[Music]
you've covered quite a few really
interesting stories and with following
your work on YouTube around the grievant
Studies hoax and the Evergreen situation
in Evergreen obviously were Brett
Weinstein and Heather hiring were and
they've been on the channel a few times
in the past and the grievant studies
piece which was Peter Bogosian
Helen pluck rose and James Lindsay and
submitting that the papers to the
journals and yeah I'm really interested
in talking to you about that experience
and also kind of some of the ethical or
moral dilemmas of that as kind of thrown
up for everyone who's kind of paying
attention to these extremely politicized
hot-button topics but I'd like to just
start - how did you first become
involved in in this well I was looking
into activism at the start that was
something that I wanted to make a film
on I think just the sheer proliferation
of activism and how much of it we were
seeing was something that seemed
significant to me and I just wanted to
figure out what was going on there there
was a particular group of activists
within the whole realm of activism I
didn't know what they were at the time
but I probably call them left-wing
utopians now and it seemed like though
there was this there was this spirit of
revenge in there there was something
destructive in inside their activism and
I don't feel like they were being
reported on properly through the media
of work within a news network back home
and the reports were a little bit off
about these these particular activists
and so I took it upon myself to go study
them and to figure out what was going on
there and it was the language that they
were using that I mean all roads led
back to the Academy things that were
using terminology like suits normativity
there was expansion and contraction of
concepts that I thought I'd already
known I thought these concepts were
quite strange and I found them
interesting and so I started hanging
at protests and rallies back home
consume way more of them were popping up
and speaking to these people and just
monitoring the digital activism that was
was taking place and a lot of the the
concepts were coming from cultural
studies in in the universities so that
led me to the Academy speaking to people
within these kind of critical cultural
studies disciplines and taking some of
the studies to statisticians speaking to
philosophers just to kind of get a bit
of a read on what the hell was going on
because it sent something big
culturally was taking place here and
eventually that led me to cross paths
with Peter Boghossian one of the
Australian academics I thought talked to
was I'm saying you should speak to this
guy who's quite vocal about about you
know being in opposition to these these
these studies where a lot of this stuff
was coming from and then he opened up to
me and told me that he was about to
undergo a secret project with Helen Pike
rose and James Lindsey and I mean it
just it was all there it was this this
kind of fierce academic landscape to
make a film with Peters a bit of a weird
guy so we've got an eccentric character
I can play with and so it looked like
good film to me and I just started
pursuing it yeah and I'd love to start
with evergreen because I think you
called it a case study and I think it is
it's the most compelling vision I've
seen of how the for want of a better
word like intersection or social justice
ideology can turn into this very strange
authoritarian force inside an
institution I would love to play a clip
from that the canoe which is just the
most incredible scene yeah I'd love if
you could just talk through what's going
on in that scene and what what you
thought when you first saw it so at the
time that the Evergreen story kind of
fell into my lap I was looking at the
scholarship and it looked like it was
something more akin to theology than
any kind of social science it was more
it was more feeling out a moral system
as opposed to some kind of you know
scientific process a lot of it anyway
the deepest darkest kind of postmodern
side of this scholarship and so it did
really have this morals kind of
religious element to it and around that
time when I was just getting my head
around this stuff the Breton Brett wine
scene had a hang had written a story for
the Washington Examiner and they they
linked to this piece of footage which
was later I made it into this scene
within the series that I that I put up
it was the infamous canoe scene and it
was just is one of the more fascinating
things I've ever seen it was just people
that were it's really hard to explain
well you're probably gonna have to show
it for people to understand what took
place there and we're gonna ask four key
stakeholders that are on this campus to
get on board our journey to equity so
what I'm gonna do first is s this is the
council our council is large expansive
and we're gonna and we're gonna get on a
canoe it was a group the equity Council
of Evergreen State College had been
given a project to create a an equity
proposal to change certain parts of the
college and they had this event which
wasn't really to talk over the equity
plan which which they were mandated to
create Brett even said that they hadn't
sent out the equity plan to anyone in
there before they had the meeting no
they didn't he had to follow it up
himself so I was like we're gonna have
this this equity plan meeting which was
kind of billed as a discussion I think
but what took place was was more of a
church service it really did it really
felt like that there was a very kind of
authoritarian if you're not if you're
not for this plan you're against us
it was it would look to me a moral
community that was policing the
outskirts it was your URI the forest or
against us and we're gonna get on a
canoe that's gonna sometimes have fierce
waves unbearable headwinds and sometimes
intentional or unintentional extra
rocking of the boat because we're not on
the same page or on the same heartbeat
if we need to have our canoe and John
let me know if this is not okay can
there be gonna be three wide - why okay
so we got to make this happen you know
emotionally I'm on board with the idea
of you know the canoe journey to
somewhere but this looked like they had
cloaked a freight train in the imagery
of a canoe Oh hold on one second the
senior administrators you have to ask
for permission and commits some things
before boarding the canoe
so can we step back out
so I would like to board the food
because I'm committed to enhancing
further aid
fusion and equity campus community both
students and staff faculty and to do
that with compassion
personally
I am committed to making every more
student ready campus and as Provost I'm
committing resources l-train
we come
to be able to promote equity inclusion
in the classroom
and outside the there's a way in which
you just there's a sea of people engaged
in a shared delusion and then there's a
few people witnessing the delusion and
isolated unable to exchange words or
anything that sense of being alone in a
crowd is profound and that really was
how that meeting felt and in a crowd of
people who are supposed to be your
colleagues yeah who are sleepwalking
people were asked to first say that they
were on board with this equity plan and
then they would step on this imaginary
canoe and then move together off to this
this magical land of equity I know that
sounds it's how this aim but this is the
piece of footage it was sitting in front
of me and so I saw this and I was
already looking at this from the
grievant studies perspective and it was
just clear to me I have to get this into
my film somehow yeah and so what I did
because Pete is friends with Brett
Weinstein and Heather hang we we sat
down and they took me through the whole
Evergreen experience that they had and
yeah I turned it into a series which
will then be condensed into a scene for
the feature film that I'm trying to
create yeah I want to say that that
series will never agree and I think I
mean I knew about the evergreen story
and I would obviously talk to Heather
and to Bret quite a bit in the past but
it wasn't really until seeing that
especially the canoe scene but the whole
atmosphere of those films that you put
together then it becomes really real
yeah I really highly advise anyone who
hasn't seen them to watch them because
it just you called it the case study and
I'd agree it's it's the kind of perfect
example of what happens when this I
guess any idea any belief system can
become an ideology at times it shows
that there is something sinister if
these ideas are pushed to that to that
extreme this particular worldview of
systems of power being perpetuated
language it's I know it's it's strange
and academic but it's a particular
worldview that if it gets to critical
mass you're probably going to see
something within a closed system right
like Evergreen is a it's a perfect case
study for this thing because it's like a
town you've got your students which are
the populous you've got the
administration which are you know your
governance you've got police services
you've got food services you've got
housing and so it's almost like it's
this perfect kind of little case study
for petri dish that we dish yeah I mean
if you want to take a moral angle on it
but I mean it was and it's it's it is
it's the canary in the coal mine as far
as I can see it's because if you roll
these ideas out they are built in such a
way where that is the inevitable
conclusion I think Benjamin voice is
another one that his work I went on
quite a bit as research to create my
series and he has delved into this whole
nother level so it's it's worth looking
at his stuff as well but yeah it's it's
an indication of what could potentially
happen if these this postmodern you left
when utopian way is actually implemented
in larger and larger scales it's
concerning and with the the grievant
studies piece yeah what what happened
because I understand that it was they
they were in the process of submitting
more than the seven papers they got
published but the whole thing got
wrapped up on you so what was that like
being sort of so I think I think the
washing was at The Wall Street Journal
that we're about to publish on it so in
the end it they had to make it public
yeah quite quickly how was that being in
the middle of that um that was
interesting so they had I think it was
five papers that had been published and
the most ridiculous one which was about
studying dog humping incidents to prove
some kind of it's approved right culture
as evidence of rape culture how people
spoke about witnessing dog humping
incidents I just read my email we have
our first wind the dog bark paper has
been accepted they don't know we're
about to tell you something dear dr.
Helen Wilson I have now closely
considered the revisions of your
manuscript and will recommend its
publication and gender placement culture
you've done very good work to address
the issues thank you for your
contribution of gender place and culture
and I hope to be seeing your manuscript
imprint your PhD a managing editor since
approximately June of 2017 I along with
two other concerned academics Peter Berg
ocean and Helen cluck roads have been
writing intentionally broken academic
papers and submitting them to highly
respected journals and fields that study
gender race sexuality and similar topics
we did this to expose a political
corruption has taken hold of the
university by this point several of
these papers have been accepted in
highly respected journals and one that
claims that dog humping incidents can be
taken as evidence of rape culture has
been officially honored as excellent
scholarship I'm not going to lie to you
we had a lot of fun with this project
but don't let that lead you to believe
that we're not addressing a serious
problem if you have a few minutes I'll
try to explain as always this really
ludicrous paper and it had been
published and a young journalist had
found had found it and it was think
there's something wrong here and so she
started looking into it and eventually
like eventually got in contact with the
journals and so the journals were
contacting Jim's fake account for this
thing and so it was the pressure the
pressure at that point was rising and I
mean it's great from a filmmaking
perspective but these guys are my
friends now so it's like involved in in
in in this kind of the wheels were
falling off the project that they done
and so at one point that the younger
journalists led to another journalist at
the Wall Street Journal catching wind of
what was going on and so the Worcester
the older journalists at the Wall Street
Journal had contacted the journal
contacted the fake account and saying we
don't we don't think this paper you've
done is we've created his way to
ridiculous we don't think you are a
scholar what's going on here and so at
that point it was for the group it was
do we lie to continue this and land more
papers because there was a lot more in
circulation that were possibly getting
published or or do we just come clean
and and let the Wall Street Journal know
and finish this thing almost a year
before they intended to finish so they
decided to come clean because of you
know it would have been a case of
forging documents in order to keep keep
the roots going and so that was an
interesting thing to face because I
don't think they were all ready for the
onslaught that was about to take place I
didn't think they were ready for the
potential shaming and be able to
communicate this really complex thing
like even the car I was there for the
conversations with Gillian Melchor at
The Wall Street Journal and you could
tell she was sharp as helps like a
really good journalist but you could
tell that there was kind of a disconnect
between what they were trying to say
because their taste
in this academic language I've been
hanging out with him for a year and a
half and I was only just starting to
find my feet and what the hell they were
talking about and so it by that time I
was friends with them and I knew that
they weren't going to be able to
communicate this properly to the public
and so having a background in news media
and been in the middle of one of these
its press circuses before and seeing how
it kind of works then I help them to
create content of their own and just
just a little bit of media training and
just what found helped them find ways to
communicate this infinitely complex
thing that wasn't going to make them
look like these kind of misogynist
racist people that it was clear that
were going to be accused of being and so
it was it was it was quite it was quite
an interesting experience and I think
that the rule is is if you win the first
the narrative within the first 48 hours
he probably going to be okay and so I
was about getting their version of the
events out to as many people as humanly
possible and so we created this big list
of journalists that would potentially
write favorably about it created a put
all all the evidence all the peer review
comments all the papers themselves into
a big google file and then sent that
link out to whoever wanted it and yeah
created a write-up to try and explain
the the project to the public so they
wouldn't be totally slaughtered and it
seemed I think at the end of the day on
balance that I think they came out on
top which was which is great because it
started a conversation about this stuff
I think you said before that you did
make a sort of decision to go from
observer to participant yeah and that's
something I feel with a lot of people in
this area who are covering a lot of
these stories is that's a really hard I
mean I know as a journalist like I feel
that that that the difficulty of that
tension yeah it's like if you if you go
from being a PI server to a participant
how do you maintain kind of journalistic
objectivity or
the objectivity of
storyteller well I guess I'm a
storyteller another journalist I guess
there's a little bit of leeway there a
little bit of poetic license I guess but
I think what the way I'm gonna handle it
is I'm working toward a feature-length
film about the about project and I'm
just going to put it in like I'll just
make no bones about it I did cross the
line and I did participate at some point
but I think that to me that's part of
the story being interesting and just
being honest about that I think that
people can take a leave it or you know
crucify me if they want as long as I'm
honest then that's cool yeah and how
yeah because there's a lot about
accusations within this space as well
that the grifting tag is thrown around
quite a lot and I know Peter sort of
talked about that in the past yeah
and I do think that that there is a
temptation to like audience capture as a
thing giving people what they want is a
thing and there are sort of ethical
boundaries that can get blurred yeah you
do you think about that in what you're
doing yeah I do I guess I mean I'm
reluctant to even do this kind of stuff
like it's it's it's strange to kind of
step out into the public eye I just want
to I want to do this kind of stuff
insofar as it can help me just make
films and so it's it's it's a strange
thing to step out in the public and
watch Helen Peter and Jim step out in
the public and all the conversations
that go into you know protecting an
image there's something off-putting to
me about that like I'm reluctant to step
out into the public because I don't want
to have to manage that I just want to
just do what I want to do and you know I
guess being honest is my true north and
so if I get into trouble for being
honest and hanging out with the wrong
people then so be it I kind of want to
be the the how I want to behave how I
want the world to be and I want the
world not to give a about let's say
guilt by association anymore because I
don't think yeah I don't know you could
get me in a lot of trouble
what's been the most difficult thing
about the moral dilemmas I don't tend no
personal moral dilemmas about it because
I don't feel like I'm doing anything
wrong I'm just looking at something that
interests me and I'm pulling the curtain
back on something I've got my position
on it if you don't agree with that then
let's talk about that I don't actually
feel the moral dilemma the moral dilemma
comes from the outside the way the
people are perceiving me and so that's
that's the that's the dilemma is is
participating with these guys and who
were consent as provocateurs is that
going to what has made made getting
funding for this feel more difficult or
or our platforms not going to then buy
the film that I'm trying to make as my
first feature-length film as a result of
me
I don't know being too honest about my
position about this thing so that that
is where the dilemma dilemma lies is
should I be protecting my image around
this stuff more than I am or yeah can
you talk to me about what you think the
moral dilemma there is because I don't
actually physically feel it I know that
there was something wrong with it but it
came from the way that I thought that I
would be perceived more than any kind of
internal sense of this is wrong
I feel the moral dilemma as in if I was
if I was in your position pitching it to
mainstream broadcasters that it's it's
hard like an acknowledging that because
they're seen and accused in some places
of like highly politicized and that
effectively they what they were doing
was highly politicized provocate
provocation and didn't prove the things
that they wanted it to it was unethical
etc etc - if that's how it's seen by at
least some some people and that has some
traction into the mainstream as well
yeah then being seen to be actually part
of the project rather than just
observing the project is a really
difficult line to
to walk and I feel that for sure and
it's like so yeah but that would be my
my question from a sort of journalistic
or an editorial perspective yeah it
strikes me more of the practical problem
right like I know that I'm missing out
on a lot of opportunities by delving
into these interesting areas but
personally it's not it doesn't feel
moral to me like it's it's how the crowd
views you know I'm having a bit of
trouble with that it's like how do you I
mean the Devils in the details it'll be
in the film
I'll be honest about it and if you don't
like it then so be it but I think that
this whole guilt by association thing I
don't it can't continue can it it's just
it's mmm doesn't mean it can't
continue it probably will continue but I
mean but it's constantly I mean it's
just something that I'm constantly aware
of in in all the work having kind of
started off the channel making films
about Jordan Pederson and him not that
he wasn't quite as controversial a
figure then as he is now but knowing
that that's he's very controversial that
there's many different kind of jordan
Peterson's as well and kind of trying to
kind of understand and tell all of that
story and and also yeah being I guess
all we can do is be true to our own
ethical sense my my ethical sense is
sort of I I feel the need to ask the
difficult question yes but also to tell
the truth as much as I can in what I'm
what I'm doing and I've asked I've done
some punchy interviews with people that
I felt that there are things that they
need to ask and I also will try to ask
questions like the questions I'll ask to
you that I feel a valid questions that
are skeptical observer might want to ask
also think it's not of any service to
the person I'm interviewing if I don't
ask those questions yeah because if if
you don't if you're not asked those
questions and you don't get the chance
to respond then then you might not even
know that that's an issue or you might
not know it's an issue or it actually
gives people a lot more most people know
what's being said about them by people
on the other side so you're not giving
them the opportunity
say that is I think in a real yeah
you're not addressing it and you're not
giving them the opportunity to put their
side of the story that's a really
important part yeah so what are we what
are we talking about True North is truth
in is some kind of truth is your your
you've got it in a sense which guides
you toward what you want what you have
to ask to feel good about yourself or
it's just to be honest about those
questions that are enabling you I think
we all do on some level but we also
understand that there are other factors
pulling us in different directions like
there is an audience capture especially
on YouTube YouTube leans leans more
right than other social media sphere x'
prop mostly because I think there's so
many of the topics that people want to
see covered and not covered on the
mainstream media or they're covered
through a very often quite sort of
naively liberal lens yeah and so that's
what has fueled the growth of YouTube is
that people are getting other
perspectives when they felt they weren't
getting them on the mainstream media
yeah but then that audience itself
starts to kind of pull in a certain
direction of the Darwin effect towards
it's playing a win right it's not
playing to be honest yeah I I was just I
was thinking I've got a friend who's
quite famous back home and she talks
about this she was like saying she
wanted to post something and she was
like oh no I couldn't face that I'm like
what do you mean you're the one with the
audience you're not working for anyone
it doesn't just post it and she was like
no no no that will upset that but I was
up there and it was just it was just an
instance of thinking you're your caged
in by your audience you're there
speaking through you you're not even you
don't even being yourself and yeah I
think that that's that's got to be an
issue there's something hanging out with
all these academics as well as something
deep inside an academic to care so much
about their the way they perceived I
think a lot of their career progression
is branding yeah I just I see the weight
of that oh my god I want to play that
game I don't know want to get in front
there was this one make films so yeah I
mean it's something it's something that
I've I'm interested in because it's
particular with social media is such a
big thing now everyone the brand and
you how are they how are they
interacting and how do you not forget
yourself you know become the brand at
some point but yeah I mean yeah this
kind of gap that opens up between a
public persona and the real person I
think it's like this sort of yawning
void the great book the circle you read
the circle by Dave Eggers who wrote his
first book was called a heartbreaking
work of staggering genius right and the
circle as a book was really really
clever in the way it kind of just talks
about the hole that opens up between as
almost like yawning gap between the
person you're presenting to the world
and your worries about how that person
is coming across now your actual the
your TrueNorth yeah your actual truth
and here that's compromising oh yeah
she's getting deep well it reminds me of
what what what a lot of these things are
covering like these these academic
fields that a lot of them are identity
studies and so first you gotta ask what
the hell is an identity before you start
playing with with with what you know
what makes you you and I think that a
lot of the essential features that are
that are guiding that are kind of
gathering groups together like things
like your sexual identity or your racial
identity it's only a very small part of
you and if you a lot of these these
fields are saying that that is you that
that's your main essence essence I guess
yeah and we should read the world
through these these group identity
markers and it's just it's so it's so
odd to me yeah yeah the other the other
factor that this this whole area brings
up for me is this sort of sense of
polarization and kind of a circling of
the wagons around different expand you
must have had that experience like how
in real time you talked about the press
onslaught and the fact that kind of you
had then in the center of this kind of
male strong male strong it seems very
difficult to then
communicate outside that bubble so very
easily get trapped in a bubble do you do
you worry about that
in what sense could you could you
elaborate then on that a little bit and
so trapped in a bubble is in well with
that amount of attention on us you tend
to get sort of defensive we tell you to
get like academic academia and knowledge
in general relies on us being open to
changing our ideas and having
conversations and it seems very
difficult in the middle of these these
kind of massive media storms it's not
it's not possible like you have to put
up a front like that's I think that's a
big part of what when the media
explosion happened and how I was useful
there was was to create a meme version
of the the you know something that's
understandable of the project and then
introduced we were talking about the
speed like you need that spear tip to
penetrate so people can kind of
understand it and then only then you can
start to move down to the more complex
layers so it's it's not not in a media
storm it's not possible you're not
getting you're not getting a accurate
description of the underlying events I
think that's I think yeah the news media
is kind of like a mythological thing as
I've had experiences of being part of a
media storm before I think my first film
my first film was about an experience I
had where I filmed a racist incident on
a bus and I then made a video of that
and uploaded it to YouTube in revenge
for these guys who were being racist
dicks I felt like they had won over me
and it was a personal thing I guess and
that just got taken up into the media
and it was this big circus whirlwind
around it and my experience of the the
underlying story and what took place on
that bus and what was being reported
just did verge further and further away
from each other and it gives you once
you're in once you've been through a big
storm like that you do get a sense
what's having me twice now with
you get a sense of how bad the the media
machine is for communicating any kind of
nuance or what was actually happening
there like it's it's these strange
little collapsed mean versions of what
happened and now they're politicized
like you've got the right wing taken the
left wing take you've got the lens
through which they interpret the
underlying events which are kind of
infinitely complex most the time our
simplified and so once you've once
you've been through one of these things
you start looking at me start reading
media interpretations of advancing and
just not seeing the truth there it's
it's yeah it's fake news is a
is a thing I think people are getting a
sense of that as well what would you say
are the biggest things that you've
learnt over the last two years of
following these projects because thing
out the lines well the whole thing's
being a learning pro pro process like I
think I found it very early on that in
order to have a perspective to tell this
story I need to study what Helen Pete
Jim was studying because otherwise I was
just the conduit for what they were
saying you know first of all I had to
figure out whether they were talking
 or there was something to what they
were saying and so the process is being
a lot of study I guess it's like a DIYs
masters that I've been doing with this
with this film and so I mean I can't
it's so complicated that I can't give
you this pithy and so I've learned this
and this is what's going on it's a
deeper understanding of the
philosophical underpinnings of what
these critical studies are about and
what their effect on culture in a larger
sense and how would you summarize that
well that's the difficult thing I guess
it's it's it's criticism with no with no
solutions I guess if you really had to
drill down to what is actually going on
there
the method is criticize something until
people
are disenfranchised and then create some
kind of revolution so it's it's it's the
the thing that's main doubt and the
thing that a lot of people are picking
up and it's having a really big cultural
effect right now is the criticism
it's the complaining without it's
cynical complaining right like you need
you need the complainants to keep you in
check if you're if you're not looking
after certain groups or you're you know
you're coming to capitalist and and you
know hurting the environment and things
like that but there is if you don't look
at the practical nature of the thing and
and look at it with a bit of love if
you're just completely cynical and you
criticize it the norms that they're
criticizing there's something wrong
there there's something wrong there and
I think it's having an outsized cultural
effect right now and I think a lot of us
is sensing that and where does the film
go from here waiting to see what happens
with with Peter Bogosian and because I
guess that's the kind of end end of the
film and what happens to him yeah so
I've captured all the events I feel like
I'm getting to a point where I can say
something meaningful about the subject
matter and so I'll inject that into it
but the the final point is the
investigations against Peter Pearce you
are ongoing so I'm just waiting until
that's finished so I can have an end
point it'll be interesting to see what
they what they do with that rebel wisdom
is a new sense making platform bringing
together the most rebellious and
inspiring thinkers from around the world
if you're enjoying our content then you
can help us make more by becoming a
subscriber which will give you access to
a load of exclusive films also you can
then join our group zoom calls to
discuss the ideas in the films and you
can send us ideas for questions for
upcoming interviews we're also looking
for talented people to help us out with
editing graphics music that kind of
thing and if you're a regular viewer
you'll know we talked a lot about the
value of embodying or actually living
out the ideas that we talked about so
that's why we run regular events in
London check out the links on the
website for more and hope to see you
soon
you