welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
check-ins so I feel deeply calm it's
sort of like an existential anxiety
associated with that and there's just
just a desire to perform an act chill
like that doesn't exist so welcome to
the stoah I am Peter Lindbergh the
steward of the stoa and the still has a
place for us to go here in dialogue
about what matters most at the nice edge
of this moment and today we have my
buddy Daniel thorn s'en fresh off of 75
day silent retreat at the monastic
Academy and so everyone will say yeah
Peter got good English though I talked
about his experience my god let's do it
so what we're gonna do is Dan and I are
just going to jam about his experience
or whatever we want or whatever we
merges and then you know the drill if
you've been here before
put your question the chat box I'll read
on your behalf if you want me to read on
your behalf or on mute you and again
this this we're public on YouTube so
just be cognizant of that
that being said Daniel on mute you
however how are you doing my friend I
accept your onion I'm doing great Peter
I went to a hospital today to see if I
have kovat antibodies and they didn't
have any tests but it was great and so
today is a day off here at the monastic
Academy so I've spent most of my time
just spending giving my attention to
this community which is a big part of
what I felt coming out of retreat was
just how lucky I am to live in a
beautiful place with beautiful people
and I get to like care for em
I'm feeling really nourished I think by
the just the beauty of this I guess of
this community and you came off a
retreat like a week ago is that like
like nine days ago
oh yeah and maybe I imagine some people
know what's up if they're attending a
Daniel's Princeton welcome back party
but for the person who might not know
what's going on so he tells a little bit
of the backstory like why did you go on
this retreat what'd you do on it like
just the whole context there yeah so I
as I said I live in a place called the
monastic Academy I think you've had
Jasna and soryu on the show so you know
we've got a number of folks representing
maple leaf coming on the Stila and it's
essentially a place an educational
institution where we use technology
psycho technologies like meditation and
circling and the bio motives framework
to try to become people who are
trustworthy in times of crisis and it's
a kind and the idea of a long retreat is
available for people who've trained in
the system for a while and who are able
to go it alone essentially because
usually you're in retreat with a group
of people and they're kind of leaning on
the group for support and in the so that
75 day retreat a solo retreat you know
every day is pretty much the same you
get up I got up around 5:30 6:00
meditated for two hours went for a walk
meditated for two hours went for a walk
meditated for two hours I did some
strength training meditated for two
hours had lunch went for a walk
meditated for two hours had an interview
a soryu
meditated for two hours go to sleep
it's you're averaging you know 9 9 or 11
hours of formal practice a day and I was
mostly focused on the form of practice
called the the jhanas which are states
to like altered consciousness and
absorption I was also doing soul making
practice which if you listen to my
podcast is a form of a very kind of
esoteric form of meditative practice
talk like the rubberband and then I was
also just trying to get enlightened
which
I did not achieve maybe wanting me to be
or something I also wanted myself to be
but it didn't work out yeah that's how I
spent 75 days and it was the best
experience with my wife Wow and so I
remember emailing before you win you're
like I'm ready to die to the world and
you make it all sound sexy and dramatic
and stuff so yeah I'm curious going in
to it like what was the strongest
motivation or intention on your part did
you actually think like okay there's
like a 2% chance I might become
enlightened at the end of this no I
didn't have a very like particular
desire it I just knew I had to do a long
retreat or I wanted to do along the tree
and I had never done anything I mean I
never done it I'd done a 45-day retreat
but that was a group retreat and so this
was a whole nother but just a whole
other enchilada I did one I did really
want to explore the jhanas I thought
that that would be rad and robber Bay
had just released a 21 day jhana
retreat series called practicing the
jhanas and so I used that to guide my
practice and it was it was amazing
[Music]
completely life-changing so what why did
you say is the best time of your life I
think because for 75 days I wasn't doing
anything that I was ashamed of
partly that and it's partly also just it
turns out if you like get rid of your
phone and get rid of you know everything
that is distracting you you eventually
settle in a place of extremely deep
contentment and joy and appreciation of
beauty and appreciation of nature and
appreciation of the gift of life and
spending a lot of time in that space was
just I'm really grateful for it was
wonderful and I think you're having sort
of a Q&A on Twitter people asking you
questions and one of them was are there
any kind of state changes or spiritual
experiences that you had while on that
retreat well there's two there's two so
there's like experiences during the
retreat and then there's like shifts in
my perception after retreat and I had
times a very strange experiences because
I was doing a soul making Dharma which
is basically a way it's a way to find
yourself in what many people would
consider to be very strange experiences
you know interacting with figures and
divinities and things like that
Damon's angels and then the jhanas
themselves are you know what many people
would consider is kind of prototypical
spiritual experiences you know being
completely absorbed in pleasure
especially your whole body becomes a
field of pleasure or being completely
absorbed in happiness such that your
body becomes just a field of happiness
peace and so on I didn't hundreds of
hours absorbed in the experience that my
body is the field of happiness and it
was as you can imagine pretty pretty
good that's pretty good way to spend
time and after a treat I definitely
notice I'm happier things just kind of
roll off my shoulder more easily I have
my heart was open more
the yeah but it's hard to it's hard to
know what's gonna go away in time and
what's gonna stick around and so if you
have any questions for Dana stock
popping them in the chat box and so yeah
I was invited by both you guys necessary
to come to your ceremony or you know
getting off but I would the borders are
closed I think we could make it
so how was that like just sort of like
was that like yeah the ceremony you
coming on like you just run out to the
whole community
they you know how to drum and they would
play the drum and they would sing a song
as they walked from the the main Center
down to my cabin which is maybe like a
quarter mile away I'm cool and then they
would all come and kind of surround the
cabin and sing to me and I would come
out and sort of be embraced by the
community ville like physically and you
know metaphorically and then I would
come up we came back up to the
meditation hall and I shared a little
bit about my experience to everybody who
was present and that was kind of like
the reintegration yeah and so how are
you responding now that you know maybe
like how do you get your download of
what actually happened when you were
gone was Kovan on stuff well so when I
went in the W it showed just a clear -
pandemic so I knew that was going
down and was going down no I had no
idea what that would actually look like
and actually Kovac came to maple yes I
heard yeah hernia and I got a kovat
spiritual practice yeah I had my son I
had bricked my phone but I recorded like
voice notes so I was like I think I had
Co good I I could I was very sensitive
to the symptoms because of course I was
meditating and and so I I kind of a
little bit calibrated my expectation of
what I would find based on my experience
I think with the sickness and I was fine
for me but coming out it's been
and it like shocking I think the degree
to which it is completely occupied the
world it seems I feel like I owe the
most that I feel like I've missed some
kind of collective trauma or collective
just very remarkable experience that I I
imagine I'll never be able to actually
really be a part of and what about most
recently with all the riots that are
happening what's just how am i
responding to it yeah I feel I think I
feel confused about it do you think you
have a greater sensitivity of sort of
like the collective you know
consciousness emotionality that's what's
happening right now
no I feel more disconnected because I
think I didn't experience like all the
days leading up to it although when I do
go out like I went to a grocery store
I've left I've left maple a couple times
I went to a grocery store and I very
soon after they're treated and was just
my heart was very open I was very
sensitive to the people I was
encountering I could tell that there was
just a lot more anxiety people holding a
lot more anxiety in their bodies I was
kind of shocked actually
so it was a pivot to some of the
questions I do want to talk to you about
like ecology of practices and stuff like
that because there's something that's
emerging wisdom Jim that's emerging out
of the stove that probably could be
bookmarked for another conversation so
beneath the ROI you said you had a
question but you said in private chat I
don't that means you want me to read it
on your behalf or you want to read it so
I'm just gonna call you out and see I
guess I could yeah I think you can do it
okay yeah it's great to see you it's
good
yeah before you went into retreat you're
grieving about existential risk mm-hmm
we had a couple of conversations about
that so looking back now do you have a
view on that perspective that you didn't
have before oh well uh I thought a lot
about death on the retreat started when
I started thinking about my my parents
and particularly my mother possibly my
mother dying and that opened me up to
about maybe like 15 days where I was
going to bed without really knowing that
I would wake up the next day you know
like not knowing that that's something I
just can't take for granted and hmm
something about that that process during
retreat has shifted the way I'm relating
to existential risk even like the kind
of like global or national situation
like to be honest I feel pretty
ambivalent about like continuing my
podcast or having like abstract
conversations and a lot more of my
energy seems naturally disposed towards
cultivating this the community that I'm
already embedded in and really just
appreciating the people that I'm around
and there seems to be some kind of way
that that is how I'm responding to that
anxiety that I think I was expressing to
you yeah
what do you think of that yeah can you
get my dad to ask questions back to
people that are yes only do I feel bad
there are like norms that I do not like
I was a store and I went around a corner
and somebody like no I just I just don't
greatly appreciate your answer because I
know that yeah yeah it was tricky when
you and I were talking about it about
how to bear the witness of that and okay
I'm gonna say something and how light
how unbelievably weightless lights out
for everyone could be yeah yes I think
what you're saying yeah yeah yeah
there's something something about the
connection between love and death that
became like bit like entered into me
that feels really helpful in relating to
these sorts of topics there like that
like I get to love because I get to die
exactly yeah and then there's those
paradoxes okay yeah Travis you had a
question yeah Daniel I don't know you so
it feels kind of weird coming to a
welcome-back party but hey it's supposed
to be on a 60 day retreat that's not it
February well it got canceled 45 days in
because of oh wow
coded thing so I kind of resonate very
much with your experience of kind of
coming out into a world that has changed
very significantly I'm interested in
your practice of the jhanas I haven't
done much jhana practice I had brushes
with it early on in my practice that
were unintentional but how did you
practice the jhanas and can you walk us
through like the process of absorption
like becoming reaching the Gianna's and
I how would you characterize each of the
levels sure I can give a brief brief
description according to my
understanding but if you're interested
in this topic you Travis or anything is
listening I highly recommend Rob the
bays retreat talk series practicing the
Jonathan so what I'm about to say is
it's mostly based on that so they'll hit
the way that might in my experience that
absorption works is I'll sit down to
meditate and I will you know follow my
breath or whatever and eventually I'll
notice that there's some pleasurable
there's some well-being in my experience
and the the skill of cultivating
absorption is basically like how do you
amplify that and the way you amplify
anything in consciousness is by a tuning
to it so you just sort of like start to
tune in to the pleasure in your
experience and by tuning into it it
starts to grow it starts to become more
salient it starts to become more
available it starts to saturate the body
and then if you do that well you
eventually reach it kind of like what
feels like an autocatalytic feedback
loop where your your attention wants to
pay attention to pleasure because
pleasure feels good and because that
causes more attuma and amplifies it more
so that's when the first jhana starts to
actually like flourish and then you're
like in this obviously altered state of
consciousness which in the case the
first jhana is can be actually like so
pleasurable at so as to be uncomfortable
like it's so much pleasure in the body
that it actually like isn't weirdly
isn't pleasurable but you say yeah and
you kind of just let it work your energy
system until it it then begins to settle
as it settles you naturally move into
the second jhana where there's a instead
of just pleasure happiness comes to the
forefront and then you kind of absorb
yourself in the the feeling of happiness
which is weird because actually it's
very uncommon I think in the human
experience to experience happiness
without much pleasure usually happiness
comes with pleasure so if you like see
if you like if you think of like
laughter there's both the physical
pleasure and then there is some
happiness but in the case of the second
jhana it's just it's more or less just
increasingly just happiness and then in
the third jhana which is as far as I've
got I only made it to the third jhana
the the pleasure completely fades and
it's this like exquisite unbelievably
lovely contentment like the most I mean
my experience is that was the most
lovely phenomenological experience I
have ever had in my life like I did not
know that perception could feel that
good kind of thing and yeah you just at
least according to Rob's model you just
spend on
hundreds of hours marinating in each of
those stages in order to sort of like
slowly rework the conditioning of the
mind and also to learn about how it is
that you can kind of sculpt perception
through different ways of participating
with it
and it's amazing it's just like a really
beautiful journey and you know obviously
it's somewhat dependent on the
conditions of the retreat but even now
like 10 days after retreat like there's
some kind of skill of just like learning
how to sculpt or participate such that
well-being becomes just amplified that
you can learn and then just that is the
best skill it's a really good skill to
learn it's a really amazing skill to
learn I would highly recommend learning
that skill yeah isn't it man so takes
you from sensory pleasure you know like
and all kinds of other benefits that's
that hopeful it's badass yeah thanks
okay yeah I wanna get my Jannah game on
now so uh Jacob had a question wants me
to read it
you said figures angels demons is it
your intuition that these spirits are
benevolent oh great question so like all
things figures angels demons the way
that they are depends on how we
participate with them so if you extend
trust to them if you view them as if
they are benevolent then they will be
benevolent actually and so if you look
at like people who experience like
angels who are malevolent it's often
because they're not extending that trust
they're actually participating with them
in a way that constructs them as
malevolent and so it's not that they are
or are not benevolent but that they
become benevolent based on or dependent
on your participation your perception of
them the way that you look at them the
way that you relate to them and so all
of the beings that I encountered were
definitely benevolent for sure
yeah okay Andrew you had a question yeah
I was just wondering
so like the question that you're
answering about orientation towards
well-being did any of this feel like
remembering or did these feel like new
states that you hadn't experienced
before definitely like the first jhana
felt a little bit like I think I spent
time in that state as a child like in
the woods
I had that feeling when I was kind of
getting into it and it should be said
that these states are actually not like
constructions they're actually what
arises as you let go alright so they're
states of relatively less fabrication or
whatever and in a sense once you
actually get into them my experience was
that they felt more natural than waking
consciousness that was that was the
feeling kind of being in them so yeah
the first in the first shot I felt a
little bit like something I was
remembering and the subsequent ones just
felt like it more and more like home or
something yeah it's interesting question
yeah
that answer your question yeah it is I
yeah thank you for answering that I I
wasn't sure what I was thinking but I
think you that it's kind of catalyzing
something here not sure what yeah okay
cool um just a question yeah so it seems
like there's people are a question shy
in the chatbox usually we had a lot of
questions going and maybe they thought
there's gonna be an actual party not
this Q&A of some I know Travis has this
brain to ask you more questions but I'll
have a few questions for you so what's
yeah like you and I were talking before
about like how kind of in and out with
the podcasting and we don't really want
to talk about this abstract stuff but
yeah what what is a life for you right
now besides building the community or
like maybe talk to me can talk a little
bit more about the aliveness but
building that community talking
community there yeah well one thing that
survived for me is so the person in
whose framework that I was mostly
practicing Robert Bay he passed away
while I was on retreat folks who
listened to my podcast know I've
interviewed him you know four or five
times and in my estimation he was one of
the he was a genius of like an
unbelievable quality and so I feel a lot
of inspiration to to make sure that his
work keeps getting amplified even with
his passing I think that he actually
created and discovered a practice of
resolving the meaning crisis like
thoroughly with his soul making Dharma
and I think that he more than anybody
else rendered the teachings of emptiness
which are the core of the Buddhist
system into a kind of philosophical
framework that is accessible to the
Western mind and I just think that he is
what he did was is humble
and I I will probably spend the rest of
my life kind of learning going deeper
into it and sharing it in various ways
hmm that's a big part and I think you
know part part of it for the
conversations for me it's like I don't
know what I I sometimes lose the point
yeah
shame I lose the point like it's just
it's like what I've had a lot of
conversations well I've had a lot of
epiphanies and at the end of the day
it's like how is this helping me love
the people around me more I was just
helping me get up the gumption to plant
a seed in my garden is it or not or is
it what is it really doing and so I'm
kind of feeling a little bit more like
it's like a put up or shut up like what
is this actually offering to me other
than a fantasy which is beautiful I love
fantasy
we need fantasy but like is it a fantasy
that I want to participate in it's
actually doing good in the world I don't
know never get a bunch of questions okay
let's just see Jay he had a question Oh
Jay is here hey Jay so my question is I
understand that you're the director of
programs maple yeah are you planning on
making any changes to the programming of
either awakening or responsibility Prak
practice practices a maple based on any
experiences you had on the retreat hmm
it's a good question we haven't really
figured that out yet here yeah I think
so one thing Jay that you know but
probably folks other folks listening
don't know is that here at maple we
divided the program up into two programs
one is dragon and the other is Phoenix
dragon is really just hell bent on
awakening like that's the only thing
that is relevant or salient to that
program or its Phoenix is much more
involved with personal growth and
psychological healing and things like
that and I can imagine a lot of these
frameworks embedding themselves into the
Phoenix curriculum it also is the case
that the soul making Dharma in
particular is very useful at helping
people discover what you might call
their like sole duty right that there's
some kind of teleological poll into the
future that your soul is asking you to
abide by and this is kind of a cycle
technology of allowing yourself to be
pulled in that direction
with all the attendant meaningfulness
sacredness divinity that that comes with
honoring that duty and I think that that
to the degree that maple is about
awakening a responsibility like that
really kind of seals the relationship
between responsibility and awakening for
me because only when you can really well
I'll just say it seals the deal
cool all right there's a question that
was someone's reading my behalf okay
this is juicy weather points during the
retreat where you felt like giving up
there was one day in particular that I
can share about on day 25 or so which as
you might imagine is a horrible period
of time like day 20 to 30 because you've
already been on a retreat for what feels
like an absurd amount of time and you're
not even like 1/3 done so if if you are
if you do begin suffering or like
constructing suffering it quickly gets
out of hand and I like woke up having a
bad dream about my inadequacy or
whatever and laid down to do some
relaxation practice and you know I don't
think it's a good idea to answer for
more thighs your neuroses too much but
it felt like there was
like a demon in me that was just knew
that I was in a moment of vulnerability
and just started like stabbing me in the
stomach over and over and over again
we're we're by all of my insecurities
basically became just like in the giana
like an autocatalytic self-reinforcing
feedback loop to the point where i was
just more tormented than i've ever are
that I can remember being in years
it was truly horrible and though much of
the retreat was spent exploring pleasure
this was it's like it it's really
important to experience this kind of
pain
and I hated it and it was horrible and I
thought about leaving I thought about
leaving maple I thought about I had like
there was there was suicidal ideation at
that point I didn't I wasn't even
identified with that ideation but I
could see my mind constructing it it
actually became fascinating at that
moment and poof eventually I went for a
walk and that created enough space for
some kindness to come in and and and
eventually it became that became one of
the most valuable experiences of the
retreat but it was really touch and go
for three hours or so what what it did
give me though was that because I had so
much mindfulness at the time I saw I
would take the building of that
experience was slowed down enough that I
saw exactly how I was participating in
it to create it how it is that I
constructed it and what what happened
subsequently is that it that that
amplitude of that experience could never
be achieved again because I would
withdraw my participation almost like
like when you touch a fire you pull your
hand back oh it was drawn my
participation before would get to that
point that I think depends a little bit
on the amount of mindfulness I had I
suspect I could find myself back in that
state now that I'm off retreat you said
you're talking to Surrey was it every
day that you you had a session with him
um like four days a week and what did he
have to say that thing they went through
he actually said to treat them treat
those kinds of experiences as demons who
are demanding your compassion you know
you you you say like oh like there's a
demon here how can I relate how can I
love it essentially yeah give it love
because it's like a cry for help type
thing okay
you had a question hey hello so my
question as you were talking about some
of your experiences I was noticing that
there were certain things certainly not
to the same intensity level I guess but
things that reminded me of experiences
that I personally had while doing and
like path working things during Tarot
hmm and then so I've had personal
experience with that and I've heard
similar kinds of like directed imaginal
technologies being used and different
different cultural and traditional
contexts and I wondered from having both
the intense experience that you had on
this retreat and also just you know
you've had so many conversations and so
many people and from so many different
backgrounds do you think that these
types of experiences whether they are
dressed up in certain cultural
traditional contexts have what am i
trying to say like a certain kind of
commonality or ubiquity that we may not
really credit or like is it something of
just about the way the human psyche and
my works that people have sort of
accidentally discovered in a lot of ways
then worked it to different different
moral aberrations and techniques to do
it I just wondering if you had any
insight on what you think about that
totally yeah I mean that's a beautiful
question my model is something like how
do I say this that the human mind absent
of like the weird ideological
superstructures that we've created in
the modern world is prone to imaginal
experiences of the sort that I was
describing and that if in fact we it
seems like after my experience on
retreat it seemed like at
that I could see that it is almost as if
we have constructed the entire
experience ideology ontology
epistemology of the West the West so to
speak in order to prevent the emergence
of the imaginal but that is like weirdly
it it seems like that and so the
experience of for me
having been born into an academic family
and being an atheist for most of my life
and a materialist and all that is that I
have to vary systematically deconstruct
these philosophical and an embodied ways
of viewing the world in order so that
the imaginal can flood back in and once
you can start to deconstruct those like
you actually have to like fight to keep
it away and then you can use all kinds
that you can use whatever psycho
technology you want there's like you say
there's Tarot but actually the world
becomes a psycho technology of imaginal
practice like the trees become imaginal
the sky becomes imaginal your psyche
becomes a national your body becomes
imaginal others become imaginal it's
it's unstoppable
essentially unless you stop it through
you know raya fide ontology x' and all
the stuff that we like to do in our
culture yeah cool Danny you have a
question I'm going to go back to your
your now she likes a good about
conversations and and to the to the
Gianna's experiences and so when I'm
playing with is does the well belt
well-being and the happy and the
contentment do they leave
this experience when you're in
conversation Oh actually that are
feeling less than what if that is I
wouldn't say it's conversations it's a
particular type of conversations where
I'm exploring like abstract ideas like
even right now I feel very connected
with you as I look at you my computer
and I feel the happiness in me and it
feels satisfying it's more about like
how am i how am i wanting to spend my
time what is the most meaningful and
useful and important and way to spend my
time and I am it's an open question
whether it is to have like intellectual
kind of cutting-edge interesting
conversations with people that aren't
actually in my life you know they're
halfway across the planet or something
it's just I'm not saying it's not that
might be exactly the best way that I can
spend my time but I don't want to I
think it's only through interrogating it
and being sure of that that I can
actually throw myself thing with with
abandon to that that process yeah but no
totally I mean conversations for me are
only good if you are embodied and like
speaking in ways that give rise to
mutual states of well-being I think
actually yeah but if you like so for me
for me like my ways the concentration
practice and meditation is kind of just
like it's almost like like cuddling with
your energy body right you're like oh
what does my what does my body what does
my soma like need right now to feel
really good to feel safe to feel
comfortable to feel warm to feel this
state of well-being and just so like in
conversation I can if you tune into
people really well you can actually
start to do that dance with others and
that is super rad it's a little bit hard
to do on the internet and I that's why
I'm kind of feeling drawn to more
in-person conversations here in my
community but it can be done I know it
can be done because some people do it to
name it's really
and yeah so yeah that well-being is
definitely available in conversation
yeah Engine Java follow-up question
Danny engineered a question yeah
hey 1000 your relationship with
information and technology has changed
since coming back I remember when I come
back a week of camping and I turn my
phone on it's like oh my god yeah
certifications read things I'm just
curious
immediately and over time what that's
been like
uh.well so I I completely brick I
actually use my phone during the retreat
to listen to the Dharma talks but I
completely bricked it like I figured out
how to even remove the time from the
menu bar I understand every app on the
phone except for like the voice recorder
and the app to listen to Dharma talks it
was completely like useless except for
those things and since I've gotten back
I've had I've been titrating very
carefully my exposure to the Internet
and what I've been doing is using I've
been trying to use it only as much as it
feels good to my nervous system and then
I just drop it and that so far has
turned out to be a lot less than before
retreat so I use the internet a lot less
then I was and for my phone III haven't
unbreak tit I've been like dragging my
feet and sort of like only unbreaking
the aspects of it that seem like I'm
gonna get in trouble with like my
friends or my work if I don't unbreak
that aspect and so it's still very like
useless which is great but oof
this whole thing is a hell of a drug
it's really really really has a huge
impact on my nervous system and I don't
think that I really understood that
before I kind of downregulated so much
in this out and the retreat I was in
yeah I'm actually I have fear about how
powerful it is and in terms of how it
can affect my my cognition my physiology
my nervous system and how addictive it
is too because I could see myself just
completely losing losing myself into it
again very easily
can you say more about why the word fear
you use that word that's kind of
interesting
um because I I like to feel this quality
of like aliveness and vibrancy and I'm
afraid that I will sacrifice that on the
altar of Technology and information
afraid that I'm weak basically milk
emotion you had a question
Malcolm's here and yeah there's actually
a couple of people off-camera - wow you
don't have our wide-angle well I though
oh yeah I would the question I had put
in the chat was something about just
your experience involving bio motive at
the tree at the rich oh yeah you and I
met at the bio motive for treated maple
last year and totally yeah it's kind of
curious about that there are some that
are like also feel like I could say but
better more like subtle and felt harder
to type into a chat box but you seem
like you got stood up you're excited to
say about the bio motive thing yeah yeah
oh my god I mean it was invaluable I I
don't know that I would have survived
this retreat without bio motive frankly
so the first like 15 to 20 days I
probably spent an hour to two hours a
day just just processing and crying I
went through two boxes two full boxes of
tissues in the first two weeks III once
tapped into a well of sadness that I
thought I'd like broke myself like I
just kept crying like I was like I was
like oh no I did something wrong I just
kept crying I just kept crying I think I
cried for like 40 minutes with 45
minutes straight which is much much
longer than I've ever cried before I
mean maybe when I was like a baby or
something yeah so so it was in - is
totally wasn't thing I'm also curious
but in relation to that is like I've
sometimes found myself feeling like I've
come up against a limit in doing bio a
motive on my own where it's like I feel
like I just I need somebody to hold me
in order to feel safe doing the practice
and I'm like how did you spend hours
crying alone in the cabin and feel held
and I don't know what kind of answer
there could even be that question
i-i-i-i was held by the imaginal figures
that I discovered so I would I would see
them with me loving me as I kind of
experienced and related to the pain that
I was there was alive in me and that
seemed to be enough to allow myself to
feel held and supported in the way that
I think you're looking for yeah and so
and then different different figures
would would support me in different
exploring different pain wow that's so
cool I'm asked yeah nice to see you
welcome and so Doug the guy who created
the by emotive framework he's coming
into stoah this Friday at 4:00 p.m.
Eastern time for an introduction session
so if you want to know more about that
diagonal recipe on the website um
Stephen he had a question about the
relationship with death yeah Daniel you
had mentioned something about love and
death earlier I was interested here a
little more about that had asked how
your relationship with death has changed
and maybe related or maybe a different
question but how your relationship but
Eris has changed
[Music]
yeah well so the death thing I seem to
have finally tipped over to the point
where I know I'm going to die like I
think I mean I like I know I you know
you can well you you know you know
you're gonna die certainly probably you
know that all biological things die but
there's for me I could pretend that I
was not going to die I spent my whole
life pretending I was not going to die
and I think on this retreat I finally
like turned a corner where I acknowledge
that I am I going to die and that has
did open up a lot more love it opened up
a lot more gratitude it opened up with a
lot more or a feeling of like the
inexplicable gift of life just that I
get to experience anything at all ever
is unbelievable and I don't know I don't
know how it how that related to arrows
only in that I
I could use that kind of vibrancy to
sort of tune in to the erotic
relationship with life and with my
experience but yeah this is this this is
something I haven't really fully
explored I don't think at least
articulated so I appreciate the question
ya know here yeah thank you for that
question so let's see we have time for
one or two more questions
Travis you had a question you had a few
other ones that you you popped up to up
there in the chat box which like to run
eat yourself and ask them yeah how I
think that this is maybe a relevant one
how was you mentioned that the solo
retreat was very different from like a
group longer treat can you highlight
some of the differences and also any
like tips for practice for somebody who
might do this that wouldn't be generally
included in the tips that people get for
retreats
well the throw that first one I think
that the the the the differences are one
that there's not other people to project
on right so like you know if you if you
sit a group retreat you will inevitably
like fall in love with somebody and hate
somebody else and think the teacher is a
total like like you know idiot or think
that they're a god and in whatever case
they color your experience pretty pretty
mightily but you just don't have that
luxury on the solo retreat which is
amazing cuz then it's just so clear that
it's all you it was just so great it's
such a load off and and so there's a
kind of like inescapability with regards
to your own experience which is just
really horrible and relentless and
delightful and so
that was and it especially with I think
long solo retreats it's like you can
kind of fake it for a week or ten days
you can kind of like pretend to be a
really good meditator for ten days and
make it through and then like go back to
your normal habits and patterns but 75
days like you're gonna see all of your
all of your things build you're not
going to be able to really fool yourself
in the same way that you can on a
shorter retreat and so you know I just
saw parts of myself that I would have
rather not seen but that I did see and I
couldn't escape and that was a great
gift but I would have avoided receiving
for the rest of my life without a doubt
if I weren't forced into a situation
like that solo retreat as far as tips I
don't know
it really depends on what your what
you're going for what your practices
um I think one thing is that for me I
get a lot of nourishment just from kind
of like connecting with others on a
group retreat like just you know even
silently just being in their presence
and me seeing them and seeing their
energy being with them and so you don't
have that also on the solar treat
obviously and so learning instead how to
connect with nature really profoundly
like like how to connect with a squirrel
in the way that a squirrel demands to be
connected with or a bird or a tree that
I think if I didn't know how to do that
I would have had a lot more experiences
of like depression and insecurity than I
did so like you know yeah it's just
really really connecting with the birds
that's been a lot of time connecting
with the birds that's great yeah so
that's what comes tonight awesome thanks
yeah so this might be the last question
Bonita do you want to potentially bring
us home you had another question yeah um
hi I'm remembering that you said on
Twitter that your relationship to your
body changed or your your I don't know
what the word is like your aspect toward
your body was changed and that was
curious about that oh yeah well so that
there tooth there are two pieces to that
I think one is the John is just
experiencing my body over and over again
as a field of profound happiness like
not as bones or cells or sensations like
but as just happiness subtle happiness
like uproarious bubbly happiness that
was all that was here like inside
outside all around just like slowly
started to change my understanding of
what a body is and what a human is and
I'm still not really sure how but it it
started to kind of just disrupt my naive
assumptions I think and then the
other piece is that I'm more profoundly
than ever realize that nothing in my
experience can actually harm me nothing
that my body is sharing with me is going
to hurt me yeah yeah because all there's
so many teachings in somewhat psychology
it's the opposite the body holds the
scars the body knows the score the body
is a suffering and the mind is gonna
liberate like totally a great
reversal yeah totally yeah yeah totally
well and and I I heard a teacher say
that
Johanna's are the opposite of trauma
right trauma is this like kind of
contracted fearful state of the body
where it body becomes a field of pain
essentially and and part of the reason
why you spend so much time in John is is
you're basically training the nervous
system and the opposite movement and so
yeah I mean it's my body feels much more
mysterious than it did before like that
it could be happiness or peace it just I
don't I don't actually know what this is
yeah it's great thank you
it's maybe a sneaking one more questions
is this kind of a good one
so Jacob the thing I asked the about two
figures demons angels thing he says so
it's okay if so how do you know they
aren't deceiving you these these beings
like how would they what is that how
would they be deceiving I don't know
Jacob you carry yourself and ask a
question if you don't mind sure so I
guess yeah it's first just to really
establish the first question like are
they more powerful would you say yes
what I'm been thin what well at any
level of analysis more powerful maybe
than you yes
we're thinking about because if they are
they might be deceiving you and then
you're just screwed no matter what I
don't know I mean I feel like I kind of
have the trump card because I can just
ignore them or deconstruct them into
emptiness so you're assuming you're more
powerful than they are
that's that none of what you're asking
has ever entered into my consciousness
okay sorry I'm a little like I'm intense
right now a little antagonistic like
usual and I apologize for that I'm gonna
try to tone it down a bit no it's okay
I'm sure I'm just I'm struck by how this
has never been relevant to my practice
but I think that because of the
precision with which the conceptual
framework of soul making Dharma is
constructed and so I can't I don't think
I can really do justice to where you're
coming from I know that a lot of like
occult traditions this is this is a big
piece is how to move into these kinds of
spaces without incurring harm or being
possessed or whatever but because of the
conceptual framework of the soul making
Dharma it becomes a non-issue
essentially well can I say one more
follow-up question of that means it's
like we're just coming off the heels of
getting screwed by power for a long time
so I feel like the one place we need to
be sensitive is getting screwed by power
so I think this is a question that like
should be probably like somewhere near
the top like is the power deceptive you
know yeah yeah my sense my intuition is
telling me that work you and I are
coming from very very different like
yeah ontology beliefs and so we'd have
to have a lot much longer conversation
to kind of work out how to line up with
it yeah we should do it sometime
nice to meet you Daniel yeah nice to
meet you absolutely Thank You Jacob
so yeah Daniel so your first visit at
the stoah any kind of final words for
trust here oh thank you all for such
lovely questions and I'm it was really
fun to see your faces and to to say
hello yeah a lot of a lot of
folks here that I know it feels like
this is i that i reaiiy integrated with
this physical community this feels a bit
like an intubation with the online part
of my psyche and i appreciate this very
much beautiful so thank you my friend
for come around the store I really
appreciate it it was good seeing you
again for so long after so long and yeah
we don't I want to say I don't know if I
want to say anything just yeah I kind of
kind of like was hesitant of making this
a Q&A format because I wanted to may be
more informal and write you back in a
different way but I think this went
pretty well because there are some good
questions in the chat box so if you want
to check out future events we got a lot
coming this week the storage both stores
the storage see a sign for the mailing
list and so is based off a gift economy
I reviewing it as a place for us to
freely use and this time of need if
you're inspired to give a gift of the
store just go to the website go to gift
economy at the part of the page alright
only thanks so much thanks everyone
thanks Peter thanks Daniel