all right welcome to our solution rising
on slavery big huge topic a global topic
and one that hopefully we can come up
with something that could move us
powerfully forward if we had 10,000
people and $100,000 we were just talking
about the slavery footprint dot org
calculator before going live I took it I
think before last time I took it it was
33 slaves that I had in this time I've
38 and there are signatures with with
within itself because it's like well how
many clothes do I own well I'm like well
these clothes I've had for decades and I
bought them secondhand and you can say
that you you source them ethically but
is that ethically they were probably
were made by slave labor but I didn't
buy them firsthand and I've had them I
wear my clothes until they fall apart
you know what I mean it's not it's not
20 different shirts I buy every year
it's not and so there's and then there's
ones that I don't know I wish it broke
it down into one what my kids slave
footprint was and what my slave
footprint was because I know I'm more I
give her things that I wouldn't buy for
myself I let her do things that are
environmentally and socially maybe not
just because as her parents I want her
to have ever experience in the world so
yeah I want you to have glitter to make
our projects with even though it's
horrible for them for the environment
every time like so I don't buy the
glitter but if we're somewhere then
someone else sees right so anyway that's
not slavery that's environmental but to
know how much is my kids right and how
much is mine and how much of that is
based on my annual consumption versus
I've had this you know my hiking boots
for a decade but I do have a pair of
hiking boots like what is what is them
so your friend and you Eric I know you
you take care of most of your own needs
by yourself and I would have been
curious to know what your slavery
footprint is but it wasn't working it
wasn't working in the browsers that we
had so that is definitely part of the
problem as well when this cool things
come up that are technology and then
they aren't maintained in a way that
even when you do ask people to come and
take the test
you can't do it in Chrome or Firefox
right it says it's like well download
one of these browsers and so I
downloaded Firefox to take it it wasn't
working
these are the kind of things that I do
want to take operative for but that's
getting into the metaphor can be and
tech cooperative not actually the
solution racing for slavery so even
though you guys don't necessarily know
what your slavery footprint is I'm sure
you both know a bit about the issue on
the planet with slavery and the areas
that it impacts and what you use like I
don't use cosmetics I do use electronics
and way too many I'm it's like how many
laptops do you have well three because
two of them are partly broken and the
third ones on its last leg and there
aren't the systems to be able to repair
it I don't have the power to say it's
 ridiculous that my computer
doesn't last more than two or three
years and that there is no option for
like Apple and Google to choose to use
ethical I call BS on that I'm pretty
sure of Google and Apple said we weren't
gonna use your COBOL unless it was
ethically mind they have the power to
change that but we are the ones buying
their product and so we have the power
to change that but oh it's gonna add
video to the stream and hello Vinnie a
welcome thanks for joining hey how's it
going good to be here yeah we're just
discussing our own slavery footprint
were discussing that the the tool was a
little broken this morning so some of us
could or over the last week so we some
of us could take it and some of us
couldn't take it yeah seems to be a
little fragile depending on what browser
people are using yeah I've shot it in
chrome and in Firefox and it didn't like
either of them it said your browser
doesn't support and they said try
downloading crime on Chrome or Firefox
so um we're on a tablet oh yeah yeah
there are very opposed to it a couple of
months back and I did it then and I
didn't have any problems then but today
when I tried to again cuz I couldn't
remember what my result was and so today
and also I remember there was something
about it that bugged me that didn't feel
like a fair
sort of
of questions right but I can't know what
that was now I know I wanted to bring
that heart but I can't know what that
was so unfortunately I'm yeah well or
well I've got the floor if I may just on
just on the notion of slavery because it
seems to me that slavery has been going
on for a very very very long time in one
form or another one could even make an
argument that slavery has been the
predominant relationship between you
know master and/or owner and-and-and
worker kind of thing for time immemorial
and you know the heart of slavery is the
notion of coercion not having a choice
but to do what your masters are telling
you to do and it seems to me that you
know it's not just kids digging up COBOL
in the Congo it's pretty much everyone
right you don't have a choice for most
people they are doing their boring
shitty jobs or three jobs or whatever to
make ends meet they don't have a choice
but to go to those boring shitty jobs
you know there are lots and lots of
people who would not be considered
slaves at all right even in even by even
you know even though some modern
slightly more abstract definition of
slavery but they absolutely are and so
you know that that coercive nature of
having to go and do some shitty horrible
thing just because you need to get
enough money to pay the bills that is
slavery in my opinion also so yeah if
your own Irby - you're a slave but if
the police bleeped you you're an
employee mmm yeah exactly so I've put a
link to a video in the chat and I'll
show up in just a second which is a link
to a video stefan molyneux made while
I'm no fan of stefan molyneux however
this particular video I think makes a
very very very strong point it's called
the story of your enslavement and and
and I think it makes a good point very
strongly so I'll leave that for you guys
to watch if you want to at some point
yeah certainly the Romans were very big
on you know the idea that if you had to
earn your living by labour even if you
were paid you were still essentially a
slave but I mean the the distinctions
are very sharp when you get to you know
um okay hell I say this exactly so for
me my background is kind of Scottish
left-leaning labor activism that was
kind of what I grew up in right I was
never personally very active in that
because
technical class but certainly my parents
generation or earlier were Scottish
Union labor organizing types and so
there's a kind of there's a curve right
like you know landowners who rent a one
end through unionized employees through
non unionized employees and then you
know four or five gradations of slavery
until you get right down to slave
markets it's it's it's on its a
gradually diminishing human rights
framework like in China the technical
class are working what we call nine
ninety six which is twelve hour days six
days a week and they're quite anointed
by that they're not very happy anyway
Helen burrows who was the person that
designed slavery footprint and may join
us so fingers crossed
kids have stuff to rearrange but she may
pop up switch the conversation when she
gets here this is a specific type of
conversation so for the next few minutes
we're still talking about what slavery
currently looks like in our own lives
and in the world and then we'll switch
over to our visions of a beautiful
future for labor and slavery that does
not include
yeah it doesn't include slavery
hopefully I don't know if anyone's
beautiful version of the future include
slavery that would be because if you if
you take it if you stripped it right you
know based on the definition I was sort
of trying to articulate before then in a
sense we are all inevitably slaves to
the demands of nature right I mean know
that that's in a way in a way but but of
course yeah I don't know I don't know
what do you guys think about that
because that feels quite true in a way I
think there's there's a big difference
to me like I'm a slave to my body and
the things it does to me like there's a
certain I don't have a choice and I
can't emancipate myself from it and I
can't but there's something very
different about that and there's I
there's no one to blame there's nothing
to do about that versus if somebody
sells my child if somebody if I'm
responsible for selling someone else's
child there's a big difference there but
you we are all biological ecological
beans and we have to work within that
framework I don't think
slavery I think that's more it's
constraint yeah I mean there's a kind of
say this exactly so there are a number
of gradations inside of the concept of
slavery right so if you get right down
to this kind of range where you have
agricultural workers gradually fading
through two bonded labor you know very
poor peasant farmers sharecroppers
sharecroppers that oh they're landowner
a ton of money and aren't free to leave
the land actual bonded labor and then
you know two notches below about you got
outright slavery you know that are that
are a lot of these kind of shades of
grey right if you're an investment
banker yeah are you enslaved well you
know you're 24 years old you're working
a nine hour week
your boss has absolute power over your
life and you're doing it because of a
hope of a future reward are you enslaved
to your own ambition and so to me the
distinguishing factors are not
necessarily the coercion but the quality
of life enjoyed by the people are
coerced
well that would buy that argument then
brave new world is an acceptable form of
slavery right because everybody's happy
in brave new world right everybody knows
their place and I'm happy doing what
they're doing and and so this is my
world with such a marvelous distinct
sorry please I was going to say like as
a single mom on disability like I wish I
had more money to be able to make better
ethical decisions on what I could
purchase but there's a certain thing I
cannot do when I am a single individual
like there's I can't change the entire
computer market I can't even change
really my food system because I have to
get what's available to be able to feed
me and my family for cheaper amounts and
and I care about it forget about all the
people who feel like they're enslaved by
working for Walmart or working for
people or who or you know Amazon or
whoever and are asked to take on more to
be able to supply don't
can't make ends meet and there is a
certain quality that there is a
difference between a living wage and can
you afford shelter and food with the
amount you're paying someone because
it's not considered slavery if it's
below that and it can be below that and
that is passed on to everybody else but
that is slavery like that is it's not
the owning of a person they have some
amount of choice and where they do that
but do they and and being able to figure
out what we can do together so that I
can have more impact with the dollars I
do have instead of like the the enders
like oh just five fair trade and go to
the farmers market it's not accessible I
want to be able to like grow my own food
but with neighbors to be able to look at
ways and be able to support that all
over the world not just look after me
and mine and Canada when we're doing
pretty well like I live a pretty sweet
life or being a poor person I know that
um have you taken a look at fearful oh
no I don't think so
umm so fairphone I think that on the
third or fourth edition of the phone and
they basically did everything possible
to get an ethically manufactured film um
so they you know sourced as far as he
could down the component line they you
know did a bunch of work to make sure
there were no conflict minerals in there
and you know they got pretty close
really pretty close the phone was also
designed for upgradability so you could
cool the camera module and put in better
cameras their various other components
that you could do is made to be
repairable and they're maybe 50% more
expensive than an equivalent a
conventional manufacturer phone and
things that sounds right that sounds
great yeah it's quite a successful
project they've been going about ten
years throughout the Netherlands I don't
own one I have some standard Android
device but it's kind of you know it
shows what can be done and it also shows
how much of this is driven by consumer
interests like if fairphone had sold a
hundred times as many phones as they
sold in all probability they would have
been now been done a lot for example
and so it's quite interesting that it's
kind of you know it exists and they did
okay but they didn't do phenomenally and
as a result you know there'll be another
version of fairphone but there won't
necessarily be fair TV fair walk top
fare bike yeah but the other thing is as
well I mean if they had sold a hundred
times as many units as they'd sold then
it actually starts to have an impact on
the supply chain at large right because
they're selling their phones for more
money they can provide protective
equipment and decent wages for the
people who are mining the dangerous
chemicals you're not really because I
know I mean you'd find people who'd be
perfectly happy to mind them you know I
mean in a non slave way give me
protection gear pay me a decent wage
don't make me work 16 hours a day no
problem yeah observe absolutely and I
mean that that was that's exactly the
negotiation that the white working-class
has gone through right I mean that's the
summary right all my think all my name
right you know coal mining used to be a
joke brutal life expectancy of like 35
or something like that and now it's
safer than being a roofer so you know
it's not that these labor disputes are
only along you know racial ethnic
slavery lines you know all of this
was labor disputes inside Western
society until literally the day before
yesterday but then of course what
happens is it's now much more expensive
to provide the safety equipment and the
working conditions on the wages and oh
and then so whenever it is possible to
do so this gets outsourced to
places where you don't have to you're
not constrained by those standards
anymore right and so it's it kind of
becomes ineffective you know when you
have this when you have this global
supply chain it becomes ineffective the
regulations in one country or not are
not applicable elsewhere you know and
until I mean this is maybe something we
can in fact it's time to start moving on
to that now right this is this is this
is something that if standards of ethics
and safety and worker well-being and so
on were standardized right that would
mean a it would make a huge difference
in the cut in the outlawed cost of
products and we as consumers would have
to be willing to bear that cost in the
pursuit of you know yeah
well okay well this gets this gets very
interesting and things like the EU right
so the EU has a range of countries
inside of it from quite poor to very
wealthy and they standardized a lot of
things like labor law right across the
EU on the basis it provided an equal
economic playing field so there's a lot
of discussion about using tariffs if
something comes in from a country with
shitty winger practices you swap a
twenty percent tariff on it to raise the
price to the same price that it would
have been if it had been malefactor in
the country that decent labor practices
and by doing that you take away the
economic incentive for having shitty
labor practices and I think Scandinavian
countries have done a bit of work around
that although I don't know whether it
was theory or when they'd actually done
it um but I mean all the things that
your point not are exactly this tendency
of global capitalism to figure out how
to somebody and turn it into profit
absolutely so I think we we all they're
passionate about not recreating that and
moving forward and so what I would like
now is we'll switch it to the to the
future version what is our ideal
individual version of what a future
could look like with zero slavery so
throw that out there because if your
future one slavery I don't really want
to hear about your future they don't
need our ideas don't carry if you go
have you got anything I mean you haven't
said anything during the first 15
minutes if you got anything you want to
put in on well basically I know I know
you're talking about slavery as in terms
of what people are making what about
human trafficking isn't that slavery as
well you know keep getting back to that
so I'm feeling about the youth you know
the women and um people who are selling
their kids because I think the selling
them on to work about a life for someone
else and that that's that's my kind of
horrors of slavery and as well as he can
omit once you know because I remember
watch your name so it looks wet and
t-shirts I don't know what do you see
nap you know with Stacey dude ages ago
she took all these posh fashion
conscious kids right I think
and he went to have a look at the
fashion trade and where the cotton comes
from and he went left to live
place the people who were making the
things and they were doing their
absolute ly horrified you know I mean
and they were like what you'd only get
into rupees a day and you know you're
new to st. Tyler and everything and as I
said it changed to change them all I
said sort of them Kornacki and she did
it in the food industry as well and they
just took them to go it show and I think
I think if people have more of an
experience of how it's others then
they'll change the mind and then they'll
make him say but until then people kind
of blinds and the only see with what's
around them their own little balls and
you really couldn't give a toss about
anybody else to be honest now that's my
point of view anyway you know thank you
Carrie do you want to share your
beautiful vision of the future speed and
there wouldn't be any slavery it
wouldn't be the consumer bubble that
will a burst that would have died and
people be more concerned about others
and that and I think that's and I don't
know how that was way but that thought
the wood beam Oliver anyway you know I
mean so yeah it seems to me that pretty
much will Kerry was saying while there
are incentives out there to do horrible
things to other people either the thing
of human trafficking you know he's
selling women and children whatever into
sex slavery or whatever it might be I
mean that's what viene was talking about
right there the continuum of slavery
that's right down at the very yeah
that's the far that's the far end of it
but you know all all of these things
they it is still if economic slavery
right the incentive for people to take
these kids and ship them off to other
people is to make money right so it is
still kind of economic slavery right and
then until those insensitive structures
no longer exists those behaviors will
continue right well while there are
incentives around people to do that kind
of people will continue to do it
right and you can't even blame the
individuals because if they don't do it
someone else will do it you know
it's so neat these things these things
are systemic the only way I see is to
remove the incentives and thus the the
ability the the levers of coercion that
exists within the structures of society
which means that the safety net if you
like the social fabric needs to include
the certainty for everyone that they're
never going to go hungry they're never
going to be homeless they're never going
to be without water and power you know
what I mean and you know that baseline
is always there and once that is in
place use the ability of one person to
exert coercion yeah and fear over
another is massively diminished and thus
the smae slavery disappear things like
energy I and universal health care and
things like that other other kinds of
things that take us in that direction I
mean I have my reservations about UB I
also but but those kinds of things yeah
absolutely I mean if you're in a country
with basic income you're just not gonna
get slavery it's it's really
straightforward right Yeah right mmm my
beautiful version of the future yeah
there's definitely no slavery and I mean
even when Eric suggested is slavery
nobody works anywhere they don't want to
everybody has is able to pursue their
passions and and do the labor that they
want to do whether that's emotional
mental physical and we have tools to be
able to see what isn't getting done and
how can we actually get it done together
a world where we do have our supply
chain the information of our supply
chain of readily available so we can
actually do about it where it isn't
it is easy for a good for a new for a
new phone company that is that has a new
model to be able to to market itself
without too easily out compete the
Android and the Apple phones because we
want that back when that phone first
came out I remember though that video
going viral of the parts being swapped
in and out if everyone who watched that
video now knew that it existed and 25%
decided their next phone was gonna be
that or even 5% decided and we started
looking at the camera but the economic
term is if we made a hundred times that
we could also make them cheaper right in
an ethical way and look at well if we
all want this phone what does it need to
have and then having an open source that
we can actually improve the camera and
improve the thing and be able to swap it
out and be able to look at the entire
supply chain and look at our human at
humanity as a system that when we steal
from somebody else it should it should
cost us our soul and our emotion but we
it's very easy to keep your head in the
sand in fact it's our entire system it's
designed that like consume consume
consume and do not look at behind the
curtain do not look at the environmental
footprint and so to be and I get that
asking people to do that is asking
people to take on the stress that we've
already taken on our whole lives without
a solution and so to be able to offer
solutions like the phone to be able to
look at the supply chain and say it's as
easy as like if you choose to shop at
Walmart because it's best for your
family because it's cheap but there's
maybe not an auction that such a
cheapest Walmart but something that goes
within their values and offers them a
way forward that they can collaborate
and create a better food system create a
better place to get clothing you know
not be so concerned about fashion not
being so concerned that even if fashion
is important to you how can you get your
fashion needs met without destroying the
planet and people and so that's that if
my beautiful future about you Vinnie a
what would you like to see twenty thirty
five years from now however long you
need it to be so Gandhi did really a
bunch of work on this um you know in the
symbol of India is the spinning wheel
right and you've all seen pictures of
Gandhi spinning cloth you know so oh
yeah Gandhi spent an enormous amount of
time talking about hand spinning or
fiber cotton wool um as being critical
for the Indian independence movement and
because at the time what you had was
mechanized mills in England that were
producing enormous went to cheap fabric
that was causing mass unemployment in
India and also transferring a whole
bunch of wealth directly to the English
so the Swadeshi movement right Gandhi's
movement deliberate India Swadeshi which
we alarmed was that you bought fabric
preferentially from hand spinners in
India even though it was many times the
cost of the fabric that you could import
from English and his reasoning was that
you were paying for your own oppression
if you bought fabric from the people
that were also an occupying army this is
the kind of Gambia model so what Gandhi
managed to sell people who was the idea
that it was better to have less
consumption but for it to be fully
ethical rather than more consumption and
have it be unethical and Gandhi managed
to make that a political agenda point in
a way that could change Dinu behavior
the the traditional picture of Gandhi
where he's just wearing like a shawl and
shorts was done be saying like look even
if you can't afford a full suit of
clothing it's better for you to have
less clothing and it be ethical than
work or they can it not be and and that
kind of voluntary reduction of
consumption higher quality higher prices
ethical manufacture also very tightly
aligns with the green agenda right we're
doing less environmental damage we know
that people are being paid fairly that
we needed to get our consumption down
anyway and what I can imagine is a
conspicuous consumption ramp where rich
people show how rich they are by showing
how high the standard of living is if
the people whose goods they're consuming
and this is part of the farmer market
psychology of like oh yes we went to the
farmers market and we bought our food
and it was groomed by people that look
pretty much like us like their kids go
to the same school as our kids go to so
we know that this product was not made
by slavery we know it wasn't made by you
know grimy underpaid Mexicans getting
beaten with coroners you know this stuff
actually came from our class our people
our neighborhood our world and that sort
of parochial glossy insularity and I
think Hans the potential to scale into a
cultural movement a bit like veganism
did you know
there's plenty of opportunities for
people to be activists on this stuff in
the same way that they are around
veganism so I think the idea that there
could be a power bowel movement veganism
which is slavery free and
environmentally sustainable and that
becomes like a product category you know
you go into a shop they've got all the
regular clothing and then they have the
Eco fashion section and the Eco FAQ
should close slavery free carbon offset
last forever sustainable materials you
know done another edit out of there and
no evil dyes used in the manufacturing
that I think is very believable as a
cultural trend and certainly the success
of the vegetarians and the vegans have
mainstreaming those approaches I think
the idea that you could extend that into
retail is very portable pedestrian but
you know that's okay it's feasible I
could see how we get there and it's our
beautiful vision in the future and we
all shared a bit of how we get there -
which was pretty awesome even if they
weren't in alignment and switching over
to the next one although we sell a bit
of time left in this one if anyone has
any final thoughts I think the veganism
part is is I have critiqued veganism a
lot not in the you shouldn't be vegan
but in the way vegans go about it they
turn people off of veganism not towards
it I know vegans who are absolutely
lovely will help you cook a meal and
those who like shame you into this is
the only way and one is effective and
one is not effective and so what looking
for in solution raising is those
voluntary powerful things like veganism
that can offer us a way forward to maybe
reduce our slavery footprint think would
be powerful with ten thousand people who
want to this and each putting in ten
dollars so we have a hundred thousand
dollars to do something that's whether
that's ten dollars a month or ten
dollars overall
maybe you need ten dollars per month
with slavery right maybe it's too big to
deal with hundred thousand can I just
put the one thing in on the vegan thing
because this is it's kind of a problem
with with our language in the way that
we use language neither you either are
or are
a vegan right and and you know any
reduction in consumption of meat in
particular but you know animal products
in general is it is to be applauded as a
step in the right direction right and
and and so you know that because you
still eat a couple of eggs a week and
and put milk in your coffee your you
know you you're still labeled as a
murderer and a killer this is this is
ridiculous and as you say many many
beacons that I have met not all by any
means but but many are exactly that they
they they put people off you know what I
mean you know you don't need to be so
yeah that that the fact that there is a
word for it vegan you know to me rather
than the notion of reducing reliance on
animal products kind of thing right the
vegan is a is that you will your are or
not this binary notion of you are or are
not a full-on vegan and you know if
you're a vegetarian well we all kinda
Charlie the labels does a big part of
the problem I think you're getting
beyond those into the actually important
parts of the ideas somehow is yeah
anyway yeah these are what trouble this
in the squat movement used to call those
guys the vegan Reich because he they
would come in and take over squats and
basically force out anybody that kept
bringing me or cheese into the squat it
was yeah it was quite contentious back
in the day on the other hand they got
 done you know maybe being
reasonable is not always the answer it's
true I mean I don't want the people who
are completely different than me and
doing that necessarily the stuff because
that is effective in its own way but
also having options that are including
for veganism that are a hundred percent
voluntary and something that is like how
do we help ourselves so then it invite
the world
how does 10,000 people get together and
as weird as it sounds less in their
slavery footprint right eat less not
necessary you can't go from 38 to zero
especially when you yourself are
somewhat a slave to the system and I
mean from my perspective the thing that
I want to do as a first measure here is
just inflict an enormous amount of
psychological pain on people right you
know we are all complicit in a system
is closing enormous harm all mean for
the hypercar as we were talking about
before is that we you mean bye-bye yes
that's exactly I mean right like because
if people are completely insulated from
the pain caused by their actions
psychologically they'll keep right on
doing it right if we have a culture
where there's an enormous amount of
moving associated with the current
system it becomes more likely that we
can get systemic change right if
everybody is neurotic about how much
suffering they're causing when they buy
consumer electronics pretty soon
companies will start to respond to them
and same thing for the environment like
you know hey you yeah you're completely
destroying your grandchildren's lives
right now they're gonna grow up on a
barren planet with 2 billion less people
in a place for justice staying fed takes
80 percent of their labor and the rest
of the time there's you're digging
through scrap heaps and that's Arizona
never mind Bogota oh I didn't realize we
were destroying the future yeah you're
totally just showing the future you
gotta knock this off and you don't
seem like there has been an enormous
tangency for the culture to avoid
hearing bad news
Inessa result like you know the Greens
just did not take that path in a
concerted way the Greens always I mean
the amount of 50 wasted years on
environmentalism literally 50 wasted
years and because they weren't willing
to speak truth to power they weren't
willing to tell people what the hell was
actually happened and were just catching
up on that now um I'm trying to think
when was Silent Spring published it was
we talked about this a couple of times
before then hey have you seen that
planet of the humans good 62
well 62 that was yeah
Silent Spring by Rachel Carson which was
that first really high impact book about
environmentalism I think probably maybe
um and you always think of it as being
like late 70s no it was early 60s in
conceivably early and
I didn't see planet the humans I don't
think but yeah I mean it's it's you know
bad rocks in this thing with like how do
we get people to admit that the culture
that we're in is extremely problematic
even if they don't have much more a fix
it right now just like wait a minute
guys we have a problem kind of needs to
become part of our discourse as
somebody's had never heard of my
discourse since I was 15 years old and
I'm now 40 it has never been effective
to shame people into environmental or
our vegetarian when I was one or ethical
even this right even talking about
slavery we get more people at the
solution raising when it's on food or
clothing or or something that they feel
like ok yeah when it's the big things
like slavery they're like oh it's too
much and that's with people who care
yeah that making people like I feel like
we all have about as much trauma as we
can handle and looking at ways to do
things like you bi looking at ways to
actually reduce as weird as it sounds
the west's trauma so that we're less
consumer driven right connect us so that
we don't need to fill that hole in our
soul with more like fashion right
that being able to look at our
electronics how long do they last and
why are like why is Apple coming up with
a new one every two years
why are my laptops not lasting very long
because that is a huge as well as how
much slavery went into it the fact that
I have to buy a new one every two to
three years the fact there aren't ways
to repair them the fact that like how do
we look at well and doing it from that
that angle like well there can be four
pear shops there can be a way to support
that the fairphone right there are ways
to look at mapping the supply chain and
then looking at where can we have the
most impact right now is 10,000 people
right maybe maybe it's not electronics
cuz it's huge er maybe it is clothing
right how can I get my clothing needs
met how can I actually wear clothing
that's ethical and look at the entire
supply chain or how can I grow my own
food so that I don't have to go to the
farmers or because I look at the farmers
market is a very not on mmm inefficient
and like so the farmer
have to take their stuff bring it here
so we can all go shop instead of like
they have better things to do with their
time I have better things to do in my
time that have an artisan experience
instead of I need food delivered to me
and I need the people who make it to
have decent lives yes and I mean the
communities for in agriculture I think
is here a real sweet spot on that in
that it's economically efficient and
also pretty good from an ethical
perspective you know the all these kind
of box delivery schemes you have in
cities now where they just dump
vegetables on your doorstep once a week
that stuff's really good like that's
actually a pretty efficient way of doing
things I mean there is a my feeling
about this is that we've had really I
mean so 62 for Silent Spring 80 years of
encouraging people to do the right thing
and and an attempting to work inside a
consumer society to move towards
solutions and there have been occasional
breakouts like the electric car stuff is
an enormous breakthrough if it was
inside of that paradigm right Tassel
sold cars because they were really
really fast by oh my god you want away
it will dust the porch for $35,000 car
buy a Tesla um but for the most part
given that we're 80 years into this
stuff the actual impact has been pretty
negligible right we've been we've been
kind of softs hoping people along really
at this point for four generations and
the actual baseline movement is almost
impossible to measure it's unbelievably
tiny and so now I think we're back at
the park where the logical strategy is
just to completely destroy people yeah
the thing is the thing as DubLi sort of
alluded to and she said it's too big
right the changing of the way we do
supply chains and the way we do
manufacturing and the ethic board you
know the especially what Jubilee is
talking about with the built-in
obsolescence that exists in goods right
and this is this is a necessary thing in
order to keep money moving around the
system you know what I mean
and so you changed its in isolation this
doesn't change without the entire
financial monetary economic model also
changing right along with it you know
what I mean though the two are
inextricably linked together you know
you've drained it my system collapses
there's no way around that
but I mean designed obsolescence is only
really 1940s 1950s right we've got
documentation of the meetings like you
know the white bulb cartel which just
went in that curve was starting to
steepen yeah when that when the you know
the money creation code was just
beginning to steep and at that point I
mean now it's almost vertical right but
that that was the point at which it
started to steepen sure we have actual
documentation of the organization that
was created by the light bulb
manufacturers - yes right or am i right
so it's not very often that we get
actual documentation of the conspiracies
right the fact that we know the name of
the organization that did the light bulb
conspiracy and the color of committee
right the group that decides what colors
will be fashionable each year you know
every year pound - um publishes here is
our color of the year and the same in
fashion world so there are a few
instances where we've got these you know
kind of bang to rights like okay this is
the place where the industry is pushing
this kind of obsolescence
but even if we fix all of that it's fine
for 10% of our environmental impact
right it's a tiny tiny tiny part of the
problem right Americans are seventeen
and a half tons of co2 per person and
that's the average the sustainable
emission is about two times maybe three
right so hopefully with your notion of
it being negligible because it extends
everywhere this notion of building
things not to last
I mean it's everywhere every part of
every car you know it's it's everywhere
and so I disagree that it's not I mean I
don't have a number and I don't have
research to back this up but my sense is
that it is far from negligible it is
actually a massive piece so industry
ahead I say this exactly so if you take
clothing right all
fast fashion stuff together is I want to
say something like four or five percent
of the human races environmental impact
right so you could say okay there are
four or five things I how about that
much damage each in the tool would be
about ten or twenty percent and the tool
might be ten or twenty percent right but
then right behind that you know you've
got the really you know big heads right
agriculture heating of houses
construction protection power generation
yeah focus on on so Vinnie a seems like
you're very very knowledgeable in both
the environmental and slavery one which
is the industry that has the number one
slavery imprint that we have right so
the sex industry might be one but I
don't use the sex industry including
porn and stuff so I have no no dollar no
eyeballs to spend one-way births as the
other so what is it what is if we were
to have the biggest impact on slavery
except that we're talking about today
what would be the industry you would
suggest we focus on so Helen is the real
expert on this stuff right but so the
areas there are specific niche products
which have real problems right um shrimp
for example often has a ton of slavery
embedded and protrude in general right
yeah general there are a whole bunch of
problems you know fruit picking you know
you get your food from Mexico guess what
the living conditions like at G Joe Lou
the name of God called Cesar Chavez
tried to unionize fruit pickers in
California and got shot in the back of
the head um so this yeah yes Cuba Cesar
Chavez so there's a there's a relatively
limited window for individual consumer
choice on these matters right a little
bit here a little bit there fair trade
whenever fair trade is available by fair
trade
it's not perfect but it's there it's
pretty widely available right clothing
manufactured in first world countries
where possible right by durable things
durable things dude all of that kind of
stuff certainly helps um but the real
the real problem here the problem of
getting us over the hump is people's
desire to believe if the even of their
lifestyles are completely unethical they
themselves are good people right and we
have to pull the pin that moral harmed
grenade because that moral hand grenade
is at the heart of colonialism that is a
fiction that mainly the British but
other Europeans wrapped around
themselves in the early days of
colonialism as a way of protecting them
from the moral consequences of their
actions my issue is have you ever had
anybody become a better person when
you've pulled the pin out of them
thinking they're a good um do they start
making better choices cuz I again since
I was 50 and have been trying to do that
and in fact the opposite has been has
been the case so let's let's say this
the shrimp industry you're saying and
even if that isn't true right the shrimp
industry is the number one place for
their slavery that we have unpacked on I
do eat shrimp I just had a dynamite
rolled last night so and this is a part
of its music it's not Taiwan Thailand is
a place has a really big promotion
sleeper they just throw the kids off the
boat at the end of harvest season okay
yeah alright so that is clearly
something like this is so there's tons
of apps out there that are like don't
use palm oil
don't use don't there's one that is is
take a picture of your of your hotel
rooms so that it can be put in a
database so we can help the sex slavery
right when that when those things come
up the problem with all of those nobody
knows they exist and I'm not going to
download an individual app for shrimp
and an individual app for palm oil and
an individual for this having one place
that I can something like the good guide
that is co-owned so that I can put in
stuff I care about so I can say you know
what and I have done this with bananas
where when I went to Costa Rica and
found out what happened to the people
who weren't having organic bananas they
were just being sprayed with pesticides
I was like I'm never eating a
non-organic banana again because it's
not about me it's not organic and
organic bananas are actually pretty
close for me like the consumer they're
one of the clean ones but not when
they're being made right for the worker
to say that about shrimp right to be
like I'm Ned
we're gonna eat shrimp again that means
that children are drowning but there's
no way to do that by myself besides
spending a lot of money or just not
eating a shrimp which is not gonna help
because it's not gonna give money to the
to the ethical rip farmers right so how
do we get ten thousand people to never
eat the bad shrimp again
what could we create and it could be a
shrimp farm really like I mean
forty-nine shrimp are could feed ten
thousand people the shrimp for the rest
of their lives yeah that median price
for and actually impact communities or
in agriculture but now for seafood right
I don't mean in Canada right you know
salmon farming that there must be ways
of doing it which are organic and
wastage are there are things we could be
doing like this the but the you're
saying like how many times just pulling
the pin out work right and you know pull
the pin out is how I got to be Who I am
right pulling the pin out is how Gandhi
got to be who Gandhi is pulling the pin
out is how you got to be who you are
right so pulling the pin out from the
people that are currently fast asleep
and simply feeding on other human beings
for a living doesn't really work right
what we do need is we need the people
that have already pulled the pin out to
get a very clear way of recognizing each
other and then figuring out how to
collaborate right because there are
enough people who've pulled the pin out
and realized that the world is
fundamentally a hell's really good PR
that you can get right and you know this
goes back to the seed of Colonials and
the way that the English sold themselves
colonialism was the idea that what they
were taking with Christianity to the
savages and these people were going to
go to hell unless the English enslave
them enforce the Bible down their throat
and that's how the English sold
themselves mass murder as a an
industrial business model for an entire
civilization if they hadn't had
crystianna you wash their hands they
would have been incapable amounting
violence on that scale if you don't have
a religious belief that the violence
that you're inflicting is good violence
most people can't do it
you guys don't yeah and there's a very
large number of people who weren't
themselves directly
doing the violence right and so I think
the notion putting the curtain back is a
really important one because that's less
it's less of a personal attack right
than the pulling the pin out kind of
vibe the pulling the curtain back for
all to see
right it's not like grabbing the back of
your head and shoving it through the
curtain right it's like pulling the
curtain back so that all can see it and
you know once you see it it's hard to
look away you know and it's hard to
unsee once you've seen it that kind of
thing Carrie made this point about I
can't remember what it was but she she
brought this up I think to do I can't
know what it was in relation to but you
know if people saw the conditions in
which people were working in order to
produce their goods if people saw the
conditions in which animals were stored
and slaughtered and processed you know
what I mean people actually saw all this
all better still were brought to it who
was the woman that you were talking
about Carrie that was she chaired I
can't remember what you told a story
about someone who went to somewhere and
but you know if more people have that
kind of experience even if it's only
seeing it on television they're not
actually going there and living it right
even if it was only seeing it on
provisional you can see on telly but I'm
just saying on a large scale that's
maybe maybe not so feasible but you know
instead of every news report being
breaks it breaks it breaks it breaks it
breaks it and then Kobe Kobe Kobe Kobe
Kobe Kobe I mean how about some kind of
you know that every day there is some
reminder of you know the that's
going on in the world in order that week
as you know so that we because I mean I
think what you're saying I think is
partly true venae about wrapping
yourself in a cloak of we're doing good
in the world and therefore the horrible
 we do is justified in the pursuit
of that larger good right I that is that
is partially true but I also think the
notion of being able to pretend it's not
there because it's not right in front of
you I think that's even more powerful
absolutely true mechanism so I wanted to
talk about group choir called Grossman
called on
killing right and what Grossman has
collected together is all the evidence
that soldiers are completely unwilling
to kill each other right like World War
one practically all of the soldiers shot
over the heads if the opposing side
rather than album World War two I think
that something like 30% of the personnel
were actually willing to point a gun
somebody and pull the trigger even in
combat situations they were largely
ineffective because there's an enormous
internal moral framework that even
stopped soldiers from killing the enemy
when they're given the opportunity and
they've worked really really hard in
terms of military training and
psychological management to get people
to kill and it's you know they've gotten
better over time but the basic model
soldiers were very reluctant to shoot
people and I think that there is a
pretty good evidence of quite strong
innate human morality that it's taken
the creation of an entire civilization
and an entire culture to reverse right
like the basic human tendency not to
just people over and destroy them
is really strong and then what we've got
is hundreds of years of acculturation
layered over each other to build a
psychological matrix which allows us to
do this and I think that the destruction
of that psychological program is much
more practical as a solution broadly
than we've given it credit for because
it gets us environment it gets us
slavery it gets us health you know and
it's just the problematization of
industrial capitalism like okay guys
this industrial capitalism thing that's
feeding us all yeah it's destroying the
world what holy what do you mean
it's destroying the world well let me
get the graphs right and that
realization of like wait a minute it's
the whole thing I think is is
the shortcut right because if we deal
with this as 58 million individual
issues we have 58 million pressure
groups and what we came to need is a
single thesis which is industrial
capitalism is killing the world and it's
killing us and once we get over that
hump it becomes much easier for the
people that are building
to kind of work together on this and
we've taken a few crocks at that right
there was um do you remember who wrote
that book one one no many S's was that
Paul Hawken but I want to ask you many
what do you think is the most powerful
thing we could do with 10,000 people and
$100,000 because you're talking about
very very big Mehta for me what I want
is 10,000 people to figure out how they
produce their food food food footprint
for environmental and slavery because I
what you're talking about people not
wanting to kill each other and we have
so much of an industrial system to get
them to kill each other to go against
their human nature people want to do
good but they don't have another option
if your options going to the farmers
market I'm telling you I can't afford
that but if there was a system I could
opt into where you're like listen this
basket of food that you and your kid
will eat you're gonna exchange ten hours
a week for this or you're gonna exchange
500 dollars a month for this whatever
the system was I would sign up for that
in a heartbeat but it doesn't exist or
it exists and I don't know about it
gemstone creating stops eating for
10,000 people and then inviting people
so that it's voluntary is what these
solution raisins are excellence we can
showcase that you could salt you can
improve anything with 10,000 people
hundred thousand dollars then you can
improve everything but first it's fine I
gotta say yeah I mean I think if you
approach VeriFone with a bulk order for
10,000 phones they'd be very happy right
like hey you know we're I mean you know
like how about you how much we're just
10 do you get if you approach with
10,000 phone order so simply doing bulk
purchase all things that are
environmentally sustainable reasonable
right I mean I don't know take colored
t-shirts right we're gonna order you
know 45,000 blue t-shirts from the
vendor that can give us the lowest price
the highest quality and perfect
environmental and social guarantees so
the notion that you could have like a
buyers club where you bulk purchase
enormous quantities of sustainable goods
from people and ideally repeated value
right we're gonna you know for one year
we're gonna basically have 10% of the
order place each month for 10 months so
you get a nice cutting even flow
I bet that their manufacturers are doing
this kind of sustainable stuff that
would absolutely die for that kind of
opportunity right you know sandals right
we're gonna get flip floats aid in five
sizes they're gonna last 200 years the
75 bucks each and we're gonna approach
you with you know a two-year order and
those kind of approaches I think this
kind of you know 10,000 person
solidarity unit very very very plausible
and if you have those consumers wrangle
together vendors can then approach it
say okay the next thing for the bulk buy
what do you think of this you know every
three months every six months the
community picks a new thing to do the
bulk buy on a year later they've all
gotten maybe those kind of approaches I
like that there's something similar that
I'm part of has nothing to do with
ethical it's like a mom's buying Club
where it's because so we have to share
in shipping and then someone breaks it
up and we doing something like that on
scale of 10,000 people or we're saying
hey yes let's focus on phones because
also even if let's say 2,000 people out
of the 10,000 we're getting that phone
they also gonna share with their friends
and family right and be like hey who
wants to come in on this bye because it
is big enough to do that
I think Carrie has something yeah just a
yeah I like that idea as well cheaply
and other centers once we get to the
10,000 it starts to pop I his cloak both
buyers polkadot then we go find and
connect with the other buyers cloaks and
then that kind of makes what I did as
well you know and people know like the
person with the new idea also knows
where to go to write that they don't
have to start in a brand new market it's
so easy to be like hey we have a
clothing system that you might like okay
I wonder how many how many do we need to
buy from you to make that feasible and
how you know how do we make this ethical
let's start commissioning stuff as well
when this buyers club gets big enough
you can start commissioning stuff you
know what we got whatever a hundred
thousand members who want this right
who's gonna who's going to design and
manufacture this with a guaranteed order
volume of this over this period you know
what I mean yeah a lot of people don't
know what's out there and others
once you stop connecting all the dots
and that and because as I said the like
hello
cuz a lot of stuff is disconnected and
once you go a big enough network of
people you can start sort like highlight
in is that a proposed in shitty memes
about somebody fat
oh hey fur-covered evil but yeah you can
absolutely get people to work together
to raise awareness of the things they
could be doing that would work you know
we be sort of convinced by a sense of
powerlessness the the book I mentioned
for one know many S's Paul Kings north
and he basically did a tour of all of
the kind of anti-capitalist green
resistance stuff around the world and
basically said look we all greed what
the problem is and then everybody so the
recorder of a solution the the thing
that I think we could feasibly move
towards right in let's say 15 years
maybe lass am is the idea that you've
got a lifestyle where the vast majority
of the things you own you are sure are
not poisonous toxic contaminated
destructive you know like where did this
come from
okay it came from here and I trust it
and so you begin to have an experience
in the same with vegetarians vegans do
where when somebody serves you something
that is not up to your standards your
right way no this is not my thing
uh-huh and right now it's almost
impossible to do that right like almost
nobody no matter how dedicated they are
can burn a clean spot for everything
they own is uncontaminated it's
extremely difficult but I think with
that as a goal state you know how hard
could it be right if we had that as a
general awareness of why in the future I
want to live life for nothing that I own
was made by slaves and it should all be
you know permanent use doesn't degrade
you know all the rest that stuff it
seems doable it's not doable easily but
it's also doable incrementally right
like what you do for clothing when we do
this for clothing okay that'll do it
yeah I mean it's it's not sorry I'm
fumbling for something here but it's
it's the drawing of the line so you can
have people that really care are able to
live in a way per their world isn't
contaminated like right now it doesn't
matter how much you care we don't have
any of the social infrastructure to make
it possible to turn caring into not do
it yes exactly and I really want to turn
caring into doing and a lot of the
systems are focused on like global or
like all of Canada or go to the farmers
market I'm like I can't and I it's not
something I can do create something that
is a bulk buying Club for 10,000 people
that is how do we get our food needs met
that is how do we get our clothing needs
met without demanding everyone you know
wears the same black shirt everyone wear
it has this exact vegan diet that like
how do i lessen mine and as soon as
those options exist yeah people come on
board because they do but asking them to
take their head out of the sand look
around in all the chaos and when
they're already under trauma is a lot
and so I think that 10,000 rows can get
together we care deeply and create
something beautiful that people want to
be ours so some of the solutions to our
super unfortunate like I'm just I'm just
gonna I can't sorry I'm rambling a
little but like polyester clothing you
ever be in a thrift store with like a
bunch of polyester clothing for the
1970s and it looks brand new apart from
the fact that it's like right it's it's
horrible to wear but it lasts for I've
seen pictures of like you know refugee
comes to Africa and you've got people
wearing like 1950s American polyester in
like 2014 and it still looks new so you
know it's not that we don't know how to
make permanent stuff it's just a lot of
the permanent stuff we know how to make
is terrible yeah
on the hour yeah I know we could talk
about this and this has been a great
conversation I just want to go around
have everyone share what they think is
the most powerful thing that they that
we could salt we could do with ten
thousand people in a hundred thousand
dollars and this might be the one that
we actually all pick the same thing as
clover I pick having a ten thousand the
buyers club to pick yeah I think buyers
club is great and you know one of the
things about is it might also very much
help stabilize businesses right so you
know imagine that you're a small
business it's doing you know import if
at our fair trade sound else or
something and somebody approaches you
with two years worth of orders you know
suddenly you know what your business is
doing for two years and and you can then
go you know grow from that base build on
those bases so those deals because it's
a guaranteed volume over time I think
might have dramatic power for
establishing the Queen's of Fontaine the
after that deal was done we then
continue to run in the environment um
bet like Body Shop you know like they
got started small and then it became a
huge global brand I could just about
March and you could launch things like
that from Bob basis yeah absolutely can
how about you Carrie what do you think
is the most powerful thing that we you
think we could do a 10,000 people I
think the buyers remember we were
talking about you know if it did get out
he says if he gets it does what would
you do that what would serve them so I
think buyers club I'm tearing Karen into
German but also have an aspect of
projects that can be developed bison
should be wish to give them options to
get actually hands-on involved you know
I mean I know a lot of people don't want
to and or just like you know don't care
that much but they want to be part of
something but as I said as people within
them mm that we want to be you're doing
a bit more and I think the buyers
probably is how you're gonna actually
that's why that's why and I'm not
interested mission so like a buyers club
from the get-go and there's more people
come and get involved and I think that's
how you're gonna do it and then create
the network out of that
and then start from what everybody's
them I witness things in what what's out
there but a lot of people don't know
what's out there because you know even
in the local communities I can talk to
somebody in America and introduce them
to somebody just II don't know
and I'm like beloved scotland's you know
I read so you know and it's not as well
so I think that's the nuts away and
Jubilee to be honest in terms of getting
the ten thousand for every solutions
raising for every item start off with
the buyers club because people like to
think that they get in something right I
mean that might be a way to but then we
don't have a buyers club yet we would
need to create a website that is the
buyers club or a Facebook Graph and if
the buyers club you'll process raising
conversations right that are going on
the the the buyers club that's the thing
that's your attraction to 10,000 right
and that's and it makes sense the ten
thousand threshold now makes sense right
because you know that's that's a number
where we feel we have sufficient buying
power to negotiate deals and have a
positive impact on ethical manufacturing
you know what I mean and and and you
know ten thousand people each putting in
ten dollars a month that's $100,000 a
month of buying power like the buyers
club has for whatever the it is
that they that they collectively decide
they want and then voting makes sense as
well right because you know 60% both or
something well the other 40% don't have
to have that good they can have a future
one right there credit remains in the
pool but the next I or something like
that I mean it solves really a lot of
your thousand people that can stop the
recording because I have to I'm gonna
have to go right away so I'm going to
end the recording next week we're gonna
start holding these on zoom' and we can
continue talking after I've stopped the
recording but we're gonna hold these on
zoom' so that we can break out into
groups and come up with solution for
other ones and if anyone wants to move
forward with creating a buyer's club
buyers club they are more than welcome
to do that that is not my focus just
because I am focused on creating this
process for 10,000 people
but anyone's welcome to use these ideas
or those raisins of their own to come up
with ideas highly fun