howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to jim
rut show com that's Jim ruts show com
today's guest is Lawrence Gonzalez he's
the author of numerous books and we're
gonna talk about one of them today
thanks Jim it's great to be here yeah
it's great to have you on in fact it's
an honor truthfully if I'm such a fan of
the main book we're gonna be talking
about today which is deep survival you
can learn more about deep survival and
some of Florence's other books at deep
survival com but it's not the only book
he's written he's won many awards
including two Magazine Awards
distinguished service awards Society of
Professional Journalists he's also been
awarded the Montaigne metal from the
Eric Hoffer Society in 2018 and won the
Eric Hoffer award in both 2018 and 2019
truthfully I'd never heard of the Eric
Hoffer award but Eric Hoffer is one of
my real heroes in fact one of the top 10
books in my life is a book called the
true believer by Eric Hoffer and I have
to learn more about this Eric Hoffer
Society and it's awards because
presumably it means good things and I
noticed that deep survival won one of
these awards as well which puts it in
great company but I put some of the you
know the life-changing books that one
can read another one being you know zen
and the art of motorcycle maintenance so
anyway that's a little bit about
Lawrence some of his more recent books
which will be listed on our website as
usual are flight 232 about an amazing
story of survival in an airline crash
surviving survival and a novel called
Lucy which I can must say I know nothing
about but anyone who can write a novel
as well has my respect deep survival is
really an astoundingly wonderful book as
I said it's when I read years ago at
recommendation a Cormac MacCarthy the
novelist and I just found it so amazing
it's this furious artistic blend of
autobiography complexity science
cognitive science cognitive neuroscience
all interwoven with some many astounding
and shocking true stories of survival
let's start off with how the book does
Lawrence could you tell us the story of
your father's last bomber mission haha
yes I can so I grew up with this as a
little kid bear this in mind while I
tell you this story because I knew my
father had been in the war when he came
back he was severely injured he was
recovering from his injuries and trying
to go to school at the same time and
this would have been I was born in 47 so
my memory is you know start probably
around the age of three or so my father
was a b-17 bomber pilot with the US Air
Corps Army Air Corps at the time before
the airforce and he was in the position
of bombing Germany from a base in
England on these near the end of the war
very big bombing raids where they'd have
700 planes
1,200 planes maybe even more in a single
mission and so they would all take off
before dawn go across the English
Channel and bomb Germany on the day in
question my father was the very first
guy in this mission all of the planes
were following him and there were about
700 that particular day and so as he
approached the targets which were just
outside of d√ºsseldorf they were railroad
marshalling yards his left wing was
taken off by gunfire flak fire an 88
millimeter cannon was fired by a
fourteen-year-old boy and shot his left
wing off the plane rolled over of course
on its back and began spinning because
one wing was still flying and a couple
of the engines were still running and
the centrifugal forces of this spinning
plane were so great that it pulled the
plane to pieces and the piece my father
was in
was of course the cockpit because he was
the commander I mean the pilot in
command and the man next to him was his
commander Colonel hunter what's his name
colonel frank hunter and he was already
dead my father said when he looked over
my father looked over and said I guess
this is it famous last words
now at that time that that he was shot
down which was January 23rd 1945 he was
23 years old and he was considered a
salty old pilot at that time and these
guys were supposed to wear their
parachutes all the time throughout the
entire ten-hour mission sometimes longer
mission and they didn't they stuck him
under their seats because they were
uncomfortable so my father didn't have
his parachute on now the cockpit is
detached from the aircraft it's falling
from 27,000 feet which was their
altitude for cruising into this'll Dorf
area and my father's trying to get his
parachute and of course the centrifugal
force is so great that as soon as he
snaps open his seatbelt he's thrown
against the instrument panel and in
those days their oxygen came through a
tube that went up the chest to the
facemask
and so it cut off his oxygen at that
point and he passed out somewhere in
midair he woke up on the ground inside
this chunk of the cockpit and he was
alive which amazed him he told me when I
was a little older and a German guy they
were in farmed farm fields by a railroad
embankment a German guy came up on the
stub of the wing that was still there or
the stub of metal that was on the
outside pulled out a pistol and put it
to my father's head and pulled the
trigger and when he pulled the trigger
it didn't fire and at that moment a
german officer came rushing up and said
you can't kill this guy he's an officer
and he's a prisoner of war and we've got
to interrogate him and they had this
argument but you know he's gonna die
you're not gonna at arrogate him I'm
gonna shoot him and the Germans stopped
stopped this guy from killing my father
anyway he fell twenty-seven thousand
feet and survived is kind of the message
that I tell at the beginning of deep
survival and
it's a cliffhanger so you know you don't
really get the end of the story until
the end of the book which is the way I
designed it but the end of the story
obviously is I'm here so he must have
lived through it it was a hell of an
introduction I still remember when I
read the book the first time it was like
holy I can't believe this is an
amazing way to start the book AAB well
and I start the book off by saying that
it's a little kid you know most kids get
told these stories and as they grow up
they realize you know there's your fairy
tales I was told this amazing fairy tale
and as I grew up I realized hey wait a
minute that's true it's really true and
and this really started my interest in
survival because I thought wow I came
very close to not existing you know if
that fall had killed him or if the the
German farmer whoever he was killed him
I wouldn't be here and that was always
kind of an existential thing that I
contemplated as I went about my work and
you did a lot of work on the edge right
yeah in the introduction you talked
about working with the Chicago Fire
Department yeah yeah what were they like
what words acog Oh fireman what were
they like so this would have been
probably I'm guessing like late 80s
Early 90s no it would have been mid 80s
I guess and I was on an assignment I had
been given a series of assignments that
was essentially like dangerous
professions so I looked up some
statistics and sure enough firefighters
are right up there and so I proceeded to
immerse myself in these professions and
when I got with the firefighters they
were wonderful guys I was put into a
little firehouse in Chicago west of the
loop and you could see the big buildings
downtown from from here it was on the
Salle in the street anyway it was just
these guys were just wonderful wonderful
friendly funny you know they they live
in a firehouse here 24 hours on 48 hours
off and you stay in the firehouse you
make all your meals there you sleep
there and you get to know these people
really well and and they took me in it
was it was very heartwarming and they
you know mostly nothing happens and
you're hanging around and hanging or
and they get a call and you go out and
it's like a homeless guy fell down in
the gutter and they pick him up and take
him to the hospital you know it's mostly
kind of nothing and then one day
something really happens and they took
me with them I had gotten to know them
pretty well by then so they actually
gave me they got me
turnout gear which is the big helmet and
coats and all that stuff that they wear
the boots they outfitted me they gave me
a tool which was a Pike pole with a hook
on the end and they took me into a
burning house to help them put the fire
out which I did and it's terrifying
I mean it's it's the real thing and you
realize I realized as I worked with
these guys we went into a burning hotel
when they - so I had quite a number of
runs with them and I realized what I was
doing was I was putting my life in their
hands and that I knew in my heart of
hearts that if these guys got out I
would get out they weren't gonna let me
get killed unless all of us got killed
and it was a very it changed my life I
mean one of the things that I've done
since writing deep survivalist have
worked very closely with firefighters
all across the country helping them with
decision making processes and ways of of
stayin safer and I do a lot of big
conferences with them I do a lot of
speaking engagements with them and end
up in my hometown of Evanston Illinois
I was asked by our own fire department
to teach all of their firefighters and
we did it kind of in shifts where I
would you know because they had to have
firefighters on the street - so they we
did three days of teaching where I
talked to them about you know how not to
get dead wow that's the real deal isn't
it right these are the kind of guys and
you can trust you you did indeed trust
your life - yeah absolutely and and I
love firefighters that's I've worked
with them ever since now it's funny I'm
from a police family and you know the
famous antagonism between the two my
father was a Washington DC policeman for
his career a couple of my cousin's were
policemen my brother was federal law
enforcement and I had a little baby
version an experience like this I used
to go Riedel
along with my cousin who was the shift
commander was called the tack squad
which was the squad that was sent out to
the high crime areas each night based on
the statistics etc I remember being
along with him riding in the car with
him one day and we get a call for a
burglary in progress in a small office
building and one other car shows up we
all huddle and me and there's four doors
and so my cuz it turns me he goes how
old are you kid
and I said nineteen guys good yeah
you're hereby deputized he took the
shotgun off the rack on behind the seat
and handed it to me and said you stand
here by this door we're gonna go through
the other three doors look at these
three guys if someone comes out the door
that isn't these three guys shoot him I
go and this was the notorious
Prince George's County Maryland police
famous for shooting people in fact they
were one of the last jurisdictions in
the United States who still allow
shooting fleeing felons rather than only
when the officers life was in danger and
so here I am standing there my heart
ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba and it turns
out it was a false alarm but tell you
what I don't know if I could've ever had
my heart thump and quite like that but
these guys I totally trusted them yeah I
know what you mean because I did I don't
believe I put this in deep survival but
I did a stint with Illinois state's
attorneys police in Chicago when they
were doing drug busts and I got to know
these guys really well it was a team
plainclothes everybody wore jeans and
you know gym shoes and I kind of became
one of them and we were going on a drug
bust of a big drug kingpin and we had a
stolen car
big Continental from the 70s it had been
used in a drug deal and so they had
confiscated it so we had it for plain
clothes use and filled it up with us you
know they were I think seven of us on
that run shotguns pistols everything you
can imagine and when we got out the guy
handed me a sledgehammer and he said
just don't say anything they'll just
assume you're a cop so let's go
went in to bust this big drug kingpin in
apartment and there was nobody in there
but two little kids one was I think
seven and one was like five a boy and a
girl and that was all the people that
were in this building and the police
went ahead and searched the place and
found the drugs and got the child
services over there to take the kids but
it was pretty exciting before we
actually got in there thinking we were
blasting our way in yeah that's it you
know gets like the fire department most
police work is boring as hell but now
and then it's the real deal all in
military people tell me the same a whole
lot of waiting around and then the
shitstorm from hell yeah and and you
know being a pilot is that way too it's
described as hours of boredom punctuated
by seconds of terror yeah I did some
flying did all the flying to get my
private pilot's license but never got it
because I got pulled off on a business
project actually a political project
after I'd done all the parts that you
had to do to get your license I never
did go for the exam god damn it it was
quite an interesting experience yeah I
don't know if I'll ever go back and do
it you became a pilot in fact quite a
serious pilot not just a Cessna driver
but you know you did helicopters and
aerobatic and jets and all that sort of
stuff I imagine kind of driven by your
father's history I would think so yeah
because I grew up thinking that being a
pilot was the ultimate and I have been a
pilot most of my life I am a instrument
commercial pilot I flew aerobatic for
about eight years in high-performance
aircraft I've flown a whole variety of
fighter planes and other kinds of jets
helicopters you know you name it and I
actually had the chance to get a ride
onto and off of an aircraft carrier so
I've had had a lot of exposure in that
world and in fact as a journalist when I
started out one of the first things I
began doing was investigating airline
crashes and writing about them so that
was in 1972 or three when I began
it's amazing now let's get into some of
the deep content of the book kind of
what is the nature of deep survival one
of the themes that came through I don't
know how many times just mentioned that
book I should actually do a search on in
fact I'm gonna do a search on it live
what the hell I make an idiot of myself
the word cool the word cool appears 52
times in the book the first pull quote I
pulled out to prepare my notes is the
first lesson is to remain calm not to
panic
because emotions are called hot
cognition this is known as being cool
and you riff on the idea of cool and
coolness and being cool and pretending
to be cool rock tell us a little bit
about that it's really an important
thing and one that I can't emphasize
enough especially today what's going on
with the global pandemic of coronavirus
remaining calm is essential to thinking
clearly so so before I you know I always
tend to talk about my father because a
lot of this started with him and but
even before that emotion and reason are
kind of two major modes of the brain
functioning and when I say the brain we
now understand from modern neuroscience
it's not just the brain it's the whole
body that does the thing but we'll use
the term brain because we don't really
have a better term right now but emotion
and reason kind of work like a seesaw if
you scare someone after death they find
it very difficult to think clearly if
you concentrate on thinking clearly you
can tone that emotion down and get
something done so for example I'll give
you I'll tell you a little story the USS
Indianapolis was the last big ship sunk
in world war ii it was torpedoed by a
japanese submarine and 900 roughly 900
guys were dumped into the water in
shark-infested waters in the pacific and
only 370 317 survived ultimately a lot
of people were eaten by sharks or just
drowned a lot of them had been burned
badly when the ship
and there was just one officer swimming
away from the mess and came upon a
lifeboat with about five sailors in it
and he crawled aboard and he could see
these sailors had given up they were
covered in diesel fuel they were not
doing anything they weren't talking they
were kind of hang-hang dog and he pulled
out his 45 service pistol and took it
apart and gave each man a piece and said
we're now gonna clean this pistol of
course this didn't make any sense there
wasn't any purpose to the pistol but it
was some rational deliberate organized
activity that sort of gave them all a
purpose and woke them up out of their
stupor and this is an example of how the
brain works is that if you really are in
shock or overly excited or afraid that
if you can just find something to do
that's deliberate step by step
goal-oriented it helps to bring you
around and reorganize your thoughts so
being cool going back to this word
that's what being cool means and you can
force yourself to do it just by having
something to do so like in the middle of
this coronavirus my wife Debbie and I
are stuck at home for the most part
she's doing a lot of cleaning she's
doing a lot of knitting you know there
are all of these different activities
you can do that that turn you into a
person who is being cool indeed I like
it you also mentioned early in the book
that in your view and the view of
experts only 10 to 20 percent of
untrained people can stay calm and think
in the midst of a survival type of vet
what do you think of that number and do
you think that's people who are born
that way built that way and how many can
be trained there's a reason that elite
units are very selective so are these
people who are in you know naturally
cool and calm are they born are they
made can they be made I believe they can
be made and I believe it is absolutely
true that you can train yourself and the
the thing that I have always said over
the years and giving talks to people
about this
is that if you practice in your daily
life the way you would want to be in an
emergency you'll be much better off
because in an emergency in a time of
high stress you don't invent new
behaviors you tend to fall back on the
ones you've already practiced and so
I'll give you an example of how this
works and I believe this is in the book
there was an FBI agent who decided that
it would be a good idea to learn to
snatch a gun out of span assailants
hands before he could shoot this guy and
so he practiced doing this and actually
taught himself to be really quick with
his hands and he could actually snatch a
gun out of somebody's hand so one day
sure enough there was a bad guy on the
street who pulled the gun on him and
this FBI agent snatched it out of his
hands before he could do anything and
then he gave it back to him now this
obviously is kind of a crazy thing to do
and you wouldn't ever do it if you had a
moment to think but when you're under
high stress like that the guy just had a
gun stuck in his belly he didn't think
he did what he had always done and
during practice of course now that he
thought about it during practice he
would practice with his partner snatched
a gun give it back so that's a gun give
it back it's nice to go and give it back
and so when the emergency presented
itself that's what he did so this tells
us some really interesting things about
ourselves one is we're practicing
something all the time and mostly we
don't know what it is the other is if
you want to be good in an emergency you
should practice whatever it is you want
your response to be at that time before
the emergency comes so let's say are you
the kind of person who when you're stuck
in a traffic jam you pound on the
steering wheel and yell are you the kind
of person who when you're stuck in a
traffic jam says hey I'm in America
there's a traffic jam what's the big
surprise here I think I'll turn the
radio on and listen to some music or
whatever I'll practice my French so if
you have a strategy already developed
for being cool then it will help you
when an emergency comes
it makes perfect sense in fact I'm gonna
read the last full quote in my notes
which reinforces this thought which is a
survivor builds up an account of
commitment over a lifetime the more he
invests the more he has when trouble
comes right exactly and so it's a Zen
way of life you don't suddenly become
well some people do but most people
don't suddenly become heroes in the
moment that lightning strikes you you
have thought and practiced all your life
certain kinds of things that lead you to
that moment and that you're ready then
to act and so I have tried to do this in
my own small way but when I talk in in
the end of the book there are these
twelve traits of survivors that I go
over and the first one is perceive and
believe and another way I have of
talking about this is to say be here now
don't try to make things the way you
like them to be don't try to make them
the way they were yesterday don't try to
make them the way you think they ought
to be in the future although you'll try
to get there but be here now perceive
and believe this is really happening you
know I was set to go on an airplane to
Santa Fe a few weeks ago to be at the
Santa Fe Institute where I've been going
for many years and I was watching the
news and I was watching this pandemic
develop and and I started talking to my
wife about it and saying hey you know
this thing is really big this is gonna
really explode and I said what if I'm
stuck in Santa Fe and can't get back to
you in the middle of this thing because
people are gonna get stuck and I
canceled my trip and it turned out to be
obviously the right thing to do but that
was after a lifetime of practicing this
perceive and believed I was like yeah
this really is happening this is not
just in my imagination and I can't go
about business as usual anymore yep I
was gonna say I had some similar
experiences around this pandemic and
I've also been a person who always
prided themselves on being ready
it's funny
we've always been thought a little
eccentric for my prepara shui but my
social credit has gone up a lot for
being a prepper over the last month or
so I will say and I called every turn
early right four weeks ago I said all
right family we're gonna hunker down
daughter and son-in-law come on down to
our remote mountain farm because I could
see in exponentials that I could
understand that this was going to be way
bigger than the powers that be were
letting on at the time yeah and you know
it's it's perceiving believing and then
acting as you say so you said you had
another story - well in 1979 I had my
first book published and I was very
proud of this it was a big deal to me
and it it was gonna come out that fall
I'm pretty sure in that spring in
preparators Bear every year it's called
the book Expo now but it's a big fair
where all the publishers come they bring
their new stuff and authors go to
promote their book so I was planning on
going this was in May of 1979 and I had
been the articles editor of Playboy
magazine from 1970 sometime in the late
70s I quit in 78 so now you're the one
who edited all articles we allegedly
bought Playboy for right well the guy
who put the stuff in there that you
supposedly bought the magazine for
that's correct but I was very close to
these people one of them was my boss his
wife had a new book that was coming out
so we were all going to that fair in LA
the book Expo and I was always in the
habit I still am of finding out what
kind of an airplane I'm flying on and I
was doing as I said research into
airline crashes at that all that time in
the 70s and I had come to dislike the
dc-10 I had come to the conclusion that
the dc-10 was deeply flawed and a
dangerous airplane and it was at the
time the only airplane that crashed
strictly because of its own failures as
opposed to pilot error or something and
I said to my former boss whose name was
shell wax and his wife Judy was the one
who had the new
bookout and and i was supposed to go
there with them on this on this plane
and I said you know she'll it's a dc-10
and and I'm just not gonna fly I don't
fly dc-10s anymore
because I don't trust them and he poked
fun at me he said well you know come on
it's just an airplane flight we take
this plane all the time and indeed there
were many different ways to get to LA
you could take plenty of other planes at
that time to make this very sad story
sadder the plane crashed and everyone
was killed it is still the largest death
toll in an airliner crash in the United
States 273 people died on that plane
shell and Judy were on that plane our
fiction editor Vicky Chen hater was on
the plane and our foreign rights editor
Mary Sheridan was on that plane
and I was supposed to be on the plane
and I didn't go Wow and I didn't go
because I because I had this developed
this perceive and believe idea way back
then and was thinking well if I did all
this research and I know these things
about the dc-10 why would I get on it so
take another plane and I you know they
crashed that day it was May 25th 1979
and I didn't covered the crash and wrote
about it that's an amazing story in your
book I was like whoa I could just feel
that story creeping up on me as I was
reading it no so the thing about deep
survival and the the message that it
preaches is just this that what you have
to walk your own walk and talk your own
talk and and actually take actions and
what you believe so and I've tried to
teach my kids this my younger daughter
Amelia was a lifeguard when she was a
teenager and in college and she and a
bunch of college kids were I forget
where they were in Greece or someplace
like that on a trip and the ocean was
very bad it was
you know big waves and they all started
to run into it and she stopped them and
she said you know what this is really
stupid
one of you is gonna drown if you get in
that water and I'm not gonna let you do
it and and she was right and and on that
very day some other kids elsewhere on
the beach did drown because
it was one of those riptide situations
the key message is you have to not only
think this is really happening you have
to act on your thoughts and you do talk
about how peer group pressure can erode
people acting correctly and you give
some examples that can you talk about
that a little bit yeah one of the things
that I talked about early in the book is
this accident with an avalanche where
there is a bunch of snowmobilers who are
rescue people they're actually going out
on a search to find someone who didn't
come back and they have been warned in
the briefing that morning that there's a
high danger of avalanche and there's not
to be any running up these hills at high
speeds because you're out left to
trigger an avalanche one of the things
these snowmobilers do with their
snowmobiles is they run up the hill at
high speeds it's called high marking to
see who can go highest before having to
turn around and you know you lose
momentum and you have to come back down
and it's a very exciting sport it gets
very high adrenaline going and it's a
lot of fun and so they're out there you
know in the smell of the pines and it's
cold and they're going fast and they're
doing fun things and that emotion just
kicks in and you just can't resist it
and one of the guys runs up the hill -
hi mark and a couple of others follow
and they trigger an avalanche and a
couple people died and so there's this
there's this irresistible quality to the
pull of emotion that is responsible for
our ability to act quickly our ability
to act forcefully and can also you know
trigger the herd mentality so that
everybody begins acting that way and it
can save us in some situations and it
can also kill us in some situations it
can undermine our willingness to act
upon our beliefs right if we are vetoed
by a social override more or less right
and and the social the more social the
impulse becomes the stronger it becomes
and now you're risking you know if you
don't go along with it you're risking
the loss of the group you're risking
your status and for creatures like
ourselves who are social creatures being
in the group is a matter of life and
death
if you're put out of the group you can't
survive so status is a very big thing
status is responsible in groups of
mammals for your ability to reproduce
your ability to get food there are all
sorts of things associated with the
group that are very very strong and so
yes it's no wonder that we go along with
the group but being human we have this
extra special gift of brain cells that
can let us think too and so the more we
practice thinking as opposed to reflex
reacting the better we'll be in an
emergency that makes perfect sense now
this is a pretty in some ways a dark
book mordant in some ways but there's
some amazing humor in it too but you'll
actually call out humor as a
characteristic of the people who
actually do practice far out on the edge
where these kinds of skills are
important and I know my own experiences
with the two groups I happen to know
cops and Marines are some of the
funniest sons of bitches you ever met in
your life right they have their own
private language almost they keep you in
stitches whenever you're with them you
know tell us a little bit about your
experience with the nature of humor of
these people who live far out on the
edge well it's dark humor and it needs
to be they have very difficult things to
deal with I started learning this a long
time ago but certainly with the
firefighters I got used to their humor
and saw very clearly that what they're
doing is coping they're sort of
detoxifying something that could
otherwise poison their their ability to
function you know essentially leading to
PTSD like conditions and the humor
disarms that so humor serves a bunch of
functions but one of them is that it
reduces stress so if you can get people
laughing it sort of diffuses the stress
of the situation and allows you to
regain your ability to function there's
also a very interesting body of work I
talked some about this in deep survival
around the subject called learned
helplessness and there's a guy named
Martin Seligman who did
a seminal piece of work on that but one
of the interesting things they found is
that if you can have an optimistic view
of things no matter how things get no
matter how bad things get if you can
have an optimistic view of things your
immune system actually functions better
and they did measurements of immune
functioning along with getting people to
tell stories about things that had
happened to them and and those who could
talk about bad things happening in
optimistic terms had actually better
immune functioning than those who were
pessimistic about relating what had
happened to them so there's there's also
a phenomenon about what's known as locus
of control and there are kind of two
kinds of people some are people who are
victims by nature they say oh my gosh
this happened to me and that happened to
me and then this happened to me and then
that happened to me and other people and
they look at the world as sort of
happening to them other people view the
world more as something that they can
control that they have agency and skills
and that they can actually take a bad
situation and improve it and so I always
say adversity equals opportunity for
those who are going to be good survivors
so if something bad is happening you
have to look at it and figure like how
can I take my advantage from this bad
thing obviously the corona virus is a
bad thing nobody would want that to
happen but it's happening now how can i
benefit from it well I mean there are
million things you can do at home that
you've always said you wanted to do get
busy doing them that's what Debbie and I
are doing here at home now and if you
just look at the world that way that
when something goes wrong you don't say
oh my gosh you know pity me you say look
at that that's really too bad but let's
see how can I use that how can I work
with that so I'm sitting here watching
my 401k evaporate and I'm thinking wow
these stocks are at bargain basement
prices I think I'm gonna get some
rather than thinking what was me I'll
never get my 401k back and so I think
this is something that we all need to
think more about yep I 100% agree I've
never understood that either pessimism
or learned helplessness in fact one of
my favorite quotes is from Winston
Churchill I am an optimist there's not
seem too much use being anything else to
your point it just up regulates
everything you do that you know and this
is sort of an aside I love to get your
reaction to it you know I'm 66 years old
a little younger than you but you know
classic boomer sword too grew up with GI
Joe parents my dad was a marine with the
third Marine Division did three
invasions in the South Pacific
you know DC cop had a ninth grade
education but did pretty well for
himself and that whole generation did
not seem to exhibit the kind of learned
helplessness we see in so many people
today maybe one of the good things out
of this coronavirus is that will shock a
few people out of realizing that they
don't really live in this hammock of
abundance and that this glassy
civilization we have is only two
millimeters thick maybe it'll wake some
people up well it will yes it certainly
will this is a a world changing event
it's a world history event it's a life
changing event and there's a zugor
suggesting it's an opportunity for those
who will see it as such and I think part
of the opportunity is just what you said
which is you know what I've been loafing
I've been loafing on my American
luxurious way of life for a very long
time and it can't be that way forever in
recent years I have walked through the
supermarket with Debbie my wife and I
found myself saying you know what that
you know there's an entire half a mile
of soda cans of sodas and bottles of
soda here this can't go on I mean you
can't do that forever this is not
sustainable what you know what's the
next step and now I've got my Debbie's
got
I'm seventeen year old son and he's
shopping for us and so she she's got him
going around the the food store with
phone say no there's no tomatoes no
there's no there's no this there's no
that and I'm thinking wow it really is
it really is happening and people really
are gonna have to change the way they
live so this may have a real silver
lining and that people may begin to
understand that global warming climate
change whatever you'd like to call it is
very real and it's going to be very like
this and it's already upon us and we
have to change our ways this could have
an interesting side effect and I heard
your podcast with Dan Schrag about about
climate and thought of him in connection
with this because it was a very good
podcast and and he's a very smart guy on
this subject
he really is in fact I did a podcast
yesterday with Bonita Roy where we
talked about the opportunities for
change for the better that could come
from this shock and I do believe there
are some I mean unfortunately at a high
cost hundreds of thousands millions of
people around the world could easily die
but maybe something good will come out
of it nonetheless let's take a turn to
the next big theme I'd call it the
second theme after coolness in your book
which is the dance and balance between
emotion and reason or we might want to
call cognition you know you know you
call out one of my favorite guys Antonio
Damasio subsequently we've had books
like Thinking Fast and Slow by Kahneman
and others because you can I lay out you
know what you learned you obviously I
mean I've read a lot in this area as
well but you clearly dug in very deeply
into cognitive science and cognitive
neuroscience and particularly pointed it
at how we act under high-stress
situations balancing emotion and reason
and we can't live without either one
right so tell us a little about your
view on all this Damacio is interesting
and he is in deep survival and I quote
him in there many things that he
demonstrated but one is that if you lose
the ability to have an emotional
response or let's call it gut feeling
you lose your ility to make cognitive to
decisions and and this is a kind of
revelatory thing to most Western ways of
thinking because we think of ourselves
as rational beings and we tend to think
of emotion as something that just gets
in the way but it's not it provides a
guiding service without which there are
too many choices and we'd never get
anything done
and he has a system of experimenting
that proves this to be the case and so
in very stressful situations in
emergency situations it becomes very
necessary to recruit both emotion and
reason and I'll use the term gut
feelings for the emotional side because
they are feelings about the body that
you get in these situations and in
situations like Thinking Fast and Slow
for example and our friend Cormac
MacCarthy wrote about this in an essay
in a magazine called Nautilus and he
referred to it but as the night shift
which is the unconscious part of our our
processing we're constantly taking in
information from the world and
processing it below the level of
consciousness in some fashion that we
don't really understand we know that it
happens but we don't know how it happens
so we don't know exactly where it
happens and it's a very deep subject
that Cormac wrote about well and that
I've written about myself but is this
element which can be thought of as
emotion or it can be thought of as the
unconscious that's doing this guiding
behind the scenes of what we think of as
our rational selves so that's the
balance that that needs to be struck to
do the next right thing and it's a
matter of practice you can't just say
here are the 10 steps to achieving that
balance it's something you have to do
kind of all your life to to make it
arise reliably in an emergency so I tell
a story about a group of wildland
firefighters who were on a fire and I
remember I remember correctly it was in
Colorado and they were above the fire
they were on a slope above the fire and
one of the younger and experienced
firefighters took his group down the
slope
called up on the radio to the older guy
up on top and said hey come on down here
and give us a hand and the older guy
said sorry I'm getting out of here and
there was something in the older guys
perception of the fire that he couldn't
put his finger on but he just said I got
a bad feeling about this and I'm getting
out of here and he took his guys out
long story short the younger guy who had
gone down the slope got overrun by the
fire and the older guy with his group
survived on you know away from the fire
and the younger guy just hadn't had
enough hadn't seen enough fires to have
that gut feeling that the older guy had
and this is exactly what I'm talking
about and so no matter what your pursuit
there has to come a time in your
experience when you begin to internalize
these cues unconsciously so that when
you get a bad feeling about a situation
you're facing you go ahead and act on
that feeling so not always as you point
out sometimes these emotional hooks can
send you the wrong way for instance you
give the example of the scuba divers and
their respirators right yeah so the
researcher who who wrote about that a
woman named Daffy Mia morph you found
this puzzling phenomenon going on where
some scuba divers would actually take
their masks off underwater and drown as
a result of it and by doing her research
she discovered that certain people had
this very deep emotional response to
suffocation and having their face
covered and oddly you know became scuba
divers and suffered the consequences but
that this was so strong and emotion that
they couldn't logically think through
the steps to avoid it and this to me is
one of those classic cases where emotion
takes you in the wrong direction motion
takes us in the wrong direction all the
time
mind you when I talk about these things
a lot of times I'll get up in front of a
big crowd of people and say raise your
hand if you've ever seen somebody you
know make a really really bad decision
in terms of a love relationship
and of course if you're over 13 euro
raise your hand and and then I'll say
well why you know why did this person do
that was this person stupid I mean you
could tell because I I've known people
for example he said you know I was at my
wedding I was walking down the aisle and
I was thinking this is really a bad
mistake I'm like well why didn't you do
something about it
well emotion can really overrun us and
and in love relationships it's easy to
illustrate because we all know examples
of it like why did you marry that guy
you knew he was a jerk and so in these
threat situations these high-stress
situations whether it's in the
wilderness or it's in the financial
arena to be able to step back and
reassess and know when your gut feelings
are helping you is I think really really
important yeah you gave a wonderful
example when you were out with a group
of f-18 pilots in training about to do
their first or early I don't remember
which night landings on the carrier one
of the the most high stress high skill
things in the life of a pilot and you
danced back and forth between emotion
and reason can you tell a little bit
about that story and how reason and
motion have to be in some kind of
dynamic tension to be at your top game
yeah and so these are young guys they're
very young guys in fact probably younger
than my father was when he was shot down
and they've had about a hundred and
twenty-five hours of flight experience
now you know having taken flight
training that that's nothing
many people take that long to get their
private pilot's license and these guys
have these multi multi-million dollar
aircraft completely complex aircraft
that they're strapped to so they don't
have a lot of life experience behind
them they don't have a lot of flying
experience behind them and then they're
shot on a steam catapult off of a ship
and they have to go around and come find
the ship again and land it's crazy it's
totally crazy
and as I say in the book I was on the
LSO platform the LSO platform is where
the guy who is the landing signal
officer LSO stands on this little eight
by eight foot platform and watches these
guys come in and waves them off if
they're not doing it right
so they don't get killed and he's
talking to them as well but he has bunch
of lights and a switch to turn them on
to tell them to go around if they
they're not right and he said to me you
know at a quarter-mile somebody asks you
what your mother's name is you can't
remember because you're under such high
stress at that point but at the same
time you have to keep telling yourself
the rules there are certain rules you
don't spot the deck that means don't
stare at the deck where you're gonna
land you got to keep your eyes moving or
you'll lose your concentration and get
to low there's a light that's called the
ball and you have to keep it at a
certain height or you're too low or too
high and so you have to be concentrating
on the ball and constantly almost a
litany of things you're telling yourself
to do and not do as you're coming in and
then just let it come on in and that's
the hardest thing when you get set up
for a landing like this you really don't
want to touch things very much because
it's all gonna be set up smoothly and
it'll go right to the spot you want it
to go to so this is a real real high
high skill high training high emotion
all at the same time kind of thing and
they have some pretty dark humor about
it too yeah I remember that that was
pretty amazing the ability to master
emotion and use it when necessary right
but within the context of learning and
discipline and rules quite an amazing
thing for these young people to have
accomplished let's go on to another
interesting topic which is you know who
survives and who doesn't sometimes isn't
intuitively obvious you tell the story
of Captain James GABA
an Army Ranger who was taking a
commercial guided rafting trip down the
Gauley River in West Virginia not very
far at all from where I live I live in
rural western Virginia not far from the
West Virginia line when the raft hit a
rock and a captain
the Army Rangers is a pretty bad dude
and yet he didn't make it could you tell
us about that story well and it's a
another thing I talked a lot about in
deep survival which is you train for a
certain environment and that's the
environment that you are going to
function best in and so even though he
was an Army Ranger being an Army Ranger
comes with certain limitations you are
trained in a certain kind of environment
you're trained for a certain kind of
mission you're trained you know with
certain skills and not others but you're
also trained that you're like a god
because in the Army Rangers if you need
help you're out of the program so the
Army Rangers are taught to be completely
self-sufficient and if somebody has to
come and help you rescue you you you're
a loser you're out you know you don't
become an Army Ranger and so this
mindset of I won't take help can be a
very dangerous thing when you need help
I mean - an Army Ranger cancer is still
cancer for example - an Army Ranger
indeed whitewater rapids are still
whitewater rapids but this guy fell in
the water and the guide who had learned
his business in whitewater rapids said
to him I will help you I mean in effect
I don't remember what the words were but
he was going to rescue this Army Ranger
and the Army Ranger laughed and pushed
him away
which seemed to indicate to me he was
saying like hey I'm an Army Ranger I
don't need your help and and then he
drowned because he had not specifically
been trained in this hazard that he was
entering and so the lesson is kind of
well one of the survival instructor does
instructors that I talked to said you
know the the Rambo types are the first
to go and I think there's a lesson in
that one of the things that I preached
in deep survival is humility no matter
how much you've learned no matter how
much you've done no matter what your
credentials are be humble because
there's something waiting out there to
get you and you don't know what it is
and sometimes you should know what it is
but you somehow get a tunnel vision or a
mental constriction you gave another
very interesting example which see
to defy any common sense which was this
event that happened on the Illinois
River in Oregon where a group of people
were rafting and the condition suddenly
changed and it water became very high
and some people had the sense to pull
over and others did yeah and that's a
this is a common phenomenon we're seeing
it right now with the coronavirus people
we know who said why you know I already
paid for the the cruise and we've been
planning it for you know a year and so
we're gonna go and then they get stuck
you know they can't come back and
they're stuck on the ship somewhere at
sea and there is this sense in these
adventure episodes that I talked about
like the one you're you're mentioning on
the river it's like well we had to drive
for 12 hours to get here and we've
already booked our motel and we've got
our kayaks here and we've never had any
trouble before and there's all these
kind of excuses that people make to
themselves to convince themselves to do
the wrong thing and and this is another
thing I talked about which is expert
often means you've done the wrong thing
more times than I have and you're gonna
say well we never had any problem before
we always do it this way and and then
that's the time it's going to kill you
so in this incident you're talking about
on the river the river became really way
too high to be run and some of the
kayakers actually got in touch with me
after deeps arrival came out some of the
ones who survived and said well you know
that's not to hide around it just takes
expert skill well some of the experts
died too and people continued thinking
that way often right up until the time
it kills them but there's no shame in
turning back from the summit I mean the
intelligent mountain climbers I know
understand that there's more than one
place on the mountain to go and that
there's always another day so just to
use that analogy the same is true with
the river there's always another day
and the thing that people lose sight of
is what I call the risk reward loop so
what is the reward you're seeking here
you know you're gonna go run the river
business your life's work are you just
on vacation and what are you willing to
pay for that that reward is fine
it's like running up the Avalanche slope
with your snowmobile there's a good good
reward there it's a fun feeling but is
it worth your life and we always have to
ask ourselves what's the risk what's
this gonna cost if everything goes wrong
indeed and then the other point lack of
judgment tunnel vision overwhelmed
working memory whatever it is it causes
people to make these very bad often
disastrous decisions becomes even
greater when you're physically or
mentally impaired like by hypothermia or
dehydration fatigue or even in the case
of the snowmobilers kind of a blood up
exuberance
yeah well talk about that a little bit
and how people don't notice that there
because actually hypothermia famously
sneaks up on people yeah well there's
there's one case that I was thinking
about recently that two ice climbers
were they were kind of going to the next
level they had done some ice climbing
and they wanted to go challenge
themselves a little more and there's
some beautiful ice climbing routes on
Mount Washington in New Hampshire not
Washington in New Hampshire has the
worst weather in the world and there's a
big sign they're put up by the Rangers
says this mountain has the worst weather
in the world it will kill you and it's
not like maybe or maybe the worst
weather in the world it's like this is
the worst weather in the world and it's
kind of because of this perfect storm
that runs across the top and you know
it's not always that way I've climbed
Mount Washington on a day when people
were in flip-flops and shorts but
sometimes it's that way and if there's
ice it's winter and if it's winter it
can be that way really quickly so these
two guys went out to do their ice climb
which would probably have been fine
except they forgot their rope back at
the cabin so they had to go back to get
their rope and that put them a couple of
hours behind their schedule which was to
climb the ice get
the top and there was a walk off route
from the top where they could have just
hiked back home so instead they're
getting up on the ice and it's getting
later in the day and it's getting colder
and some weather's moving in very
unpredictable weather and instead of
just rappelling off and going back they
keep going and part of the reason is
that they were stressed because they had
made a big mistake you know go rice ice
climbing without your rope
they had hurried they had skipped eating
because they were late and then they had
scrambled up the ice as fast as they
could wearing themselves out so they're
on the ice they were tired they were
cold they were sweaty so their sweat
started to get cold and as they got
hypothermic they lost their ability to
reason and just kept going right on up
by the time they got to the top the bad
weather had arrived and it gets to the
the wind there gets to oh well over a
hundred miles an hour
and it gets way way way below zero and
so there they were on the top and a
hundred mile an hour wind trying to
crawl their way over to a trail that
they weren't quite sure where it was and
they died they died of exposure right
there on the top Wow basically their
cognitive ability was degraded by you
know ever-increasing levels of physical
depletion which then became mental
depletion yeah exactly now you talk
about a deeper concept this is the first
time I've ever seen anybody actually
address this which is fatigue and you
know you make the point that fatigue
isn't just being tired but it's a much
more systemic thing that is much harder
to recover from could you riff a little
bit on fatigue yep fatigue if you get
into real fatigue not just I'm tired
you won't recover by just going to bed
and sleeping it off it's kind of a deep
systemic wound to the system if you will
an energy deficit so big that you
actually probably came close to dying
from it and and it will take you quite a
period of time to recover you know not a
day maybe a week different people
respond differently but but you see it
in speaking of
Army Rangers in the Rangers and I've
known a number of these guys you're
taken to that level of fatigue and
stress on purpose for training and it
can kill you actually these guys risk
their lives doing this but one of them I
was working with the 82nd airborne at
Fort Bragg and one of the guys I worked
with was a ranger and I said tell me
about the training and he said when he
got back from the training he slept for
like eighteen days he said I would wake
up I eat you know five or six sandwiches
and I'd go back to sleep and and he said
it was just like bone bone deep
tiredness that didn't go away for a very
long time and so it's different from
just getting tired so if you if you do a
normal outing where you know let's say
even even something like climbing
Everest you know when you start from the
base camp you get up to the top and it's
morning and you come back down and if
everything goes as planned you're not
going to be in deep fatigue you're gonna
be tired and of course there's no oxygen
up there to speak of and so you're gonna
have that too but once you get down to
base camp to the lower base camps you'll
recover pretty quickly everybody's
different as I say so if it's seeing is
a very special case and it can it can be
lethal I think one of the most useful
takeaways in your book you know I've
basically described it as if you are in
a survival situation let's say you
become hopelessly lost or a survivor
after an airplane crash you make the
point and the experts make the point you
don't want to get fatigued so
surprisingly the right answer most of
the time is to take it easy rest a lot I
think the number you quoted was try not
to use more than 60% of your capacity
because if you fall into fatigue you're
probably doomed yeah so there's a guy
this is just a way of thinking I like
very much and I interviewed him but it
was too late to get into the book but I
do tell this story quite a bit because
it fits right in with deep survival his
name was Vito sakuni's and he was going
for a solo cross-country ski in
Grand Teton National Park one winter and
Jimmy parked in the parking lot went out
on his skis got out about five miles and
hit a hit a downslope the wrong way and
twisted his ankle and did a torsion
fracture of his leg in his boot so he
just fell the wrong way and literally
torqued his leg til it had a spiral
fracture in it and he knew that was it I
mean he wasn't going anywhere
and he knew nobody's coming down this
trail in the middle of a winter like
that it's very remote trail but he was a
good outdoorsman and he had packed well
so he immediately sat down where he was
he didn't try to take his boot off or
you know splint it or anything like that
he sat down and he unpacked all his gear
and he set up his tent and he took out
his stove and he melted some snow he
made himself a hot drink and then he
made himself a meal and he looked at all
of his equipment and assessed what he
needed and what he didn't need and
decided that the only way he was going
to get out of there was to scoot on his
butt even though that was really slow
and difficult and painful and all that
so there are a number of things that I'm
gonna tell you the second half of the
story in a second but first of all what
he did goes back to what we were talking
about reason and emotion he broke his
leg out there by himself very high
emotion very high stress he sat down and
immediately made himself a hot drink
organized his stuff made himself a meal
he's doing exactly the right thing he's
using reason he's using step-by-step
methods to achieve a goal and he's
nourishing himself he's replenishing his
energy and he's warming himself up with
the hot drink so these are all like
amazingly just right deep survival kind
of moves then he decides on a strategy
so he's made he stayed calm he first of
all perceive and believe I did really
break my leg I am really stuck out here
secondly you know they make a plan
stay calm he did that think analyse plan
these are things I say in the
arrival and then take correct decisive
action so I'm gonna scoot upon my butt
now how am I going to manage that for
five miles to the parking lot he decided
that he would devote every hundred moves
to something back at home that he loved
and wanted to get back to alive so he
dedicated 100 moves to his wife
dedicated 100 moves to his guitar he did
it cated a hundred moves for his cat he
dedicated a hundred moves to his best
friend and so on and so forth and every
hundred moves he'd think of something
else in his life that he really really
wanted to get back in and by goodness he
got there he got himself out and finally
got fixed up so I love telling this
story because it embodies so much of
what's in deep survival this guy just
did it perfectly
and I think it's a lesson for us all
okay certainly he exemplified the idea
of actual coolness under fire right to
be able to do that suffer a spiral
fracture and then calmly inventory your
material and make yourself a cup of tea
my god that is a cool cat yeah yeah yeah
great story another point I'll call out
from that story and this is something
you mentioned it must be a half dozen
times throughout the book is that many
people who actually do survive seemed to
have motivated themselves by living for
other people yes for their people back
home their wife or their children or
they want to see that grandchild about
that a little bit yes so I noticed and I
do write about this quite a bit in deep
survival that if you're in a bad
situation if there's an emergency you
know a World Trade Center or something
like that people do a lot better if they
have somebody to help so by by helping
someone else you stop becoming a victim
and you start becoming a rescuer and as
a rescuer I mean that has a lot of
meanings in our culture and probably in
all cultures you're taking control which
is an extremely important element of
survival to have a sense of control
you're taking this internal locus of
control that I talked about before I can
do useful things yes even in the face of
this terrible situation I
find something useful to do you're
having a positive attitude you're
optimistic because you believe you can
do something which I said you know helps
you in every way including your immune
system which can be important at this
particular time in our lives and so
always latching on to something somebody
you can help is a great idea and and I
think in statistically we found that
doctors and nurses tend to survive
better in critical situations because of
the fact that they've got people to help
but anyone can do this I mean you can
always be helping others and in deadly
survival situations I know I wrote about
one photographer I worked with he was a
whitewater raft or guy kayaker and he
had gotten trapped in a strainer which
is a tree that's fallen across the the
water and it sucked his boat in and the
current is pushing you into this mess of
branches so every time he'd get his head
above water would push him back down
again
and he was no he was bounding and didn't
have the strength to keep pulling
himself up like that he'd catch a little
breath and the the current would push
him down again and he'd have to pull up
again and I said well how did you you
know how did you get out he said well I
thought about my son and I thought you
know he had like a four year old son he
said I've got to see my son again I
can't let him I can't let this be the
last gift I give to my son and he just
found superhuman strength and bolted
himself up on top of this tree and got
out and that's a classic example of a
situation we've all heard this story
like the old granny is looking out the
kitchen window washing the dishes and
the car falls on her husband who's
underneath it changing the oil or
whatever and she rushes out and lifts
the car off of him even though she's
only 5 feet tall and a 99 pound
and how is it possible well it is
possible there's an instance of it in
the book it's possible because we have a
lot more strength than we use day-to-day
and the special emotional state can give
us access to it yep it seems to be I saw
that pattern appear in several of the
stories now let's move on to the next
topic I frankly don't remember from the
first time I read the book but the very
interesting line of discourse about
Charles Perrault who studied industrial
accidents in nuclear power plants
airlines shipping etc and wrote a book
called normal accidents where he makes I
would call it a complex systems type
claim that systems that are organized in
a certain way are just likely to have a
power-law distribution of accidents you
know not all that different from pierre
bach and his sand piles could you talk
about that a little bit yes so Charles
Perrault and I'm pretty sure he's still
around came up with this idea first as
far as I know it was that these systems
are so complex that the accident is
built into the nature of the system it's
not a system where you can say you know
if we did this and this will prevent all
accidents that's not the way it works
it's like as you say it's a power-law
it's like earthquakes there are a whole
bunch of little accidents little mishaps
that go wrong and then every once in a
while there's a huge one and his concept
began to change the way industry looked
at certain things by saying you know
just identifying a hazard and slapping a
technical fix on it may actually just
make the system more complex and make it
more prone to failure an accident so
it's a real rethinking of the industry
as you talked about there is truth in
this and it applies in our daily
activities and it certainly applies in
places like you know wilderness
adventure travel and it applies in the
stock market you know things like that
where they're going to be you know
little breakouts and huge breakouts in
each direction and the huge ones are
less likely than the little ones
it also applies to social and biological
systems so we are now witnessing with
the coronavirus an example of a normal
accident it is part of the normal
functioning of the scheme of human
interaction that there are going to be
illnesses that spread rapidly through
the population as long as people can
contact one another so if there were no
such thing as that modern travel we have
we would not have this virus globally
right now but that's the system we have
we created it and it's subject to normal
accidents so the more that we can think
about these systems in those terms this
is a complex system and it's going to
have these kind of accidents I think it
comes down to saying yes these accidents
are going to happen to people but they
don't have to happen to you and so that
means figuring out the strategy that's
going to keep you out of the the
workings of the system I use a
mountaineering accident on Mount Hood as
an example of this where all these
people were climbing the mountain and
they were roped together but they didn't
rope they didn't connect the rope to the
mountain so it was it was just like a
suicide pact there were several
different groups one at the top fell
three guys roped together they
encountered another group halfway up
that was roped together and dragged them
off and they in turn encountered another
group below that was roped together and
took them off so all these people became
this complex system and like I say it
was inevitable that an accident like
this would happen but it didn't have to
happen to me if you like yeah I found
that story the bounded debacle I have it
in my notes and you go into great detail
it's in some ways the most
fully-developed of all the stories and
you talk about how it tightly coupled
the systems become and how the people
involved no idea about the energies that
were available if you fall a hundred
feet on ice and then suddenly pull taut
it was a fine example of this concept of
normal accident if you do this sort of
stuff sooner or later
some group of people doing this is gonna
have an accident about it that example
is well worth careful study by anybody
who wants to be able to avoid those
kinds of situations yeah and the other
thing Jim that I'm sure you noticed is
this accident had a way and many of
these accidents have the same quality
had a way of sweeping up other elements
into it that were not connected to it
initially so the international guard
mounted a rescue attempt with a
helicopter a big Blackhawk and went up
there on the mountain that when they got
up to the functional limit of the
helicopter the helicopter crashed so
they they now had contributed to the
accident more complexity more victims
more destruction it's almost as if these
these events have their own super
gravity that draws other events into the
into their vortex yeah we had an example
of that in Santa Fe of several years
back where some people got lost up on
the mountains behind Santa Fe and you
know snow storms came in and helicopter
went to rescue him in the helicopter
crash well and again it was just stupid
stupid unprepared people luckily they
were able to find a spot where their
cell phone worked otherwise they'd have
been dead meat in fact that gets me to
my next full quote that's the main
difficulty with neophyte to go into the
wilderness we face the same challenges
that the experts faced nature doesn't
adjust to our level of skill right right
well and you were talking earlier about
our American hammock of blood Korea as
you called it which I thought was a good
term you know we get used to we're like
goldfish in that in a bowl I mean it's
like a miracle
I wake up in the morning and there's a
cup of hot coffee for me I wait a while
and there's a male in front of me you
know it's like oh I must be a genius I
get rewarded every time I look around
you know that's the way you train an
animal if you want to train a dog you
carry a pocket full of treats and pretty
soon the dog is healing right at your
side
and we're kind of like that but we don't
have to do anything to get our rewards
other than work some cushy job or
whatever we do
but we're constantly being rewarded and
if I'm bored I turn on the television
I'm entertained like I say I must be a
genius well not quite what's happening
and then you take that attitude into the
wilderness and the wilderness does not
reward you the wilderness says ok now
you're on the same term since we were on
a hundred thousand years ago what are
you gonna do about it and of course the
first rule is like I say perceive and
believe yes you really are out in the
wilderness and if you misbehave you're
gonna get your hand slapped and maybe
worse so it it's hard to instill roots
attitude in people who are used to
looking at the wilderness like a
playground yeah very dangerous very
dangerous and even people who have great
expertise can still get into trouble
another one of your very well-developed
stories was that story of Ken Killip and
his buddy York who set out on the trail
at Miller pass in Rocky Mountain
National Park and these were guys who
you wouldn't expect to get in trouble
but one of them did yeah I mean they
were experienced hikers backpackers they
were going to a little group of lakes
that was down off of the past you know
one of the drainages and had it pretty
well planned I mean they the one guy Ken
Killip was a firefighter I can't
remember if York was but they had you
know basically good skills but emotion
comes in here
Killick wasn't as fast as York York got
impatient and he said well I'm going
ahead you know you're too slow I'm going
ahead and I'll meet you down there this
is against the rules you do not break up
the group this is a bad thing making it
even worse if I remember the details
correctly Killip had the compass and
York had that map which is a no-no you
need both so they did make some key
mistakes so Killick was was slower than
he had hoped to be and he was up on the
on the ridge when the weather afternoon
weather came which it often does in that
part of the country 3 o'clock in the
afternoon you get a thunderstorm on the
high peaks so he was driven back down
again to get out of the lightning
made him even later and then he was
rushed he was exhausted probably a
little dehydrated probably a little you
know confused and pissed off and he
decided well this is a drainage on going
down and of course he didn't have a map
so he went down the wrong drainage and
got to the point where he's supposed to
see the lakes the lakes weren't there
and he thought well maybe those lakes
dried up
maybe somebody moved the hooks you know
you start to think really nutty stuff
when you get into that that situation
the last thing in the world you want is
oh my gosh I've got to hike back up that
stupid Ridge and go to the next the next
drainage over and it's getting dark and
so he continued on down the wrong
drainage and was lost for five days and
did all the things you're not supposed
to do when you're lost he panicked and
started to run around trying to find his
way back which is classic lost person
behavior he tried to climb up so that
he'd get a better view to think you know
maybe he could orient himself he climbed
up and fell and rolled back down this
this rocky slope and hurt himself he
passed out when he woke up he was
covered in snow I mean it just went
downhill really quickly and somehow
finally came to his senses he had in his
pack everything he needed to survive
right where he was he had sufficient
gear to make a shelter to keep himself
warm to make a fire and he's thinking
well I'm a firefighter I can't start a
fire no no that's not the right way to
think because you weren't sparsit's
supposed to start fires in Rocky
Mountain National Park at that time but
he finally came to his senses and
started a fire and calmed down and did
all the right things in the end put some
colored materials out where somebody
flying over could see it and was finally
spotted and rescued but it shows you how
quickly even a smart guy can get stupid
yeah they're degrading by physical and
then you also have quite a little riff
in that section about the whole nature
of getting lost and what research has
told us about that I particularly
resonate with that cuz I actually there
was a time and I was a little younger
and fitter than I am now when I used to
intentionally enjoy getting lost
in the woods in a minor kind of way
again I have a farm in the Appalachians
these are pretty benign mountains you
know they're maybe from the farm to the
top is maybe six miles in 2,000 feet of
elevation and it's you know Eastern
mountains and I hiked off into areas
where the logging roads ended and you
know follow this drainage and that
drainage until I didn't know where I was
anymore
yeah and there was a very interesting
and powerful feeling that comes upon you
when you know you're lost right but
fortunately I had a heuristic and I
notice you taught your daughter the same
heuristic and I taught my daughter the
same heuristic when she was about six
right which is in benign eastern
mountains I wouldn't recommend this in
the Rocky Mountains but in the east 99%
of the time all you got to do is walk
downhill until you hit water or a water
force our area has a lot of harsh
topography so the streams are off and
dry in the summer but you come to a
water force follow the water force and
within five miles you will cross a road
yeah and even our most remote roads get
a car every half hour or so
so don't go walking on the road just sit
by the side of the road till somebody
comes by yeah and I would actually do
that and I'd end up in places I go how
the hell you know it's amazing how
disoriented your brain is when you're
truly lost so I really resonated with
that section on the psyche and even
though this is baby lost right
nonetheless
it was the real psychological experience
and so yeah it was really taken with the
writing you did in the research that you
studied on the nature of being lost and
you could talk about that a little bit
so I think I mentioned before that being
part of the group is extremely important
to our kinds of creatures you have to
stay in the group or or you'll die
essentially and when you're lost you're
out of the group and you have some other
problems in your immediate future you
know we we learn our own environments
and we get certain things from them we
we know our environment because we need
to get food from it we need to find
mates and part and be part of the group
you know we need access to water all
these things involve knowing where you
are
and when you don't know where you are
it's a dire emergency now humans I think
are well they may not be unique but
they're unusual in that we like to do
things to scare ourselves for fun so
things like you know riding a snowmobile
can be fun because it's a little bit
frightening in a controlled way going to
a horror movie can be fun because we
know we're safe so there's all kinds of
things we do that we use this emotional
elixir that is scaring us in a in a
controlled environment so we know it's
safe and we get a big kick out of that
so it sounds to me like you were doing
that in the in the situation of getting
yourself lost and that it worked but if
you're unintentionally lost it's a whole
different ballgame the typical thing for
people to do when they're lost is to
panic because it is an emergency and
it's much more of an emergency for
people who are like in their teens so
interestingly enough if a little kid
gets lost the little kid survives better
than you know a 14 year old the 14 year
old is probably the worst of all
survivors in a situation of being lost
older people tend to do better too
because they can stay calmer the little
kids do well being lost because they
don't think they're lost they haven't
yet developed a sense of of lost and in
fact if that little kid gets lost in the
grocery store and somebody says where's
your mommy the kid will say my mommy is
lost so hey I'm not lost I know where I
am I'm right here and so the little kids
don't panic and they do things that are
natural if they're thirsty they'll drink
from a puddle if they're cold they'll
get into a hollow log so they do these
natural survival things without even
thinking a teenager who has not yet
developed cognitive control of the
emotions will realize he's lost because
he's got that skill of knowing where he
is and he will panic and he will run and
often these teenagers run themselves to
death I have a good friend who who
happened to in in Utah his son died
because he got separated from the group
accidentally and and he just took off
running and in many cases these
teenagers will run right through
somebody's front yard not realized that
they've been you know that they are not
lost anymore
and so being lost with a much more
complex phenomenon them than we see at
first sight and so that's why I devote
so much time to it in deep survival I
believe we can get lost in other ways in
our lives we can get lost in business we
can certainly get lost in love and it's
worth thinking about it was a very good
section it really resonated with me and
I took some lessons away from it and I
would really recommend that section for
people want to read the book let's move
along we're getting a little close to
our time here we talked about optimism
before there was a very interesting riff
in the book about positive mental
attitude which was the watchword of
byron Kearns who you had experience with
at his Mountain Shepherd survival school
can you talk to us about that a little
bit yeah and this is hand-in-hand with
humor hand-in-hand with optimism and
hand-in-hand with be cool if you're
doing all of these things you are well
along the road to having what is called
positive mental attitude which is a term
the military uses a lot by the way and
byron Kearns was an Air Force survival
school guy so I'm sure he picked it up
from them and that that is really at the
core of of survival I mean anybody can
get the equipment you need to survive
and in fact if you develop the skills
you can create this equipment in the
wild I took another survival course
which was called a primitive survival
course in which they basically toss you
into the woods with nothing and you have
to start from scratch and and build your
kit out of what you have in front of you
which is all the tools that mankind had
you know a hundred thousand years ago
but with his positive mental attitude
that includes all these elements of
humor optimism being cool
you will function so much better I mean
right now in the midst of the
coronavirus I can tell I can tell at a
glance by the you know Facebook posts
and things like that it email z' and
text messages people send what side of
this divide they're on if they are
conducting themselves with a positive
mental attitude they're saying like oh
you know I always wanted to make this
recipe and I've just done it and isn't
this great we're going to have it
tonight on the other end of the spectrum
is somebody saying my life is crap you
know I can't go out I can't take my
walks in Central Park I'm really bummed
I don't know what I'm gonna do
that's like wait a minute that's not
gonna help much in what you have to do
because these things are not voluntary
these survival situations sir
you don't sign up for them voluntarily
when they come upon you it's like
perceive and believe man it's here it's
looking you in the eye yeah real real
stuff and I love that section of the
book the other survival school you went
to was Mark Morley's Vermont wilderness
survival school in Brattleboro that was
a very different experience could you
briefly tell us about that so if the the
primitive survival school you're assumed
to have nothing you're you're dropped in
the middle of the woods with nothing
what are you gonna do and so they
develop such skills as I made fire
without any conventional fire making
materials and I described this in the
book it took me a couple of days to do
this
first you break a rock to make a knife
then you use the knife to cut a branch
then you skin the branch to get the bark
and you have to know the right kind of
bark you want and then you untwist the
fibers of the bark to make a rope and
you take a suitable branch that you use
as a bow and you tie it with the rope to
make the bowstring and then you have
another piece of wood that goes twisted
into the bowstring to make a spindle and
as you move the bow back and forth the
spindle spins and you have a piece of
wood at the bottom that it spins against
and as you spin the wood the piece at
the bottom gets hotter and hotter until
you get a glowing Ember and prior to all
this you've made a fire bundle which is
tinder which is some kind of dry leafy
material and you put the little ember
into the material and blow on it and it
bursts into flames
it's very difficult to do but you can
learn to do it and so he's teaching you
you know what if you don't have anything
what if what if mr. York did walk away
with the map he did another thing which
means with me which was fascinating and
I describe it in deep survival and
that's how to do tracking without a
compass and he did it by noticing signs
in nature that were unique and he would
point them out and we'd stop and talk
about them and we'd look ahead and find
another such thing in the distance and
we'd stop and talk about that and we
would go from point to point with these
unique features like a particular knot
in a tree deer tracks in the mud just
different things a patch of mushrooms
and it would create a little stepping
stone for us to where we got all the way
into the woods and then could follow
these stepping stones back out without
any map no compass and we never got lost
that way so it's fascinating school and
he taught a lot of little kids I watched
a nine-year-old kid make a fire in about
90 seconds with a hand drill that is a
stick held between his two palms that he
rubbed back and forth to spin and into
another board and it's in about 90
seconds to make a fire was like whoa how
long did it take you to learn that he
said well about two years Wow Wow
it's wonderful it's wonderful stuff I
encourage people to take survival
training it's it's lovely just for the
mental advantage it gives you in life
yeah that was my takeaway and I was
gonna ask you in this soft world of ours
shouldn't we consider making survival
training part of everybody's education
yeah
wouldn't it be smart to do that as part
of high school right yeah or even junior
high school you don't have to be any
more than 12 or 13 there or even less
than that yeah I remember in the Boy
Scouts we did a lot of
edgy stuff and I think we just make
people stronger mentally and more
resilient emotionally if they had
survival training I started my son my
son Jonas is 17 he's a junior in high
school I started him he was probably 5 I
would imagine with little things like
fire making and you know how to use a
knife how to hold a knife safely you
know making a shelter for example you
can if you're dropped make it into the
woods you can survive a blizzard by
making a debris shelter in the forest so
a trick like that could have potentially
saved those two guys on Mount Washington
because you can go in a debris shelter
that's made correctly you can have 20
below outside and be toasty warm so
there's a lot of a lot of things that
you don't even have to use these in life
just to give yourself a mental edge
that's what I took away like you I was a
you know a baby boomer and we were just
let run free as kids and we do stuff we
build forts out of logs and we did this
and we did that we weren't over
scheduled and over committed to lessons
and all that kind of stuff and seems to
me that with the lack of that today
perhaps survival training is a way to
get back to that kind of emotional
self-sufficiency that I think a lot of
us people who were raised more as free
running children had yeah I agree
completely well we're kind of getting
close to the time here so I'm gonna skip
over three really interesting episodes
of adventure and survival so I'm just
going to call out for the people who
read the book and people do read this
book this is a book that if you have not
read it your life is not complete
great story of Debbie Kiley and catch
the trash man Callahan on the Napoleon
solo and his amazing ability to survive
against all the odds and the tale of
Simpson and Yates another amazing one
readers read the book and enjoy them and
I think we're gonna wrap up with a brief
discussion of your other book surviving
survival surviving an extreme event is a
traumatic event in itself and a person
to come back from that could you tell us
at least a little bit about what it
means to survive survival yes so when I
wrote deep survival I was thinking in
terms of you know once you're rescued
the the event is over right or once you
self rescue the event is over you go
back to life you tell your friends it's
you know good for a free beer and then
as I got done with it and started
talking to some other people I realized
no no that's not what happens actually
surviving one of these kinds of events
that I described in the book is a
life-changing thing you can't go back to
your regular life
it won't happen so you have embarked on
a new journey which is the journey to
reinvent your life essentially Who am I
now and what can I do and in many cases
people do completely different things
from what they were doing before and
change their lives entirely and so I
thought well this is really interesting
I'm gonna start talking to some of these
people about that process and I realized
very quickly that I needed to write a
book about it
to complete the survival journey that I
started in deep survival so essentially
surviving survival is a guide to
resilience so because once you have one
of these terrible survival situations
even though you live through it you may
be very rattled up you may be suffering
from PTSD you may have anxiety you may
have trouble sleeping trouble in
relationships and you need to address
that as okay what's my new life going to
look like so that's the in a nutshell
the book surviving survival I think it's
very germane right now because a lot of
people who are going through this corona
virus pandemic are gonna come out the
other side and realize whoa my old life
isn't there anymore really I have to
figure things out all over again
and this is a guide to doing that well
it sounds like a great bookend to one of
my favorite books deep survival Lawrence
I really want to thank you for coming on
the gym rut show this has been
everything I was hoping it would be and
Morris has been great fun great thank
you very much Jim
appreciated production services and
audio editing by Jared Jane's consulting
music by Tom Muller at modern space
music dot-com