good morning welcome to meditating with
John rebecky I'm a cognitive
psychologist and a cognitive scientist
at the University of Toronto where
academically and scientifically study
phenomena like month list meditation
related phenomena like fluency insight
flow mystical experiences transformative
experiences higher states of
consciousness enlightenment wisdom so
this course is based on a lot of that
work but it's also based on the fact
that I have been practicing the pasta
meditation medical inflation in touch
each one for over 29 years and teaching
them professionally for close to 20
years so welcome
but as I mentioned this is of course so
if you're joining us for the first time
you're welcome to stay but every Monday
as a dominate every Monday I teach you
in principle a new practice and we
usually do direct experience exercise of
it so if you want you can go to links in
this video and go sort you can go into
the notes of this video and find links
to previous sits and also previous
lessons there's a special playlist of
just the lessons so you can catch up I
saw as I mentioned on Mondays Strama
days Tuesdays through Friday including a
day like today is a sit day we NEET I do
sometimes a bit of review I'll do better
for you today and then we sit together
and then there's QA the fact there's Q&A
at the end of every class Monday through
Friday the Q&A is through on the sick
days Tuesday to Friday tend to be a
little longer it except for Thursday
because we have a very hard closing time
on Thursday to end right at 10:00 that
Thursday so as I said welcome so
yesterday I reviewed how to apply the
five factors of inquiring mindfulness
when you're working on your distractions
today I want to review something I
talked about on Monday which is dealing
with hindrances and so the idea of the
hindrances is not things that are
happening in your practice that are
disruptive to it but things are that are
disrupting your attempt to do your
practice and I mentioned that there's
sort of two kinds of resist
since to practice that we face one is a
very active resistance you're sort of
getting this dog no don't like I said so
that might be something that goes back
to trauma or some deeper issues that
need to be explored therapeutically and
so again I don't know you that might be
something you might want to consider
exploring often though it's it's it's
something that we can deal with more
directly by this practice of you're
already meditating and what that means
is when the resistance comes up don't
meditate then immediately apply the five
factors implying mindfulness - it might
perhaps direct Metta towards it so that
you find yourself already in the
practice already meditating and that is
it's you sort of slowly transition into
your sitted practice in some fashion so
that technique of you're already
meditating is how we try to deal with
that very active resistance now the more
in this video is kind of passive
resistance is when we oh I should
meditate and our motivation just sort of
leaks away from us I mean we just go
into a bit of a fog and we drift off let
me think about doing other things and so
that is something that you have to have
built up sort of significant habits not
to counteract and the way we do this is
what's called the three jewels or the
three refuges which is sort of the core
of Buddhism again I'm not trying to
convert you I don't even think I myself
am a Buddhist but what are these three
practices well it has to do with the
Buddha the Dharma and the Sangha the
Buddha is not sort of venerating or
worshipping hearted Gotama although
learning about human reading you know
what he has to say can be very helpful
remembering the Buddha is to keep I
would suggest keeping a journal where
you try
certain moments where you had an
existential insight especially about
yourself as opposed to other people
right a moment where you came into
mindfulness or spontaneously and deeply
moments when you remembered to practice
and apply to these are all moments when
your inner teacher is making itself
present to you and present through you
and so by noting those and remembering
them and reviewing them periodically
there's a danger here about narcissism
and oh look at our special item so you
have to keep that in mind you have to
approach this as always right with
humility always with humility but
celebrating in an appropriate sense
it's called watering your Buddha this
sense of the inner teacher so the inner
teacher is more and more invited to be
more and more present to you and through
you until eventually like the way when
somebody's learning a sport they they
imitate their coach they internalize the
coach until eventually they don't need
the coach because the coach and to them
have been integrated into their
awareness and their skill so grow your
Buddha Dharma Dharma these are like when
teaching you thoughts of Dharma learning
about this reading books about
mindfulness if you're interested in the
broader framework reading books around
Buddhist philosophy or Buddhist ritual
practice so the more you can learn the
morning people learning in the morning
your brain associates the practice with
learning and opening up the field of its
capacity to make sense of things
the more the brain will pick up the
motivation to continue to practice and
the third is the Sangha
this is also saying that we're meeting
together with other people we're talking
so human beings are incredibly
socio-cultural animals so much so that
this tends to be the reliable factor and
we're triangle because we're setting
this up the way we're doing we're trying
to create a community of Sangha around
it well they're trying to what we can to
keep it going because right if you are
practicing and sort of totally isolated
fashion chances are within about five
weeks you won't be practicing this
anymore
it'll just erode away but if you meet
with us and this was you know that
people know this is going to temple
going to mosque going to church
but if you regularly meet or Weight
Watchers right if you regularly or a a
right if you regularly meet with other
people and write they write encourage
you they correct you they inspire you
they give you a sense of belonging and
connectedness they make you realize that
you're not isolated and alone your
problems aren't overwhelming because
they're not so idiosyncratically
specific to you
there's multitudinous ways in which
belonging to a saying a keeps you going
and keeps the practice now the
difficulty of course with this is
finding Sangha a group of people that
you have good reason to trust and so
that has to be the people you choose to
Sangha with that has to be done with you
know with with careful reflection
insight and some at least good evidence
preliminary evidence at least that these
people are trustworthy to enter into our
Sangha with and hopefully that is
emerging at least virtually right now
because of course physical a physical
segment is not possible for us right now
so the three the three practices right
for dealing with hindrances no cultivate
Buddha cultivate the Dharma cultivate
assignment that's those are the things
that will most keep you going in the
practice okay so I think we're ready
well I think well there's a couple
things we'll probably all announce when
I do the QA but other than that please
get yourself comfortable
set your phones to do not disturb and
we'll begin when I say begin
begin
you
you
[Music]
so they come out of your practice trying
is the best you can to integrate with
you've cultivated in your practice with
your everyday consciousness and
cognition how you come out of your sit
it's part of the practice so we have
some questions we will address this is
from last week Amara has brought it in
for us from Austin Collins should I have
any conscious thought of my own during
meditation in general or should all my
focus be just on my breath I can't tell
if I'm actively preventing thoughts you
know that's wrong so yeah don't try to
prevent thoughts just try and focus on
it like I said focus on your breath so
center stage the majority of your
attention however as I've mentioned
before and this is the idea of the raft
and Buddhism right the thing you put
together to get across the river and
then once you're across the river you
let it go you're going to have to engage
in you know in inner coaching I
mentioned the coaching earlier at the
beginning so they're often you're going
to have to talk to yourself in order to
write to do the practice right you know
centering we're looking look all of
these inner things your teeth you're
talking to yourself and that those don't
count as distractions or kind of
conscious thought that you're trying to
expunge they are the raft that inner
teaching is what you do in order to get
engaged in the practice and eventually
and but don't hold on to it too tightly
right eventually you won't need to talk
to yourself to do the practice it'll
just be
we do the practice and that's really
important so don't try to be forcing
thoughts out but I don't don't sir
friend of my goal is to make my mind
empty you what you're trying to do is
follow the whole of your breath and have
center stage majority of your attention
on your breath but you will have
conscious thoughts insofar as you are
using them as an inner coach until
eventually you internalize it enough
that you won't need to talk to yourself
so you know when I do touch you know I
don't have to talk to myself at all but
when I was first learning it I had to
sort of note and remind myself okay do
this then do this that do this and then
eventually it gets internalized that it
goes for something from something you're
speaking to a way in which you're seeing
and inhabiting your mind and body Andre
Andre Braugher this is also from the QA
the live QA when talking about thinking
in it and images does that involve
memories yes it does should I apply the
same methods from yesterday's lesson
when random memories come up yes
memories and mental time trouble is is a
version of monkey mind and you should
definitely apply the same things to
memories that come up Phil Messina how
do we know how long to meditate for so
good learning this comes from the Gonski
one of the great developmental
psychologists second only to Piaget
which he called the zone of proximal
learning or the zone of proximal
development and you always want to be
challenging yourself so if you can just
sit and you don't have to make use much
use of all of the practice to keep going
then you're not sitting long enough you
should sit to the point where you have
to really engage engage your skills you
have to engage the practices you have to
write engage the principles in order to
keep going for at least five or ten
minutes so you want actually you do most
of your learning when you're facing that
challenge remember what we talked about
finding your flow you want
right you want the demands to slightly
exceed your skills because that will
actually make your spells grow if you
are just sitting was you know what it's
easy or comfortable for you
your skills are equal to your demands
and very quickly your skills will exceed
your demands and you're not only are you
not learning and educating and growing
you will start to fall into a kind of
deep boredom with the practice and that
boredom can either prevent you from
practicing or it can in a kind of
insidious way go into the sort of
pleasant calmness of meditation and you
can get this kind of dull contentedness
that the Buddha warned about is one of
the really deep dangers in these kinds
of practices Simon get it from it
Hermanson do you have any act of
breathing meditations you'll be speaking
on recommended future I really enjoy box
breathing for example and some pranayama
breathing yes when I when we when we
finish the course perhaps when ways in
which are going to continue on the
Sangha as helping people cultivate and
home this practice within an ecology
practices I'll be teaching a couple of
basic of pranayama techniques Nick
Kennedy hi Nick this pandemic means I
have very few strangers or casual
acquaintance to recall and that can be
used people from other the past most
definitely most definitely as long as
your memory of them isn't just sort of
what's called semantic memory as long as
your memory of them isn't just sort of
you know facts about them it has to be
episodic memory it has to bring with it
right the sort of a sense of their lived
presence I guess it's imaginal I get
that but that sense you like that you're
that you're not just recalling but
reliving their presence so if that
person from your past works that way
then please use them prema prema it's
always good to hear from you can you
give us more verbs for sensing
so I'm not quite sure what you mean you
might you know you might mean like
hearing or listening and noticing the
difference from hearing and listening
you might pick up are you talking about
within the flow so your might be picking
up a tingling and tightening on tempo
and warming and cooling
quickening slowing resisting smoothing
so there's all kinds of different
interceptive verbs you can bring to
verify I hope I don't know which way you
asked me so I hope that covered one of
them at least go fill up 86 and more my
tea after my distractions are caused by
trying to follow these instructions if
it gets too much I just stop following
and wait as as they play out until they
the lake eventually comes down pros or
cons for this yes so yeah you don't want
to be pushing this until I'm not quite
sure what it would mean by it because
distractions if it's triggering a lot of
distractions because you're putting so
much effort into it yeah you need to
you're losing the befriending if I'm
understanding you correctly so you need
to you need to slow down
maybe not apply so many of the
principles go slow down the pace go more
gently and if you start to get
distracted first of all do the five
factors of aquatic mindfulness on the
distraction and then and then as you say
try right we get to a place where you
can let that go it dissipates and you've
been returned to your breath the mad
truth if after turning to a thought it
disappears but there is residual
feelings emotions should we meditate on
those or just return to the breath add
some questions meditate on those
meditate on those notice what it's like
to encounter those feelings and emotions
without the you know the inner
description or accompany X inner speech
but yes definitely meditate on those
excellent excellent
great question jet black during the
routing produce my right hand side flows
much more readily than my left in a
previous session you mentioned barter
body armor yeah
any recommended reading yes a good book
on body armor and how it fits into this
from a really good transpersonal
perspective in many ways I prefer this
transpersonal perspective to people like
Ken Wilber which is Michael Washburn's
the ego in the dynamic realm and get the
revised edition of the ego and the
dynamic ground I think it's a really
excellent book and at the end if a
transpersonal psychology starts to
interest you take a look at the work of
your gate career he's got a book called
revision transpersonal psychology and
then he's got an excellent anthology
called the participatory turn so that
sort of you could go through that or
take a look at Washburn especially for
the specifics of the body armor event
setting this into a more encompassing
understanding of transpersonal
psychology Dennis Mantis much from doing
that correctly I am using the mantra
that don't seem to elicit many feelings
sensations or emotions at times it may
feel almost as numbness well that as I
mentioned that happens for people so the
numbness means you mean a lot of things
sort of that was to grab yours to
potentials because you know there's
there could be like I say there could be
trauma there could be issues from your
past there's lots of stuff that could be
happening to you so I don't know that
but sort of a statistical norm is that
people have been there they have sort of
over identified with one particular
aspect way in which they do that they
are in existential mode and it's and so
it takes time to open up and noticing
the numbness and I'm not trying to
insult you please please I'm sorry I
think they're like here to help you
right so paying attention to the
numbness and sitting with it and trying
to feel as much as you can just what is
your mind
what your mind and body doing in this
and how might this be in the background
as you're moving around the world and
well how would it dispose you to see
yourself and see other people right and
and then what can sometimes happen is
people will sort of snap into a
situation in their mind where they're
confronting people that they feel in
contrast what it's like so try that see
if that gives you any progress and be
even remember good friend yourself and
if it doesn't come back and ask the
question again maybe reframe it a bit as
you try to do this practice at all I'll
try and lead you through this this is a
fairly challenging thing that many
people do face and that's what I did
mention that when I was teaching you
matter there because we're we're spend
so much time in our culture drives us
into the habit mode and drives us into a
kind of very specific and limited
awareness of the process of Co
identification there's weather stoic
said all these other practices one more
thing about this admit it just doesn't
take for you if we if we move into hope
we do the wisdom sang up I'll teach you
some other practices from stoicism that
are really good at trying to bring up
bring up that awareness of the Co
identification process and the
remembering of the being mode so
hopefully between all of this I think I
can afford something that will avail you
in some way all right well we have some
more questions that were left over we'll
pick them up again tomorrow one of the
advantages of the services we get to get
through all the questions I want to
thank you all for joining so I spoke to
a Marv and he would like to remain just
simply a techno major I know that many
of us but we're trying to in celebration
of his birthday he wanted to promote him
to a grand techno mage but he thinks
that's too too pretentious he's happy
with just being a mere techno major so I
think my techno mage and good friend are
more for helping me as always I think my
beloved son I really depend on him in so
many ways not only for this practice but
in my life in general please subscribe
to this channel to be notified of the
next video you
also find a lot of accompanying videos
on a lot of the other phenomena I've
been talking about and make reference to
insight flow with them how to set this
into a bride at broader ecology
practices how to respond to the meaning
in crisis in general which is really
being exacerbated by the pandemic crisis
please invite others who might benefit
from this series by sharing the series
helped me to help as many people as I
can by sort of promoting the series and
a reminder that we will be doing this
every weekday morning at 9:30 est my
data's Dharma days Tuesday through
Friday or such days and for more general
questions beyond the practice which is
what we cover in the week and in the
daily Q&A so we have a monthly Q&A on to
try and answer these more general
questions so please look for that and
you're welcome to come in and you can
also ask questions about this practice
they're they're not precluded but you
can it's especially good for asking
more encompassing practices for
cultivating sort of more encompassing
questions for cultivating a and ecology
practices so as always thank you very
much for your time and attention please
keep your sitting continuity is more
important oddity if you honestly can
only sit for five minutes
sit for five minutes but friend yourself
cultivate wisdom and discernment it will
be one of the most important things we
will need to keep going thank you very
much for your time and attention
goodbye everyone
you