[Music]
in a way the phenomena of the IDW
intellectual diet web has kind of
flagged this up that there seems to be a
quality of conversation that's had where
we're genuinely going in without knowing
the answer this is the meta conversation
like that there's one thing to come up
the right answers but even more
important is how do we have the kind of
conversations that will allow us to find
these right answers well it seems to me
that the beginning is to name it dust Li
I wishes to say when I when I watch and
was specifically when I watch watch ed
like when when these individuals were
just beginning to enter into
conversation with each other well some
of the ideas that they were talking
about were insightful and interesting I
found that what was by far much more
interesting as what you're talking about
which was noticing that there was
something different about what happened
when somebody was well thinking
I mean endeavoring to listen to what the
other person was saying and in not just
responding with their prefab response
that they had already written down on a
piece of paper or had learned from
somebody else but actually really
contemplating it deeply and endeavouring
to express something that potentially
created something new or at least
helpful and when I noticed that I
noticed two different things one was
that that was vastly more interesting
and the other one is that it felt like
goodness it felt like something that was
needing that was that was needful like
you know eating when you're hungry or
more specifically actually more of a
feeling of safety which I imagine is
actually the feeling of hero right and
it's the feeling of when people are
doing something that is necessary in a
time of what it is necessary in
particular what it is not common
I got imagine it's maybe the feeling
that somebody has when they see the
I'm coming when the fire is raging right
courage is a as a part of that sensation
and it is certainly the case that in
this in this moment in order to speak
honestly requires courage and I was
gonna say in particular when we have to
say is not that which is in alignment
with good opinion but oddly enough I
think it's even when it is in a line
with a good opinion because I think
there's something in the ambient
environment that feels honesty as a as a
bad thing in and of itself
I almost a a complicity to always be
ever so slightly ironic and never be
fully connected to trying to speak
honestly but at the same time human
beings have evolved in fact won't even
say it's the essence of what we are that
differentiates us from our primate
ancestors to be very very attracted to
honest insightful expression so I think
both were happening simultaneously I was
reminded when you were when he said that
it felt like something good a quote that
the guy who put together the
intellectual dark website use at the top
of one of his pages was when two or
three gather in my name I am there with
them and it's a biblical quote yeah and
I was very struck by that it really fits
with what you were saying about there's
a sense of something good happening when
when these people get together and talk
in this way yes I think this is right
and I think it's deep which is to say
that well let me use maybe Peterson's
framework just to make it soft wicker
self-reflective it seems to me that
there is something that happens when
to a more gathered together in my name
and oftentimes in history we've needed
that something to make it and the
situation was not easy
the situation was complex challenging
and so it required that something that
whatever it is that happens when we are
gathered together in a space of well
collaboration was just making it again
very simple a space of peace a space of
mutual understanding not for the purpose
of delivering on the same opinion but
really for going deep and trying to find
something which is trying to frankly
express itself like to listen and so if
that story the story that I just told is
true then it would be in our bones maybe
in our deepest mythology and our deepest
traditions I do this religion that this
is the place to go that when trouble is
brewing gather together answer into this
space this is where we do these sorts of
things this is how we solve these kinds
of problems and you've spoken before
that that can almost only happen in
indirect interpersonal dialogue it's
very difficult for it to happen in any
other any other means well
I have noticed being able to get there
in virtual environments not very often
or very common in just texts like
Facebook posts it seems like there is a
relationship between the the richness of
the possibility of interaction and both
the possibility and the quality of the
relationship so it's a lot better and
stronger richer and easier enter
personally but I don't think it's
impossible if I don't know it's not
impossible I definitely have felt
entering into this kind of relationship
in say podcasts I imagine that in some
among some certain
of people or maybe it's some future date
with this becoming a practice that many
people go through that it may actually
be effortless and that people are able
to enter into this often there's a whole
different story that maybe we'll get
into another time as to why that isn't
how we always are if we are if we are in
the matrix as a an analogy and metaphor
what is the matrix okay so to be meta
just to be aware the first thing I want
to notice is that for us to do this
right we need to be a space of
collaboration so the invitation is to
have this not be question answer I am
not the authority and you are not the
listener but rather we are collaborating
on this question so let's put the
question in the middle we are exploring
the question of what is the matrix
so one of the things that really popped
into my head very cleanly was this
notion of that we've been using just in
this dialogue of simulated thinking as
being very much like a computer it seems
like there's something about the way
that the human mind can be made unable
to relate to the world and instead run a
program run an ideology where it
constantly refrains its perceptions in
accordance with the ideology as opposed
to honestly in humility relating to a
reality
the makes it exquisitely vulnerable to
control I would maybe bring in Vic and
Stein's idea of the bullish mental
language the the idea I think he said
philosophy is about I'd love to know the
exact quote but it is effectively
undoing the process of the bewitchment
of language that there's something in
the nature of language the nature of
being able to think in concepts that
somehow flips into making us a prisoner
of those concepts well interestingly
enough very cool so as you were speaking
you actually said I wish I had the quote
and that's the bischmann of language
which is to think that the exact
specification of the actual sounds is
the thing but it's not it's the essence
of what he was trying to say and so to
convey the essence is the thing that we
actually want yes you did
which is why I was so interesting like
it popped in I actually initially was
struggling with the actual words and
then I realized that what I really just
need to do is to listen there was trying
to express itself through the words I
think this is very I think that's like a
big idea that's not like imagine imagine
that I'm not very good at expressing
myself and also imagine them trying to
express something which is both deep and
important
well either you're going to eat just
gonna have to ignore me right and just
move on because I'm not going to be able
to give it to you whole cloth in sort of
perfectly wrapped magical material or
we're gonna have to work
together we're gonna have to both
identify and recognize there's something
here then maybe I have some piece of and
if you can sense it at all that means
you have a piece of it too so now we're
never 'uncle Ekta bleah to kind of get a
size of this thing you know it's the
nose blind the blind men and the
elephant except in this case maybe
you're seeing it and I'm hearing it and
I can kind of describe it as a soundness
I don't really know what it is like yeah
this was maybe it's coming from this
kind of large lumpy object hmmm that's
neat
well everything interesting is going to
be of that sort
mine has never been said before then
it's very unlikely that I have a very
clean way of expressing it and if it's
interesting it's likely it's going to be
hard to express and so we enter into
that and we enter into a place where if
you see if you perceive the words that
I'm using as being more of a map more of
a hint more of a way to try to sort of
begin the process of orientation around
something which is itself transcendent
and we're endeavoring to actually find a
way to tune in to the transcendent using
the words literally just as a way to
make it more real more shareable more
clear and in terms of the what this
looks like what this kind of dialogue
looks like there's a there's a form of
it's almost like a meditation a speaking
meditation that I was taught by raffia
who is that the guy who is kind of
leading helping us lead some of the
men's what we're doing and it's called
inquiry there's a form that came from
the ink of the essence work that almaas
put together and the the idea of inquiry
is that you acknowledge you don't know
the answer so you try and enter a space
where you're listening to yourself as
you're speaking as much as you're
listening to the other person and you
are able to be surprised by what my
camera my
come out and it's a very it's a practice
of learning to to feel into what wants
to emerge so it's a kind of it's a it's
a form of meditation in that you have to
learn that kind of nuance and learn that
sensitivity to yourself and what wants
to emerge which maybe fits with Jordan
Peterson's observation that pay
attention to how your words make you
feel is this something that makes you
stronger is it something that makes you
weaker there's some kind of as I know
almost like really deep listening to
ourselves that we need to do to be able
to get into the space well I can tell
you that as you were saying that I was
feeling very felt good and this is
because I did not know the name that you
described or the individual whose name
you gave and yet this sounds very much
like what I've been trying to do and
yeah it's it's not I don't recall that
this has always been the way that I have
endeavored to listen and to speak and
it's not always but it is always the
best and that I've also noticed that it
becomes easier that it is possible to
actually have this place where you are
somehow outside of yourself you're fully
in yourself and you're expressing
simultaneously and that from that place
is where there's something really
interesting beings to be possible it's
kind of aligning ourselves with the
creative principle as again Peterson
talks about the logos mm-hmm yeah that
sounds really nice yeah it's interesting
so as I'm being very very very like
noticing very closely it's initially
very raw my price is really just a
pleasure hmm yes that feels good yeah
what was that ah that feels like what
happens when something any senses that
what just was expressed yes I can say
yes to that and then after I say yes to
it I can try to put more into it what
about it was the thing that was yes I've
actually very interested this notion to
Louis for a long time I studied ancient
Greek I am
they've contemplated and this is the way
that you just described it was very nice
that that the alignment with the
creative principle mm-hmm and that feels
very clean mmm
it feels like it's uh well true in a
very specific Peter Sounion sense hmm I
wish we could find a way to make that
simple that little disagreement it
bothers me
hmm which disagreement sam Harris and
Jordan Peters from the nature of truth
hmm
do you have a sentence on what it might
be I know what it is I just can't make
it simple I came to say it clearly all I
can try to say it not clearly but that's
always it just comes down to the fact
that there are multiple different kinds
of epistemology that the word true
doesn't mean the same thing in every
context like for example I can I can
true an instrument I can also my aim can
be true and then of course the statement
can be true and these are related to
each other but they also cover a
different distance the way I would say
it is that is that distinction I used
earlier between something which is
thought or a model and something which
is lived so that a model is true to the
degree to which it corresponds with
reality call that Harris truth but a
practice is true to the degree to which
it generates thriving good it's only
interest is just literally just two
different kinds of truth and different
domains and so getting confused about
them is just getting confused about the
fact that you're actually talking about
two different kinds of domains that
respond to two different kinds of truth
that associate with two different
aspects of reality and they don't cross
over there's no point in comparing them
they can be a relationship as we
discussed in Harrison Harris Sam Harris
truth scientific truth is able to make
it possible for us to be able to be more
religious in the sense that we could
make better choices if we
what is true at the same time Peter
Sonia in truth lived truth is about us
actually making actually better choices
in our actual lives which is just a
different thing so maybe that was simple
peterson talks about scientific truth
being nested within his concept of the
truth that scientific truth is a subset
of truth whereas the wider truth
includes yeah thriving it's pragmatic
it's it's about what what pushes us
forward as Darwinian beings that the
only definition of truth we can have is
a definition of what gets us it has to
be practical what I would say and this
is just the way that I perceive it is
that these kinds of truth are distinct
but they are also inseparable and that
lives truth is more basic or more
fundamental than scientific truth but
they are distinct so it's not really
relationship of containment it's more of
a relationship of well it's a very
complicated relationship it's not if
that is very not simple what does it
look like do you think the what we need
to do to come together or to to to be
able to form the collective intelligence
that's going to get us through the next
5 10 15 years well I actually think it's
mmm relatively as they said that's
easily done it seems like there's two
basic moves the first move where we've
used the phrase exit or escape the
matrix so it's something along the lines
of free your mind and your body from
this legacy
environment this legacy civilization the
blue church and all the other
accoutrement that environment most
notably your mind the second move is
well making more of a complex of news
become sovereign find the others and
turn to a you know two or more among us
in my name with them enter into
collaboration with them become sovereign
as a group in some sense that's it
because that thing that gathering of
sovereigns who were entering into a
relationship of higher level sovereignty
has a level of consciousness and a level
of intelligence and love of wisdom that
is well certainly much more than any of
us as individuals or any existing
institution has now the only real
novelty at the only thing that that we
don't actually know how to do it all is
how to do that with more than an
old-fashioned tribe of people so we can
build the skill its ambient it's part of
our basic toolkit of being people if we
can we can unlearn a lot of the adaptive
techniques and strategies and habits and
biases of civilization one of what I
call game a the blue church and all of
its past versions we've done learned
that a lot of it but we learn a lot of
these basic things but the basic things
are still basic so we can relearn that
we can instantiate the basic human
toolkit of how to be people with each
other and in that environment we have
what it takes to be able to enter into
this relationship of coherence but
evolution only got us up to about 150
people it's called the Dunbar limit for
wannabe intellectuals sort of the
maximum size of a fully coherent tribe
we should be mindful of the fact that
that makes that that's actually truly
coherent only in the context where we're
all related
really a tribe like every single person
that tribe was born in that tribe and
raised in that tribe then you have a co
here couple hundred and fifty these days
with practice maybe you can get it up to
thirty or fifty I'm sure that some
communities can get a little bit higher
but not a lot but our challenge is
actually harder just doing that as great
as that would be doesn't actually solve
the problem we actually have to figure
out how to do with everybody we have to
find a way to scale coherence well
beyond 150 maybe even all the way to
everybody certainly into the small
digits 15 150 thousand that's new right
but the way we're going to get there is
by this first step yeah so individuals
becoming sovereign recovering that which
is theirs in the first place and then
entering into this relationship of
coherence with other individuals and
becomes skillful at that becoming
masterful at that and then using that
from that place then doing the next work
that's the place to do the next work
what I find most problematic painful and
distressing is when people try to do it
from the old place it won't work it
can't work that style of thinking and
the style of coordination of working
together it's just the wrong tool for
the job that's sort of what's coming
through for me is I sort of sense of
trusting the field and it's very
difficult to sort of express this in a
way that doesn't feel sort of not
crunchy enough for kind of game a type
people but the sense is if we are able
to come together in in that space then
the right answers by definition will
come up because that's the nature of
creativity that's the nature of
consciousness that's the nature of
getting out of our own way enough for
the right things to arise well I I don't
feel that I have to go bet sounded to me
like it was teleological
and maybe I think the point here is I
don't know I don't think anybody knows I
think some that come to me you can know
but I'm put I need to because the only
thing that you can really endeavor to do
is the best that you can do and maybe
that it's not enough it may be that we
do not have it in us to make it through
this but this is the way that we could
do the best that we can do and so if it
is there if the answer is to be found
this is the way to find it and to feel
that it is a meaningful endeavor to do
so so that even if the answer isn't
there our effort was meaningful how does
this link to silver ante so we're
dealing with a word a sound and I'm
going to actually put that in your mind
first we're dealing with a sound
sovereignty which by the way if your
mind is the kind of mind that knows how
to speak language it's going to
interpret that as a word and then if it
uses words and associates then with Beth
with meaning it's gonna download a whole
scheme of meaning notice it doesn't have
to you could just choose to listen to it
as this sound
the reason why I'm saying that is that
it's very important in the context of
sovereignty to be able to actually take
responsibility for all of these steps
because in a conversation with somebody
they may utter a sound that you goddamn
think means something specific and they
may mean something completely different
and if you can't actually be able to
slow down and say hold on wait a minute
I thought you said this as opposed to
getting into an argument about what you
for sure no they said be able actually
slowed down and say I wait there's
something something's off not quite sure
where it is it's back up a bit
oh when you use the word the sound you
added to sound sovereignty it seems like
you may have meant something different
than what John Locke was writing about
or with the the folks in Montana keep
carrying on about what do you mean by
that so let me describe what I mean by
it and the reason why I'm doing this is
cuz I think a what I'm describing is a
more powerful version of the essence of
what that term has long intended to mean
I'm kind of recovering it from the
legacy of feudalism wrenching it finally
from the from the grips of long dead
kings and finally putting it back on the
place where it belongs which is in fact
sovereign individuals
but then they're gonna do that I have to
actually give it the meaning right you
aren't born sovereign that's reapplying
the feudalist model right you're born
the king to this new thing what does it
mean to be sovereign well it means to be
sovereign is well first of all it's
contextual it describes the degree to
which you have the capacity you have the
ability to respond to the circumstances
that you find yourself in in such a way
as to maintain or increase your ability
to respond to the circumstances in which
you find yourself in it's very simple
it's a loop right so let's say for
example I am sober and I am standing am
I am sovereign in the context of
standing means that I can keep standing
the likelihood that I will spontaneously
fall down is relatively low
keep drinking at a certain point I
actually lose my sovereignty I will
spontaneously transform from the state
of standing to a state of no longer
standing I have destroyed my sovereignty
in the domain of standing we can do this
all over the place
oftentimes say fighting or martial arts
is a good one so every martial artists
including boxing and fencing think that
is aware of the fact that there's a
relationship between your balance your
Center where you are in terms of poised
in inability to act and then what
happens when you extend yourself and so
in an optimal space I'm in this place
where I can I can respond to anything
you do as swiftly as I can with maximum
impact and with a maximum ability to be
able to respond in the next moment right
so I don't want to get into a place
where I'm suddenly on my heels where my
balance is off I don't want to swing so
hard that if I miss I'm not completely
vulnerable and I can't do anything and
if I do swing very hard I mean that
calculated choice the next thing I have
to have to get back into into balance
have to get right into the stance so
it's like a physical example dancers
have the same sensibility right it's a
sense of being able to be centered and
poised but it's always in relationship
to a context and it's always very
complex
you know let's say do you ever watch the
the French soccer players Enedina Zidane
we might say that he was very sovereign
in the domain of soccer but not
particularly sovereign the domain of
having his sister critiqued by an
Italian soccer player if you recall
he went from being a masterful champion
of soccer to somebody whose head bidding
somebody in a field getting his ass
kicked out the field tonight so his
sovereignty was masterful in one domain
but had a sort of fractal or a very
specific vulnerability that got popped
and caused the whole it cost the whole
thing to pop right he literally got
removed from the field is no longer even
a soccer player so this is the idea now
what we can do is we can generalize that
so I can speak about your sovereignty in
a given domain and then I can sort of
think about your general sovereignty
which is your sovereignty and an
arbitrarily large nymburk domains and of
course that that involves more general
capacities so and that's that's like the
give a man of fish eats for a day teach
a man to fish eats forever you could
become sovereign in some domain but you
can also build a higher order capacity
which gives you a generalized capacity
for sovereignty in all domains so for
example the capacity of discernment or
the capacity of just self-awareness so
she could do a simple one knowing what
your emotional state is being able to be
conscious of your emotional state is a
general purpose always useful ingredient
of any form of sovereignty and if you
know that your opponent is goading you
and it's making you angry and that's
taking you out of your game well that at
least gives you the ability to maybe
choose not to be so angry not the end of
your game if you know that you're
getting anxious and fearful while you're
trying to walk across the tightrope and
that's gonna cause you to fall then okay
may begin so that that's a more
fundamental capacities especially with
general purpose sovereignty there's a
whole list of these kinds of capacities
so let me hold that for a second come
back so now we have a basic idea what
sovereignty means in this context the
way that I'm trying to use it now what I
want to say is the reason when that
concept is so powerful and important is
the sovereignty is what is necessary to
be able to play a role in this new
emergent sense making fabric I remember
in the broadcast model you had to be
sort of a very high quality computer in
this new model you have to be sovereign
and the more sovereign you are the more
effectively you can actually play a role
in this thing because the more capacity
you have to receive from the world to
process it in a way that is responsible
that you can actually respond to with
the fullest aspect
to what it is you have to bear to it
you're not merely what's not rocking you
out of balance and you have the ability
to choose the best choice that you can
make whatever it happens to be it may be
that you're not very you haven't got
many choices but you can let's choose
the best choice and then you can send
that best choice out with the highest
degree of skillfulness you can bring out
so now you've got a an ability to listen
an ability to discern and sense and then
your ability to express and if you have
these three aspects in HI in a symmetric
relationship and in a sovereign
container so that they're able to be
Integris against various forms of
challenge which can be all kinds of
things like one one thing that might
overwhelm your sovereignty is just the
velocity of input if you hook yourself
up to social media and just like scroll
through Facebook for ten hours
you're probably overwhelming your
sovereignty most people's brains can't
handle that much dopamine and serotonin
and you know nonsense other words
they're actually from more simple if you
haven't been eating at all for the past
ten hours you're likely breaking your
sovereignty your body needs fuel to
operate to be able to operate
effectively so religion and to some
extent also spirituality building
practices that are able to support an
increase in individual sovereignty
supposed to be able to enter into
relationships with others so as to
increase your collaborative sovereignty
these are properly spiritual and
religious domains so now we're actually
reinvigorating the whole notion of
religion we're using a more fundamental
definition I guess this is the big
paradox for me about meaningful
collaboration can only happen from a
point of deep individual sovereignty to
really connect and really connect with
someone else can only come from a place
of being fully resourced in myself well
you were used were deep so as long as
you use the word deep I completely agree
we can have we could have meaningful
collaboration even we're both in
reasonably poor sovereignty it's just we
just got lucky or it hit us in a place
that is most needful and it may be that
the thing that our collaboration did is
gave rise to how to increase our
sovereignty but for sure if we want to
use collaboration reliably and we want
to go really deep the
is now conditioned on a depth of
sovereignty and a depth of skillfulness
in listening having discernment and then
expressing clearly right so the capacity
to be present to what's happening
without allowing yourself to be moved
out of your skillfulness and then the
actual skillfulness to be able to deal
with that situation well or what is what
needs to happen and again we can talk
about this in particular domains like
maybe in say computer science as a
programmer but there's in this new world
things aren't simple you are a computer
programmer you may be playing the role
of computer programmer for 15 minutes
but then you're also doing all kinds of
things constantly it's constantly
flowing and rejiggering and maybe
actually had a very interesting person
writing a message yesterday about
decentralized autonomous organizations
noticing that an evil to be able to deal
with these things that design them you
had to sort of somehow be a sociologist
an anthropologist an economist and a
computer scientist simultaneously so I
guess there's a good example and by the
way that'll be a spontaneous emergence
of a particular cluster of capacities
that might be the thing that you're
doing for the next three or four hours
and then you're going to shift and now
you're gonna be a relation in a
relationship with another person and
we're making food right and of course we
know that we do that now but we do that
now in these weird kind of like
disciplinary blocks in the future these
things and I even in the future in the
present these things are flowing and
they're mutating very very rapid they
were just in a world of faster change
and more fluidity so in this world that
faster change and more fluidity your
sovereignty and your skillfulness need
to be based on the most invariant things
so you can't just have say skillfulness
of computer programming which is like
give a man a fish you do have
skillfulness in learning or even having
skillfulness on the basis of how one
becomes having a high capacity of being
able to learn that's the deep basis if
you build a a deep basis of sovereignty
and a deep basis of mastery then you're
fully prepared to participate in any
form of collaboration in any context and
now things get very powerful because
let's say you find yourself with a group
of 10 people you've never met before in
a space that you don't understand
seems odd now but in the future we're
gonna see that a lot well what
do all you do is you each is individual
figure out how to get fully clear on
your own sovereignty and whatever things
you do to be able to really okay calling
this up I need to be fully sovereign
like you you know martial arts you get
in in a fighting stance and then you
start from nothing with each other you
know for sure that you don't yet know
anything so you begin to play
experimentally you try different things
and if you're all skillful if you all
are aware of how this works and you're
all sovereign so I say something to you
that to a blue church snowflake would
trigger them out of their mind but your
sovereign so you're aware the fact that
we're right now in a space of
experimentation and playfulness which
doesn't mean necessarily that you're
allowing me to abuse you what it means
is that you're listening and you're able
to discern and you're able to be aware
wait a minute he's actually abusing me
clearly you actually are able to have
perception on that and you can maybe
respond to that say hey wait a minute
I think we just moved into a weird space
what's going on here and you can
actually address it effectively clearly
call it out in a way that it allows me
to realize whoa you're right I was
actually out of my sovereignty there and
bring it back in and then of course is
crucial I'm gonna call this coherence so
coherence is when people are able to
enter into a relationship where they
basically been to form an emergent whole
as emergent properties that is greater
than the individuals involved greater
than the sum of the parts
and to achieve coherence first and
foremost requires both sovereignty and
awareness of sovereignty when you you
have it and you're aware of where you
are and a continual consciousness of
recognizing that you have to maintain a
certain level of sovereignty to be able
to enter into coherence at all and the
be in coherence has the highest
intelligent has the highest capacity to
perceive and respond to the whatever is
going on
so you prioritize that so first a -
opera - yes okay cool now are we in
coherence yes okay cool now let's start
trying to do something if not if
something is out of coherence okay how
do we get back in coherence oh is it
because I'm out of sovereignty Oh
getting me to get back into sovereignty
and kind of building back up one of the
practices or techniques to build
sovereignty
let me do it in terms of sort of
dimensions because we can simplify a
bunch of pieces there's the body and the
body is the basis of sovereignty so and
it's kind of simple like imagine a
two-year-old who is cranky is not
sovereign you can actually think of your
body as your little two-year-old so you
have to learn how to take care of
yourself how to parent yourself at level
of the body so learn how to make good
food choices learn when you're
dehydrated I mean it's amazing how often
people are dehydrated and how confused
they are by the fact that they are in
fact unable to think clearly and have
clean emotions when they're dehydrated
it's not confusing your body it's a
corpsman of automaticity tired are you
tired right I mean all these very basic
things like I sent it's silly but almost
everybody gets it wrong almost all the
time so learn how to parent yourself at
the level of the body for most people
alive today the next one's going to be
be aware of your trauma and the reality
is is that we were all effectively
enormous walking bags of crazy trauma
and all the various defense mechanisms
that have built up around those traumas
and everything experience we have is
filtered through that well unfortunately
that's just the case hopefully in future
civilization we're able to create human
beings who don't have that in which case
that won't be a major issue but here it
is so to the degree to which you can
just work through that trauma it
generally sucks it's very painful and
scary and can lead to having to actually
make changes in your life which are
themselves painful and scary but
nonetheless the more you can work
through that the better if you if you
find that you're going to be engaging in
a race it's probably useful to have
learned how to walk first same thing
here if you're going to be interacting
with other people the more you could
have done the work beforehand that has
either eliminated or addressed the
trauma and the defense mechanisms or at
least has made them conscious the better
and then of course also build practices
and techniques and how to respond and
bring
so back into sovereignty when you find
these various defense mechanisms and
traumas are hijacking you there's a good
concept called amygdala hijack this is
actually a lot of very straightforward
Neurology but if you feel like you're
under threat
let's say for example somebody shows up
who happens to VOC the feeling of a
bully who used to beat you up and you
don't even even conscious of that but
suddenly your body is under threat you
may actually literally experience a
Migdal hijack meaning that the blood is
being pulled from your prefrontal cortex
and being put into your limbic system
for fight-or-flight responses well in
that case you're not sovereign but one
of the things you can do and then this
gets two things one is you may have some
habits that you've worked on practices
that you've trained yourself to do when
you're out of sovereignty and is like a
martial artist who's trained how to get
back up when they've been knocked down
like he worked that over and over and
get until it's just unconscious so you
you work that error again and the second
course is then also always flag yay
I just got knocked out of sovereignty
awesome I've just been able to identify
a blind spot that I wasn't aware of
before learn how to be attracted to that
rather than avoid it actually see how
well you can train yourself to be
attracted to experiences that traumatize
you not to get into trauma not to be
traumatized but to get into experiences
that are triggering because of past
trauma so that you can become conscious
of it so that you can see it and learn
what the shape of it is and then you can
of course go in to address it and then
ameliorate it so you can come back in
the next level is psychological and
cognitive so at the psychological level
if you are still running if you're still
a computer but if you're still running
the simulator of thinking rather than
thinking itself one be aware of that
notice the difference between them and
begin the process of trying to figure
out how to rebuild for yourself your
capacity to think now the good news is
is that's ambient right that's how we're
born fortunately human beings are
broadly speaking born with a natural
seeking and exploring creative thinking
capacity it is beaten out of us it is
not natural and so to the degree to
which to begin relearning that and we
can double click on that if you'd like
then you're moving into a space of being
able to think and this includes things
like not thinking you know
the answer not thinking you understand
somebody not using the process of inter
of communication to achieve power or
dominance over someone else this office
often times worship is for example
willful misinterpretation or
self-righteousness and these are all
sort of characteristics of what not
thinking looks and feels like thinking
looks and feels like curiosity it feels
like well humility it feels like slowing
down it feels like having a habit of
responding to confusion by slowing down
and being more careful as opposed to
speeding up and skipping over it
at the cognitive level now we've got
this notion of transparent mind there's
a really neat concept called mapping
mapping has to do with the fact that
everybody learned everything by virtue
of actually experiencing things and then
connecting some portion that experience
with some notion like dog dog is a
mapping you have an experiential
manifold of all the various dogs who've
experienced particularly ones when you
first experience dogs and the notion of
the word dog kept being associated with
something in that experience are
manifold at first who knows you may have
cut out some big chunk of experience and
associated with dog with like furry
fuzzy thing that's drooling on me and
also the couch because you're a baby you
have no idea but over time it's
sort of the differentials sorted out
you've got a fuzzy thing which is dog
well the point here is that your mapping
is gonna be mapping to some stuff that
actually isn't part of that just for you
much less for other people and so I say
sovereignty you've got a mapping well
we've just gone through the process that
it's at a cognitive level we can
recognize that mapping errors or just
mapping errors so flag I've got a map in
here it what you just said doesn't make
sense to me is this because I'm mapping
it wrong or is it because I'm not
understanding what you just said okay
cool the way that's also a practice but
the concept is useful yeah I mean
there's lots more but these are examples
yeah that's good even talked about that
in terms of the context of mysticism so
let's go into the notion of self
integration this is a key one this is
actually the combination so I did body
and I did psychology I didn't do the two
so let's bring the two together
meditation is the the becoming
exquisitely aware of awareness how it is
that you show up as self absent all of
the things and in its relationship with
mind alright so one of the aspects of
meditation is learning how to separate
mind from self learning how to separate
thinking or really it's actually the
computer mind the programmatic mind from
that thing which is actually is the or
of deeper thinking so it's both useful
in the sense that it helps you actually
separate those two and necessary in the
sense that it's a primary practice of
being able to come into clarity of self
which is the basis of all these other
things and to do learn things like
acceptance like how to actually be
available to and open to what reality is
actually conveying as opposed to
endeavoring to cause it to be what you
want it to be it's a practice that is
for that it does that as that's the you
can only get that through that practice
that's one of the things that practice
is doing and then another one is this
notion of integration this notion of
being able to become very aware of all
the different aspects of mind and self
and body and how they're showing up and
what they're trying to say and being
able to become compassionate I suppose
or loving so as to allow them to express
themselves right not to repress yourself
not to be a tyrant to yourself not to
have some aspect of yourself calling out
and trying to call something up and just
show it's up and speak itself and
repress it and shove it down because
then if you do that you're disintegrated
you're out of integrity and this will
create well it'll create a havoc
actually evil for sure come to bite you
in the ass at some point and make you
extremely vulnerable to a wide variety
of blind spots in sovereignty space so
of course the key to that is
self-acceptance so remember I talked
about the mission of acceptance well the
recursion on that it's actually able to
enter into acceptance with self so that
you can actually allow the parts of you
that you may judge you may want to have
your sort of computer mind has been
somehow trying to say isn't a good thing
or should not be happening and actually
to allow those things to show up and to
I'm gonna say honor them more than
accept them because what you're doing is
you're actually allowing them to be
revealed as the purity of the essence of
what they are which they are right but
they may not be able to be clearly that
until you've actually honored them
there's a lot of depth here I mean this
is not trivial stuff at all and I'm not
even doing it particularly well but
that's some of that as a birth and
returning to the kind of the matrix idea
what we are we're talking about I see
that that metaphor as being about
individuation ultimately it's all about
individuation it's like how do you
escape the traps of ideology how do you
escape the traps of your thought running
down conceptual lines because that's
what we used to and becoming truly
ourselves which is what you were talking
about the sovereignty and that that for
me is is kind of the framework of the
matrix I guess if if what we're we're
talking about is escaping from that it
is the process of individuation okay so
the word individuation there feels
confusing to me probably because I have
a meaning I'm from Texas so have a
meaningful connection to more
libertarian sensibilities so when I hear
it I map it more in the direction of
that which it stands opposed to
communitarianism some more like
individualism as opposed to individual
but then I notice it's you're saying
that I also have an awareness of it in
the context of child development right
that a child as teenagers adolescents
are individuating which is that they are
discovering who they are by virtue of
themselves for themselves and becoming
capable of being responsible is that
sound like what you're referring to yeah
and maybe it also links back into the
concept of we can only truly collaborate
from a space of genuine individual
sovereignty
mm-hmm and that's the paradox that many
people get hung up on because they want
to move to this space of no we want to
collaborate we want to do this together
but actually you can only get there once
you've done the inner work to be able to
collaborate from a place of genuine
sovereignty well this is also very
powerful thing in the context of the the
false dichotomy they're just articulated
there's oftentimes a well false
dichotomy that we I there are
individuals or we are communal and it's
either
consensus or its Liberty but what you're
saying and would I agree with completely
is the collaboration takes place in a
space that is that transcends that
dichotomy that it is precisely to the
degree to which we are most fully
individuated that we are most fully
capable of expressing that which is most
meaningful and also most capable of
simultaneously hearing clearly listening
clearly and expressing clearly because
we have become clear right we've become
nothing but that wish we are and the
process of doing that requires a serious
amount of skill
maybe some of the
heuristics that seem to be showing up in
these individuals are for example
courage yes they have the archetypal
virtue of courage which is sort of
notably absent from our yeah there was
if someone asks me like why I even made
some music with Peterson in the first
place of what I likes by him and the
first thing that came to mind was
courage was bravery yeah who is someone
standing up for something right whatever
that is in in the face you could imagine
that like a deep level like in our in
our bones or even in our like
reproductive organs the part of us that
has been all about how the hell do
tribes survive has a deep sense of when
there are when there is no courage we're
probably so when when we feel an
absence of courage and then courage
shows up we're like okay that whatever
that is it needs to happen yeah right
and so that's one one piece and then the
other piece that we also see is well I
guess I'm gonna break this into two one
is this notion of a an unreasonable
attraction to the truth all right so a
sense of a willingness to say to take
pain to like suffer in in defense of
what is perceived to be true all right
so rather than being able to capitulate
or to equivocate saying no I'm just
gonna kind of like come in and say what
I think is true and I'm almost blindly
not like calculating when I take the
consequence cuz I think it's a good idea
but for some reason I'm just wired is
one of these people who just can't feel
good about things not being true and
then the other aspect over here is
something about stepping out like a
bigger picture like zooming out and
taking a look at things that are not
right in front of us and trying to say
like wait a minute something's going on
and again like if you think about this
in terms of just straight evolution you
can imagine that there's a situation
where we've been encamped in a valley
for a long time it has worked out we've
got a good way of being and but we're
noticing for example that maybe the hunt
isn't producing as well as it used to
where the watering hole seems to be
getting drier every couple of years and
most people still are just kind of like
that's not there there's nothing thing
and they're just focused on what's going
on but a couple of folks they step back
and like wait a minute
what's that mean like what's happening
here and something there whoa hold on
guys
we may have to leave
now leaving the valley is dangerous as
 going from where you are where
things working understand what's
happening to a new place it's a really
bad idea
so it's not gonna be well-received which
is why it takes a certain kind of
courage to be willing to step up and say
it but because we've had to do that a
lot to be humans and humans more than
any other animal
we're the only animal that is in fact
designed the ability to get up from
whole niche like to leave the African
savannah and migrate to the to the
Arctic we're the only animal that has to
have some system that's able to be able
to detect when it's time to do that
alright so then this is the Buddhist
step back and try to figure out okay
what is the basis that we can actually
use to perceive a bigger picture that
allow us to make good choices in an
environment where something is wrong and
it's gonna be very subtle like you can't
what name it very well if it's at the
mythopoetic layer so maybe that's what I
think is that that's what's happening is
it's showing up
you