welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
so I guess I'll just kind of dive in I
hope that we're not catching things at
too much velocity because we're
certainly moving pretty quickly
first order I think is to just kind of
have a an awareness of the notion of how
to be able to hold multiple difference
in areas in your head so I'll be using
language that has a bit of a Bayesian
construct which is to say that there's a
whole bunch of possibilities of what's
actually going on right now and it's not
quite clear exactly what I mean by that
is both it's not quite clear exactly
what information is is accurate it's not
quite clear exactly how to understand of
the information that you have what it
implies in terms of what the state of
the larger system is now and what it
like it will look like in the future so
everything has to be held in a
probability construct with the
probability of certain events pardon me
nobody Oh a lot more talking than my
voice box is used to so the highest
confidence model that I'm operating with
right now is one where where is about a
forty percent confidence so I don't have
anything above fifty percent but the
highest confidence model and I'm
offering right now is the right now in
the middle of a multi systemic cascade
failure so what that means is if you if
you imagine you've got a bucket full of
water and you're carrying it and and if
you walk in a certain speed the sloshing
of the water doesn't come over the top
but then you trip and so you lurch
forward a little bit and so the sloshing
comes out and that's that's a systemic
feedback loop or your your the
environment you're walking through leads
to a perturbation effect that's larger
than the containment environment of this
particular subdomain which happens to be
the water in the bucket moves the water
out of the bucket spillover
okay now Matt imagine if instead of
being water in the bucket happens to be
oil in the bucket and so when it's
spilled it didn't spill just water it
spilled oil all over your feet in the
ground you're walking on so now your
next step step increases your next up is
slippery and so the likelihood of you
spilling oil goes up so now you have a
systemic feedback loop where a cascade
effects actually feed back and forth
between different system dynamics so let
me give you a more concrete example of
where we are right now trivially we have
the example of this the the perturbation
effective of the virus had a
characteristic of uncertainty multiplied
by a velocity that led to a really big
impact so by uncertainty what I mean is
this I think is legitimately true
although there are certainly some
intentionality questions we need to
answer but as the information I what was
going on in China began to show up there
really was a what the heck is this don't
what's happening what is the
epidemiology what's the impact what's
the reality of it and because we have
the notion of asymptomatic carriers we
have a situation where even as early as
beginning of March the reality of the
degree of the number of people who are
infected and it's are not was just a big
question mark but as we've discovered
the velocity of that is actually quite
high I think right now I heard from the
WHS there as they're me and modeling
globally two point five day doubling
rate which is actually higher then the
most models had seen but that's of
course global so we're looking at places
where reporting is not the data that
we're getting on reporting is not very
good because we know testing is really
really poor so they're trying to
actually get a sense of what is it
call it really working backwards from
the data that we have so that
uncertainty plus in plus velocity ended
up hitting our systems in a lot of
different places and hitting them kind
of hard so it's that bucket sloshing
well one of the places where it sloshed
over was a feedback loop between
unstable or fragile I have political
choice making systems at a combination
of bureaucracies that have been sitting
in a level of complacency for a long
time so they just weren't ready willing
or able to move out of complacency into
choice making political situations where
the amount of fighting between political
groups infighting was very very high so
they weren't willing to step back and
put their knives way to actually look at
the problem over there and and
technocratic operating models were the
way of making sense of the environment
was locked into particular ways of
thinking that weren't able to slow down
look around and say oh or was it
thinking other things need to change so
as a consequence when end up happening
was is that the whole system instead of
actually shifting to a way of responding
to the to the new environment actually
started to lurch in a very dysfunctional
coordinated way which is to say we ended
up like say the UK they lurched into a
direction of defaulting to political
divisiveness originally so let's focus
on a
the people inside whatever it's called
the Prime Minister's office originally
the original default was don't believe
the panic data focus on protecting the
economy that kind of it's thinking and
and then by the way a counter-reaction
inside the political structure which was
activated a whole bunch of different
constructs that said oh no no lurks back
in the other direction but now we
actually have to do a big shelter in
place and the reason why I'm bringing up
that that kind of choice making tissue
is that's the communications layer
between one domain and another domain so
what happened was is that we had a big
impact but instead of the effect of that
impact actually being mitigated and not
not increasing our choice making
structures actually increase the impact
of that on the financial system in the
economy so then we suddenly had
everybody going into shelter-in-place
which then turned off the flow of the
economy which created a big perturbation
at the level of Finance in the cotton as
we've got these cascade effects now
what's happening is as I'm watching it
we're seeing more and more cascade
effects percolating to all system
dynamics so a thing to track for example
is the spreading of the locust plague
entering into Africa so we now have a
gigantic out of control locust plague
which would have been a big problem
under any circumstances but now it's
happened in an environment where the
governments are having a very hard time
dealing with just the implications of
virus x economy you've got huge
populations of people who are being
forced to shelter in place while their
crops are being a devoured by a plague
of locusts when they come out of shelter
in place there's not going to be enough
food all right so that's a think about
what that implies in terms of other
implications around violence and
political structures similarly right now
we've got a situation where in inside
the United States here you get the
mental health crisis which I called as a
had already hit could read from my model
two weeks ago and it's now actually
beginning to percolate out so we're
beginning to see increases in suicide
rates under in vulnerable populations
which by the way is both elderly and
teenagers and as the fact of that begins
to be broadcast as the consciousness of
that shows up we know for historically
that ends up having a feedback loop and
you know we don't have infrastructure
for actually being able to deal with
people who are pole
out of all context like literally people
are pulled out of all of their support
structures into completely novel
environments with massive big scary
uncertainty hitting them and isolated
all right so we don't we actually have
no infrastructure Freight being able to
deal with that and so that's going to
have a feedback loop in one direction
another direction it's going to have is
that some people when they're faced with
that kind of a mental duress don't go in
the direction of depression or suicide
they go in the direction of exploding at
the antisocial behavior so another
metric that's starting to show up is
crime so crime rates are beginning to
build and crime rates are being build
both in terms of of n number so number
of crimes happen in particular urban
environments are going up but also in
intensity so property crimes are
beginning to move into like just
breaking into shops and stealing things
not quite rampant looting but the story
on the ground is that that's going up
and violent crimes are also beginning to
grow up like for example a big one to
track if you're looking at data is
something called home invasions so
people actually just going straight into
homes and holding everybody a gunpoint
and doing whatever it is they choose to
do at that moment which varies across
the violent crime metric now if you
notice the implications of that that has
cascade effects in terms of people's
willingness to sit to sit back and hope
that the the existing political
structure by a police forces and local
governance will take care of them at a
certain point they stopped believing in
that that means they move into an
environment of trying to figure out what
they're going to do it's unlikely that
then choices being made by people on the
ground in an uncoordinated driven larger
by fear of personal safety are going to
be very very good so so that the
situational assessment at the high level
is my highest confidence model which
again is only about a 40% is that in
somewhere between four and twelve weeks
it was actually pretty large window
given how much time how fast things are
changing we'll be moving into a
situation of very high liminality and
what I mean by that if you guys remember
I think in some other location sorry I
can't say that I know if it happened in
this group so the metaphor of thinking
about system dynamics that I was using
at some point was the notion of like a
heavy ball rolling in a groove
on like a glass table and the groove has
a deep holds the ball so the balls can
just follow the groove but as the groove
gets shallower the possibility of the
ball popping out of the groove room or
shifting out and coming back in just
goes up in a certain point if the groove
is completely flat the future state of
the ball now it's completely undecidable
and any energy will cause it to move
there's nothing that holds it in place
and so when I say a point of high
liminality what I mean is that the the
table becomes very flat and you can
think of that about that at almost a
year personal as an individual neither
what that means is something like your
your psychological inertia the degree to
which the choices that you make in the
future are determined by the context
that you've been in the past drops to
zero and that would be the maximum level
of flatness so that your future choice
is undetermined by identity structures
by psychological models by commitments
that you've made in the past and just
kind of opens up to anything could
happen now I doubt we'll look at that
point because in the abstract that's an
extremely high degree of liminality but
call it even 15% or 30% inertial has an
enormous number of future states and
it's kind of like you know if you
imagine all the planets orbiting the Sun
so you know how a gravity well works and
that holds the planets in order imagine
if something the Sun just disappeared
where do the planets go that's kind of
what my model says we're going to be
looking at in four to twelve weeks so
the question is where does it go and
that probably that the inquiry into that
question I think is the is the the most
relevant though by no means the most
salient inquiry for anybody who's trying
to actually respond to the real depth of
the crisis that we find ourselves in by
my lights there's effectively three
kinds of directions that it goes from
there two of which are bad broad-brush
one is vectoring in the direction of
atomization balkanization and
increasingly escalating conflict at
smaller scales so this is where
individuals and groups begin to lose
faith in this in the larger scale
constructs that they're part of and
begin to take take care of themselves at
the expense of anything that isn't on
the inside of their group and by the way
we're seeing this the EU right now and
so that's a case study
watch the EU Serbia exited the EU and
everything but named Hungary just exited
the EU and everything but name and
they're making choices now that are
oriented towards in-group vs. out-group
and by the way it's not always clear
exactly what the in-group is in
Hungary's case maybe it's hungry maybe
it's you know the the leadership it's
not quite clear the opposite direction
of that vector is the authoritarian
direction instead of two degree to which
existing governance structures instead
of breaking up solidify and increase
their capacity to impose top-down order
on the consumed components inside of
them that's the opposite and of course
these are mutually reinforcing meaning
that as the energy of balkanization
increases the pressure on top-down
structures to fight back with more
authoritarian control increases and
basically these two forces co-evolved
until one of the other takes over
alright so if the balkanization forces
win in a certain domain the top-down
system just breaks apart and then it
becomes obligate then everybody all the
energy has to move here because you can
no longer rely on top-down structures
and vice-versa so both of those are
natural forks
this kind of environment by the way just
do a survey on all on history everywhere
and you'll see that that tends to be how
the system operates the Third Way is
something that goes up the Third Way is
some capacity to utilize the possibility
space that has been latent in our
environment for the past probably twenty
or thirty years which is to say things
we could have done but have not actually
been done because existing structures
are in the way and to embody them to
make them to realize them to actualize
them relatively rapidly like we're
talking four to twelve weeks in a
fashion that creates a way for that
energy those planet had just got freed
from the gravitational tractor of the
Sun to re-enter into a new coherent
orbit the one that is neither
balkanization north or terian wow I
apologize that may have made not the
least bit of sense I may have just
thrown a whole bunch of big balls into
the pool but um I mean you get what you
paid for which is you didn't pay
anything so I kind of wanted you to keep
on going so let's let's turn it to Q&A
then if you have a question for Jordan
right in the chat box if you want me to
read on your behalf let you know I'm I'm
curious how you are personally
sense-making in this environment Jordan
like you you come with that number forty
percent how did you come to that number
and how do you see other entities since
making in this environment like the glue
Church or whatnot ah great so the first
answer has to do with yeah I'm gonna
actually just kind of run full speed
here so I'm gonna be saying things that
it may be difficult to track because I'm
using a whole lot of metaphors to
describe things that are not easy to to
describe so since making in the
contemporary environment involves taking
any in the past you may have seen me use
refer to something that's going to quote
my sense maker and what I mean by that
is a graph and a set a set of
relationships that that graph is
composed of two kinds of things one is
that the edge or the bond on that graph
and the second is the the
epistemological perspective
that is connected through that note so
we'll use Daniel Smackdown burger as an
example Daniels attached to my sense
maker that bond is strong I know Daniel
very well I know I trust his perspective
I trust his good faith I have a deep
understanding of his methodologies and
the where he will have blind spots and
where he'll have strong input so you can
think of that as a you know a nice big
thick pipe made out of carbon fiber a
lot of stuff can flow through that and I
know that he if I double-click on him he
has a really big graph there's a lot of
capacity on the other side of that node
that capacity in terms of both
relationality he's connected to a lot of
surface area in perspective that can
receive a lot of stuff and he has a very
rich and mature epistemology which
allows him to make sense of his
environment effectively right so I've
got a sense maker Daniel connected to me
which is my sense maker
that's it right iterate relationships
combined with sense-making capacities
that have high degrees of discernment
you know what you're dealing with so you
can actually convert that into
higher-quality sense and recursion right
so it's not one-way trip I'm connected
Daniel Daniel is connected to me right
I provide input to him from the totality
of my sense inator maker modulated
through me
he has a way of understanding what that
means in terms of the bias of what's
likely to be coming through me that's up
right that's good sense and what's bad
sense he puts that into his sense making
he percolates that back out through his
relationality into the set of
relationships that he's connected to and
you get a feedback back and forth but it
flows back and forth the whole system in
fact if you mapped the entire graph you
have a series of ripples that are going
out and going in at different levels at
different time sequences and this
creates a gigantic set of interference
patterns that pops into a single unified
field of a meta coherence of signal
doesn't make sense that's what it looks
like that's the answer the question now
what happens is that everybody cannot
help but be connected to that network in
some fashion you're gonna have a local
piece of it your local piece of the
relationships you're working with your
discernment on those relationships and
the capacity to move and its energy
through it but I guarantee you that I'm
connected to all of you by it's no
larger than four ends at this point
right now one end because I kind of know
all of you but certainly with three or
four ends in terms of actual
relationships they have real energy
flowing through them so the challenge is
to figure out how to actually upgrade
the fabric of that sense-making graph
find the relationship that you're
working with that have the highest
strongest bonds strengthen them in terms
of both the quality of trust and it was
just to say intimacy and vulnerability
of honesty and integrity flowing across
that bond and the discernment real
serious hey I noticed it in the past
you've said things that had a high
confidence but sometimes weren't
actually true I'm gonna mean I need to
call you on that and ask harder harder
questions so that the next time
something comes through you're doing a
better job at your end and by the way do
the same thing for me because we
actually got to really get better at
knowing what we know as opposed to
drawing inferences based upon
potentially epistemological eWEEK models
first-person experience is the highest
highest octane fuel so in many cases my
current sense maker has been upgraded by
probably a factor of 50 over the past
eight weeks
because a whole bunch of people are just
being willing to make risks and jump out
of context where they weren't willing to
share information where they are willing
to share information a lot of it is
first person or second person so they're
direct hands-on with things that are
actually happening so you can get much
higher octane conversations the other
one is that graphs are coming together
focusing on centers of gravity so let's
say for example mr. score like a very
prosaic technology like detection what
are the underlying technologies for
detecting the presence of virus well
ordinarily we actually do frankly a
terrible job at that because it's a very
complex question but what's happening
now is there's actually a center of
gravity on that what I mean is it's a
place where there is a domain what's the
answer to the notion of detection
there's a collection of people who could
read who know what the they're
talking about who are now gathering
together and they're increasingly
effectively sharing their information in
the fashion that has one agenda which is
to get to the truth now by the way that
ain't the whole story there's lots of
folks of multiple agendas that are
critics noise in the environment but
there's a fusion cell a gathering
together of different capacities and
different perspectives that are unifying
any way of making sense of this
environment and as that becomes more
sensible and if you connect to that node
you're no actually getting very high
quality reality on what's the
possibility in that domain or stand you
can propagate out to other environments
so that evolution of fusion cells in the
larger environment which gives higher
quality reality modeling is another big
piece of the story for me but the short
answer is I'm increasing my the quality
of my trust I'm adding a whole lot of
new people in chunks to the network and
a lot of people are doing this and
dropping previous agendas and just
focusing on what is real all right my
next question no one was actually oh I
apologize you want me to talk about the
blue church here or not yeah yeah that
would be good the blue church right now
is in the process of having two things
happen simultaneously and this is
actually this happens all this is how it
always happens
so the blue church has a a Cronos
structure which is to say a formal
hierarchy hierarchy based upon
bureaucratic commitments that is weak
bonds I it has a lot of inertia that
under ordinary circumstances people talk
to the guy who they're supposed to talk
to using the formal structures they're
supposed to use but they're weak because
they nobody actually gives a right
at the end of the day they don't you
don't really care you only care because
it's the thing you do doesn't get you
fire to get you out you know it's kind
of like covalent bonds instead of ionic
bond but it's got a lot of inertia so
what's happening right now is the blue
church is beginning to notice which is
to say the individual human beings who
actually make that up that the
structures that they are operating in
can't respond to the circumstance that's
happening and so vertical one and
vertical two clearly are getting blinds
that they're getting blindsided
constantly and they notice they can't
actually have the conversation they need
to have across so what's happening is
people in those environments are just
dropping the formality and just jumping
out and connecting and that's creating a
mesh network inside the blue church
transverse to existing hierarchies
transverse to existing processes by
individuals for basically saying it
I'm gonna actually try to figure out how
to do the right thing and begin to form
a cross across - I should say by the way
that's how it always happens that can we
actually look at these kinds of dynamics
and any structure he's about formal
vertical structures to jump into crisis
what always happens is the individual
nodes pop out of the formal structure
look around for anybody else who's
actually showing up as effective and
begin to reweave into some kind of a
mesh which then actually supports the
formal structure is now you've actually
got information is flown that's relevant
and the formal structure can actually be
directed towards more effective choices
so both of those moves are happening
simultaneously in the blue church
okay so uh no can you unmute yourself
and ask her to your question sure so
speaking you've already spoken a little
bit more the third option and somewhat
stern to as what turned out to be my
question so then I could be given the
four to twelve week time line what
challenge is what kinds of challenges do
you see that will be the ones that will
go here for people who are already kind
of working within this the paradigm of
this third option like one one thing
I've noticed was the masks for all and
how that kind of developed over the last
month and it changed what was sort of
the top-down approach and I'm wondering
if that gives us any hints and generally
what you've been seeing and what kind of
things to expect okay
the way it the way it looks to me is a
little bit like
doing like a compression wave at the
edge of salience that generates a lot of
energy and so for masks for all masks
the the fact of that there was a need
for and an absence of masks was a simple
simple thing it landed people like oh I
get that and my energy of desiring to
help or act could land on something that
was a was a real problem and a simple
problem in the sense that you could make
sense of it it wasn't hard to understand
what the a mask was and why it was
important so everybody tried to figure
out how to address it using their local
knowledge and capacity so you got this
huge spinning up of energy and that huge
spinning up of energy was like a
compression wave kind of pop people
where they were you started seeing a
creation of new bonds people getting up
and saying hey how do I help and they
grabbed their friends they found
connections that they didn't know they
had their network they began to kind of
Search Search Search Search Search
looking up figuring out changing
operating method up methodologies
alright now in many cases that actually
added a lot of chaos to the situation
you know you've got to start getting you
know people pulling masks out of
environments that would've been better
handled by a different path or peeing
each other so rapidly that people got
overwhelmed with with sort of requests
for help or opportunities to help etc
etcetera right so many kids is actually
created a lot of chaos the environment
but two good things came out one good
thing was it actually did in some sense
it's called almost instantaneously it
were creative like two weeks an enormous
amount of capacity from an unprecedent
number of different modalities showed up
to began to actually solve the problem
like so it's almost like capillary
action and we had one big artery plug
plugged into the tissue and suddenly ten
thousand capillaries just went and
every cell about connected and from my
perspective right now the masked problem
is more or less a solved problem which
is to say we aren't there yet but the
the momentum is now moving downhill and
in ten days or so most mask problems
will actually be solved okay that's one
good thing two more fundamental
was that the invariant of that action so
what the did we just do what
happened just then what did it look like
for us to suddenly jump up out of our
inertial frames into how do we actually
figure things out in this entirely new
modality that also upgraded like a
consciousness-raising event of oh wait
hold on if I behave in this way and
here's the things that didn't work and
here's the things that did work oh wait
 here comes another compression wave
with a different name you know you know
the next compression wave was called
ventilators but the next compression
wave was called something else right as
the systemic crisis as this sort of a
scary story I just unfurled rolls out
new events emerged they continued to put
pressure on where we are and create
energy to drive people to put their own
to take risks and to challenge
themselves to develop to grow into this
new possibility and and that's the thing
right it's like we're surfing the wave
we're trying to find where's the pocket
of the energy of that wave and just
stick with it as hard as possible
recognizing that the situation is
actually changing so by the time you've
actually done the concrete thing it's
worth as many people right now who
actually like to say makers who tried to
spin up ways of printing face shields a
lot of those efforts just were waste of
time it turns out that they couldn't
figure it out and or by the time they
came to a solution a better solution
already been created and that's okay
because the underlying meta structure of
how they went about responding now
becomes core infrastructure for them and
everyone else that's how you respond to
these kinds of crises in general so it's
the next set of sleep I tell you what
right now I'm telling you in two months
we're going to
to figure out how to feed a
billion people we don't have a clue how
to do that so getting ahead of the curve
and thinking okay how do we take the
learnings we just learned on how to
produce a bunch of masks how do we apply
that globally to figuring out how to get
food into places that right now we don't
even have high-quality connections with
across socio technological dynamics
where maybe we even have political and
ambitions about how we're gonna go about
doing existing NGOs are going to have
some degree of efficacy but they're not
gonna be able to solve the problem so
that's an example of something which is
a event that is coming that if we can
start looking at how we solving problems
now as the events happen now it's like
that wave is passing through our social
environment every time it passes through
it leads behind it for those who are
paying the closest attention more
structure of the new form and that's the
that that meeting of the new challenges
with new possibilities actualized as the
wave of energy actually passes through
is the key element that's that that's
the key the the biggest possibility and
challenge all right um Nicholas you had
a question yeah hi Jordan so when so you
were talking about the first vector
atomization and then and then the second
one you know it's more governance and
then the Third Way which is the one we
all hope for but then you talked about
sense making and and getting to truth
the relationship right and we're not the
only people doing that right that
they're doing that there as well in
these two vectors so once they get a
better sense of the truth couldn't they
abuse it to to go into you know their
their directions and is there a way of I
guess it's like it's not inevitable that
we're gonna go our Third Way right so
how sorry I'm sorry if I gave that the
impression I would say that's a that's a
really lucky chance if it pulls out that
way it's exactly the opposite of that
yeah it's definitely not inevitable I
would say right now the likelihood of
that is about 0.1% exactly so I guess my
question is okay what what can we do now
to really get that going
right I mean it's it's like an emergency
almost so I guess I wanted more concrete
advice I was just on a call with with
Jim talking about this right and and and
then my mind goes on okay what is the
practicality in all this like what can
we actually do because yeah that's my
question yeah there's that a shared
question you cannot if it's thumbs up
because it's the it's it's a it's a it's
hard question so let's see so when I was
just talking about I was I was trying to
describe the answer to your question so
if you kind of rewind back a little bit
and listen to what I said that's the
answer so it's something like ah so
think about trying to like imagine it
like when those video games where
there's a bunch like Mario we're jumping
through a landscape now Trane's the
transition this to the notion of like
n-dimensional Park or through mystery
space we don't know how to solve the
problem what we do know is that every
once in a while some platform pops up
some structure pops up that has an
energy against it what you can actually
pop you can leap to it and then you can
figure out a leap to the next piece so
the actualization of the solution to the
problem of how to actually solve n95
masks has nothing to do with in 95 maths
right
it's actually an abstract concrete
example of how we actually solve mystery
problems in new modality space so okay
look at it
get in it get drive into a directive so
you can an embodied experience what the
reality looks like it's okay reckless
abandon just jump into it but recognize
that's not the thing you're doing what
you're actually doing is learning how
that general pace operates all right
what's the thing that shows up things
that show up are how do you support a
higher quality of sense making
what do connections look like what do
you choose what is choice making look
like in this kind of a context I'm
saying that in general right in all
cases that kind of thing is going to
show up next wave that comes through
dive the into it but now dive into
it with more structure not just you but
maybe a week what is your local node
start to be have capacity to actually
respond can you have better better sense
making of the larger context of the
bigger story where's your local node
actually relevant what kind of unique
capacities do you have that you're
holding the piece that you personally
you as a group can
actually hold and how do you begin to
egoless Li partition the story of the at
that environment so that people are more
and more effectively holding because
they want to hold one of the real
challenges that people who feel the
third weight is a good idea have is
generally speaking they've been holding
way too much right everybody who's kind
of a change maker has been dealing more
or less with no allies and no support so
they have like one piece of the story
that they actually are supposed to be
dealing with but they've been dealing
with 80% of the story because you kind
of have to my one little widget doesn't
 work if somebody else isn't
building the whole car so I'm out there
trying to build a coal car in a really
shitty wet and you've got a tire
connected to a really crappy trend
transmission well our challenge right
house and say okay you're the tire guy
I'm the transmission guy where's the
steering wheel guy let's find these
people and each of us drop all the stuff
that you're working on that eight years
and figure out how to get better and
better and better at actually
fine-tuning the piece that you're
supposed to be holding and then finding
the people who are holding the other
pieces until that comes into a coherent
organized hold that suddenly BAM
instantaneously out of magic almost we
actually have a car I should tell you by
the way that's gonna be exponential it
will look really weird and confusing and
ineffective as its beginning to go out
so leaping through case studies leaping
through things that are practical on the
ground and trying to solve concrete
actual problems that are material like
n95 and ventilators and helping old
people and helping teenagers and you
know whatever food whatever happens to
be like real concrete problems on the
ground is great because it keeps your
morale up and it keeps your your razor
sharp and you can't you can't engage in
a sort of collective masturbatory circle
indirect of trying to pretend like
you're gonna change the world by waving
your hands going hard to talk a big talk
you're focused on the hard core thing
that's real if it doesn't work it didn't
work
teaches you how to actually do that
while in the meantime the meta problems
learning how to do that collectively
begins to become embodied more and more
people get clarity on oh I used to
be carrying 15 balls I got a drop nine
of those right now I can't even the
number of inbound enquiries that are
coming to me through those 15 I can't
even handle it so hopefully you guys
here's somebody's gonna be better for
that just route them away from me right
under somebody who's better and get
really good who's better and then okay
here's the three that I'm holding right
and then I die I take responsibility for
making sure that everything that comes
in there is high
quality we can't have any more
half-assed can have any more like people
who are and this be I'm gonna be very
sort of mean-spirited there's a class of
people up here at the top who are the
folks who are the perceive this subtle
okay the sensitive individuals they've
been talking about this stuff for a long
time they are not the people right now
who are dispositional e or cognitively
empowered to deal with problems at this
level just that's not their job right
there they're the Mystics and the
artists who've been absorbing this step
for a long time
we need to interface with them and pull
out the deepest most concrete nuggets of
absolute wisdom they're like compressed
diamond at the middle of the ball a cart
of coal pull that out and I began to
move that into levels of of
actualization so this is an honoring of
those who came before us who brought the
words of wisdom but also recognition the
challenge now is to actually in the act
of honoring the honoring is a crucible
that melts away that which is in fact
not real in the story and pulls out the
actual most compressed piece of
fundamental wisdom and must-haves and
pull that into this constellation is
trying to assemble itself
Tyrael you have a question for Jordan
on mute yeah I'm not sure which which
one you're referring to because is to
area I'm actually Katie but and it was
one huh
it's yeah so one thing that's been kind
of interesting to me to observe over the
past few weeks or at least I feel like
I'm perceiving something it's one
tendency of people's response to this
coronavirus crisis and the economic
crisis that's related to it it seems
like reactions and responses tend to be
both there's a trend is falling along
ideological lines and like making
divisions more divided since taking any
kind of action like quarantine or not
quarantine and going with government
recommendations or not going that
government recommendations are now
concrete things rather than just kind of
like abstract things that you're talking
about like where you fall on the
political spectrum so I'm seeing that
play out but then on the other hand I'm
seeing more people actually unite with
those in their communities who might not
be politically or tribally or I think
the determinant you use as blue church
red church align I was wondering if you
see those two things happening like more
stratification but also more unification
and how you see them interacting with
one another if you're picking up on this
oh absolutely yeah absolutely so let me
see over backwards from the from the
right hand side of that so the the the
natural state of humans is in fact to
bring those different dispositions and
perspectives in two holes
that's our strongest location I tribes
natural like really old-fashioned Stone
Age tribes intrinsically must have all
of those dispositions and therefore all
of those perspectives as part of the
tribe that's how we were selected for us
why those dispositions exist
differentially in in human populations
so the integration of groups of
fragmented perspectives and dispositions
into new holes is is almost like what
happens when we get rid of the
artificial constraints we naturally
begin to Rico here in that fashion
because that's our more natural state
and by the way it's the way that we're
actually able to achieve consciousness
as a group because that gives us the the
net-net like we are obligate tribal we
just have to get that as individuals we
aren't real beings like our reality as
humans is in groups that are coherent
that's where we actually begin to feel
the most fully real because it's
actually the reality of it and a lot of
a lot of junk starts to drop away when
you actually begin to drop back now into
into real relationship and right
relationship with other people and I've
got to mix it so he has talked to
somebody yesterday about some of the
proposals that I'm putting out there and
one of the things she said is this feels
very scary to me as an introvert I said
well that makes sense because because in
your mind you think about it as you as
an introvert but what should happen is
you should find yourself in this context
having extroverts who have relationality
with you inviting you into this you
don't have to become an extrovert to
play this game extroverts will play the
extrovert game and they will invite the
introverts and to play the introvert
piece and suddenly everybody's holding
the piece and they're supposed to hold
at that level right so you've got you
know 50 different different dimensions
of individuals tendencies of
psychological and by experiential
tendencies and the integration of that
so that's the right-hand side now let's
look at the left-hand side because I
think it's actually ended up really
really interesting confusing as to YV
the in-group out-group boundaries behave
the way that they did as this thing
moves through cultural and psychological
space and it's actually because this
event is worth saw g''l to the
constructs that we've developed I'll
give a very concrete example as I
watched it very closely with regard to
red red insurgency so more or less team
red in in the u.s. I don't know about
this elsewhere is
as a result of a long
[Music]
official polarization at the physical
level like literally people moving
physically apart and at the virtual
about what conversations become more and
more filter bubbles that team blue it's
well by the way just talk about team red
because I watch them closely
sorting along dispositional lines right
so to use the flag of just ordinary
psychology like people who have a
personality trait oriented more in the
direction of state conscientiousness
tend to radically disproportionately
align themselves with an increasingly
polarized conservative mindset well this
particular event okay so that's one two
is they then formed in-group out-group
tribalism that began to define things
that were out group to them well in this
particular event we had this weird thing
where a story
Invader like disgusting external invader
violating our integrity of our borders a
virus sickness illness coming in which
pegs the pegs the chart right for team
Reds underlying fundamental disposition
at a typological level like that's as
high on the on the threat vector as you
can possibly get right was being
signaled by the mainstream media whose
they've already identified as being
obligate out-group that a hard
psychological thing to integrate right
if I listen to these guys my everything
I've been listed been been
psychologically preparing myself well
for the past 20 years is every signal
coming out of these guys must be false
and this signal is the highest gain
signal for me to actually believe is
true I'm in the middle of a paradox
alright so the only way out of that
paradox since I had to drop all of this
or to invent an illusionary narrative
right here allows me to maintain my it's
pre-existing condition I think that
happened across a lot of different
psychological domains I think it's
actually driving the law of the reasons
why we're seeing stuff happen so it ends
up happening is that's like a giant plow
tearing through the soil of our of our
pre-existing psychological and
disposition own political commitments
and as the reality of the event hits
you're seeing two movements one movement
is an increasing like delusional
hysteria increasingly manic and a
slaughtering and breaking down in that
fabric and a Rico hearin Civ people into
whatever they wherever they land which
if it's even vaguely healthy looks like
new wholeness and because that's real
that's so that's like a real natural
place if you get the artificiality
breaking apart and it's just super
powerful and astounding in this invent
is the degree to which people have been
forced out of their comfortable context
you just popped into an absolutely
bizarre of circumstance where they're
not going to work for good or for bad
right maybe you're happy not going to
work because you got enough savings to
actually call it a weird-ass vacation
and maybe it's real bad you don't have
any savings and things get scary but if
you're you know you're sitting with your
parents and your kids and you're online
all the time and everything is going
around is mysterious there's like a
really crazy like you can't it's hard to
fit your existing delusional narrative
into this environment so it makes that
delusional in there
the shear forces that are powerful and
so that's that bi-directional movement
the other area you want to piggyback on
that sure so basically my question was
like I guess we're related to this idea
of like why wholeness is more real than
fragmentation like I was listening to
your third scenario it seems pretty
appealing good like re reconvene into
some kind of good configuration and for
12 weeks that unlocks all this latent
potential but I'm wondering whether
maybe like the existing systems we have
are so like calcified that the potential
latent potential so deeply locked in
that maybe a longer period of like
destruction or creative destruction is
necessary like basically could path one
eventually lead to path 3 ah
so when I say that wholeness is more
real I don't necessarily mean it's more
has more power in the contemporary
environment I mean that it's more it has
a deeper basis and therefore is more
invariant other different conditions so
that all things being equal it's where
things would go but as you say all
things ain't equal
so now the question is it's almost like
I've got a river and the rivers got a
current is going in one direction and
that's the only thing going on my little
recall a cooler of beer is gonna go in
that direction but at the same time I've
got you know a guy with a motorboat
who's got a rope tied around my cooler
and he's pulling at the opposite
direction there we go
that's a pretty good model for the
reality that we're in so what I would
say is that in point of fact the
feedback loop between 1 & 2 that tension
and the increasing intensity of that
tension is actually what I'm describing
is giving rise to the space for path 3
that's what's going on right now the
conversation is just having with area
one was was that right you've got a
breaking up of the motorboats capacity
because shits just like weirder than it
thought or sherry oh I'm sorry you're
not even area but in my universe you are
now
but there's a point all right this is
those this there's a lacunae there's a
point at which and you throw the ball
into the air and as it's going up it
slows down slows down slows down then it
hits a singular point at the very top
where suddenly a sort of no force of no
velocity and then it comes back down
that's where you want to catch it that's
where the possibility space of shifting
things a different location or at its
maximum but where other gravitational
forces haven't already started pulling
it I don't if you've ever seen like
those trapeze artists where they swing
really hard and they swing back and
forth and they let go and then they grab
the person at the top well I don't know
if you don't understand the physics of
that but there's a very specific point
where they can grab where the human the
strength of the human arm can actually
hold if you grab them too early their
velocity is to higher they're gonna pop
right out we've grabbed them too late
gravity's now accelerated them they're
gonna pop right out there's a spot right
up in the middle or the air everything's
kind of up in the air and the ability
for hands to grab each other and hold
and bind it's strong enough to actually
hold the whole thing together that's the
window you're targeting all right so
what I'm seeing is it's gonna look like
this existing inertia is gonna break
down it's gonna break down it's gonna
break down these differential forces are
gonna break it apart a window will open
in that window the possibility of the
third attractor is at its maximum if the
photo tractor just now to cohere with
enough integrity and enough velocity
then other forces will begin to have
more pull and a trip attractor one and
two will have the highest likelihood
probability would begin to move more and
more away from three and towards one and
two
uh-huh so this might be the last
question
um Charles can you unmute yourself and
Astro and your question hey Jordan
thanks for the time people in this world
understand your analysis but when I try
to communicate this to other people who
aren't in this world
it sounds like I'm speaking completely
different language how do you bridge
that communication gap well you know
what I tell you what you can imagine my
exertion stance hold on one second I'm
just copying pasting something so I
don't lose it all right so I've actually
been practicing this for a long time and
you try to see the kind of crazy-ass
word to use to come out of Daniels mouth
before we worked on this thing
principles and values why what how in
that order
if you speak to speak to wise and get
why is really landing you've got most of
the problem solved
if people are oriented around the
meaningfulness of something then you
work with the direction of values
principles and values and this is about
what's now if you're speaking to
somebody who's a former Vietnam veteran
you need to kind of work from there in
tier II or 'ti what are the what's that
resonate with them deeply where are the
values that have been the driving force
and their being in the world since the
day they were born and communicate this
in the language that connects with that
become their own sense making vehicle
now you're not trying to explain your
and you don't want to try even vaguely
to cause their epistemology to look like
your epistemology because that there's a
waste of time what you want to do is to
figure out how to actually get out of
the fine grain structure epistemology
and get to the coarse grain structure of
values and principles so are we aligned
on these can we agree that
corruption is rampant and bad
yep okay good that's we're on the same
page now now the only question is
exactly how do we begin to deal with it
and if I jump too fast to the end state
my solution to that is either gonna be
dealing with stuff they don't care about
cuz I'm focusing on things that aren't
their world or my solutions could not
make any sense it's kind of husband pull
backs let's take it step by step you
know what our area is so if I'm talking
to a Vietnam vet I'm gonna talk about
that for Navy admiral who got fired for
doing the right thing I don't even know
about that story but enraged a whole
bunch of people because it's when they
make sense in the world you can use
examples of what's going on in the real
world I posted something from a doctor a
couple days ago
k-dog I think his Tim hey he talks about
himself it's a medical doctor I'm he
goes livid he was livid because the
reality that he knows is the case which
is that his medical system is run by a
bunch of who have no idea
about how medicine ought to be operated
to control things out of situations of
complete incongruity are actually now
for real putting doctors at risk a
doctor was fired for complaining that
there was inadequate PPD in their
Hospital and so he was fired a doctor
right now in the middle of a crisis
was fired for saying that that hospital
needed more PP e
now is it was it Zeta has a Dalek a dog
Z dog MD was pissed and when he said was
this he said look my tribe which is a
tribe of healers we are going to be
focused on solving this crisis all right
we're gonna put ourselves in harm's way
and we're gonna try to help people but
when this thing is over we're gonna burn
this down if you just
listen to the language he uses and it's
things he focused on an abstract out the
detail because I'm not doctor I don't
come from his world I don't know exactly
what his concerns are when I listen to
the things he's talking about
I can transpose the things I understand
and say yep I know exactly you're
talking about
great everybody has the same point of
view now when I would say at a very high
level is the primary shape of the
problem we're dealing with it's three
things one we got a system that Orient's
people towards making bad choices all
right so we have to feel it deal with
that at a systemic level how do we
liberate people to make choices how do
we put people in a corner where they
have to actually make choices for the
first time in quite a while
the virus is helping us on that front
and there's more things we can put in
place to do it - the classic distinction
right more or less we are struggling
with the fact that there's a small
number of malevolent men and a very
large number of weak men all right fair
enough
we need to put weak men into a context
where they actually have to be forced to
use their weakness to make a choices
that are good choices and we're gonna
have to find it exactly this malevolent
men arm we've got to get him out of
equation so something on the lines of a
message coming through from the top and
from the bottom the justice will be
returned and then we're coming no matter
what happens that's a big part of this
third attractor and there's a strength
and an energy to it you got to get the
weak men realizing it's the right choice
right now is to stop making passive
choices that are hurting everybody and
to either let go and let other people
take over or begin to actually recover
their courage and do the right thing and
you got to put on notice that the
malevolent men the days of malevolence
are over all right we're all gonna
figure out how to solve this problem
right now come hell or high water we're
gonna figure it out together but when
it's done we're gonna burn this
 to the ground and we were
going to restore justice on a global
basis and it can be done by the way the
third attractor by no question can do
that so it's just a matter
our teeth to the bit and making sure we
make that happen
I feel the intensity flowing through my
body right now so we'll end here I'll
make some closing announcements in a
moment Jordan do you have any closing
thoughts no I'm all worked up too so I
think we'll probably leave it there cool
yeah and I don't know where this stoah
project is going but I feel like
tremendously motivated to experiment
with different forms of relationality
quickly and you know hopefully
emancipate the Baymont so we'll see
where this goes
so for next session Daniel uh you're
here we're having a metagame mastermind
session at 6:30 Eastern time do you want
to unmute yourself and just tell us what
that's about
yeah so tonight's session if it's
successful actually might be quite
complimentary to a lot of what Jordan
talked about today we're going to
explore how the formation of digital
gangs can help people maintain their
sovereignty and respond to the meta
crisis and this is really for people who
are looking to connect with others and
participate so I really encourage you to
join tonight thanks Daniel and you can
RSVP on the website the stove's CA check
out the mailing list for daily updates
and i'm viewing the stoah as a gift for
all of us to freely use and this time of
need you're inspired to give a gift to
the stoah just go to the website and
check out the gift economy for more
information all right Thank You Jordan
and thanks everyone for the excellent
questions today
you