[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
hey folks welcome back you are now in
the Q and a stream where we are going to
attempt to answer all of the questions
that you all have submitted during the
livestream portion they're awful lot
though there are a lot we will do our
best try to get through all right so
should we start at the top start at the
top okay
is it raisins yeah Glasgow okay
so evening guys hope you're well how do
you think society and politics will
change following the pandemics decline
let me just say I hope that this will
change us absolutely radically and my
fondest hope would be that this wakes us
up to all sorts of things and that as
bad as this was it will actually leave
us ahead in the end because we've had a
trial run at something that could have
been far worse and unfolded far faster
so anyway there's no guarantee that
things will not get vastly worse as a
result of political bumbling and the
unexpected but nonetheless it is
possible we come out of this ahead
because we will have learned a valuable
lesson yeah we can hope we sort of see
governments across the world reverting
to the mean you know Hungary's going
authoritarian for instance so that is
not hopeful but we can we can hope that
it will do the opposite what is
necessary what is necessary to test for
viruses we're on the bottle can we
body can be sample but materials
equipment etc what innovations in
testing are possible
can you DIY it we spoke to tests a bit
in our first live stream it's not our
wheelhouse all the particulars and there
are a variety of different types of
tests and as far as I know there's no
possibility of DIY and the creation of
tests I'd only we could DIY the creation
of tests the antibody tests could
conceivably be distributed and you could
do it at home in fact our phone very
much so did blood type testing last
night all four of us I thought I knew my
blood type I turned out to be right
based on a test I'd done many years ago
this was a de facto paternity test for
our children as well I wasn't worried
were you worried I was okay good so
anyway yes those kinds of tests could be
distributed and that would tell you if
you had been exposed at a high level
such that you had circulating antibodies
it wouldn't tell you whether you had it
or not that's so it's partially yes
partially no undo it yourself so there's
a question you know where and body can
we sample certainly saliva probably
blood probably fecal and I mean those
are the obvious easy choices okay do you
think secretor status could be why some
people are asymptomatic yeah this is a
tough question I think it's conceivable
secretor status as I understand it it's
not something that we know a lot about
but it it is whether or not you
basically secrete the antigens of your
blood type into bodily fluids like
saliva and blood so it's not it's not
the same as are you a a B or a B what
you say you have those antigens versus
are you oh do you would not have any of
them but do you actually secrete them
into your bodily fluids yeah and so it's
possible that these things could
molecular ly gum up the works of corona
virus and leave your tissues more intact
that's pure speculation it does mirror
what some antibodies do which basically
take things like viral particles and
they glue them together so that they can
be consumed by something like a
macrophage and then
rendered harmless so I don't know it's
conceivable but we don't know enough
about it to say mm-hmm let's say a
request to invite a discussion with MSO
an Austrian economist with regard to
game B Robert Murphy any thoughts on the
great wim HOF another yogi type
breathing to boost immunity let's speak
a little bit to this phrase boost
immunity yeah boost immunity is one of
these phrases that gets tossed about
that has very little meaning the immune
system is an amazing piece of non
engineering as it were and it functions
it has some general components like the
macrophages that I just described it to
go around basically collecting garbage
including pathogens and it has a bunch
of what's called specific immunity the
circulating humoral immunity which has
to be targeted at the very signature of
the the pathogen in question there's
almost no meaning to boost immunity with
respect to the second now it may be that
you can compromise immunity by not
having enough sleep or being dehydrator
or something like this causing the whole
system to falter but boosting immunity
beyond a healthy status is very often a
phrase that is used without much meaning
to it it's often a kind of quackery all
right you know if your if your if your
system could simply be functioning
better why isn't it well therefore you
know if it if it's not because either a
cost to the thing that you've now just
innovated that you don't know about or
you haven't actually innovated anything
yes I would say if you're going to
engage in Yogi type breathing that's
unlikely to hurt you unless you do it
next to somebody who is coughing out
kovat 19 so maybe if you're gonna try
yogi type breathing it's unlikely to
hurt you but do it with proper distance
from other human beings yes very good
to what extent you think Dawkins concept
for the extended phenotype the concept
for which he is apparently most proud
will apply to the evolution of society
and politics following code 19's decline
well I'm more or less think that it
always applies to the way societies
evolve in every regard in every regard
and the virus itself is part of our
extended phenotype now
right and our response to it is the
diseases all of them are yeah it is
Dawkins himself when I met with him two
October's ago was skeptical of the
utility of extended phenotype applied to
cultural evolution in humans at a large
scale but hopefully he'll come around on
that all right are we big Katy Perry
fans or Dark Horse comic fans I became
aware of Dark Horse Comics
after I initiated the podcast and many
people forwarded their logo which has
some reminiscence of the logo that I put
together the extent of your familiarity
that's the extent of my failure
familiarity and I I wouldn't recognize
Katy Perry on the street so I think that
tells you how much of a fan yes I was
also made aware I knew who Katy Perry
was but somebody alerted me that he has
a very popular song called Dark Horse so
anyway no we're not fans you know we're
we're more rusty Rockets fans let's put
it that way okay I truly value these
talks thank you how are so many
recovering from kovat 19 the question
seems to imply an extraordinarily high
level of virulence which there are a
number of ways to define virulence but
this has a very high transmission right
and it is deadly and it leaves it leaves
its imprint on many of those who have
survived but the fact that it has
something something like it's gonna end
up being something between 0.5% half a
percent and 2 percent probably case
fatality rate probably closer to the 0.5
it's much much different from the boy I
want to say 50 to 60 percent fatality
rate of something like a bola and I'm a
member may be wrong but it's not wrong
by an order of magnitude so how are so
many people surviving this isn't the
disease
that kills the majority of people who
get it that's not that's not the type of
pathogen it is
yes that's both a true answer and
absolutely not explanatory in terms of
what the mechanism mechanism of action
is for instance I would say the question
is a little bit on its head that a human
being is a miraculous example of a self
repair architecture that goes on for
8090 a hundred years if it's in good
circumstances and that this is just
another case where something doesn't so
compromised most of the people who get
it that they can't repair anyway you
know a story for another day
see just ordered bandanas we should
start naming people so just order Bend
ends that's Derek his inner cowboy is
calling congratulations
let me know when you learn to yodel okay
JP Peters thank you for doing these
you're very welcome
Jonathan storm can you explain patos
paradox and give your thoughts on the
idea this is a big topic paedos paradox
is the observation that although cell
size is similar between organisms and
therefore one would expect vastly more
cancer in bigger animals because they
have more cells that in fact big animals
have much less cancer than you would
expect it is a fascinating observation
when I've thought a lot about I think
the answer comes down to telomeres I
will have to go through that explanation
another time but in essence you have
another parameter that is scaling which
is the tolerance for what I've called
proto tumors so anyway we will return to
that another time Jonathan okay what are
some of the most common effects of
stress on human physiology and are there
any cool bio hacks that you can
recommend to help people fortify
themselves eg ie again wim HOF breathing
but the hashtag make politics boring
again yeah thank you for that militant
moderate so you know the the common
effects of stress are the usual things
that we've said here and in our first
live stream insufficient sleep
insufficient hydration insufficient
nutrients in the form of whole good for
food and then there are some things
around timing which 20 years ago no one
was really thinking about so something
like intermittent fasting appears to
actually be very effective for many
people with regard to reducing
physiological stress at the dietary
level a few things that have been used
in various parts of the world for many
years but are now gaining traction in
the West things like turmeric seem to
have some value potentially at the
dietary level being outside being
outside certainly I would say story from
my own life the cost that I was paying
in terms of health and in terms of
susceptibility to in particular
respiratory viruses for ingesting wheat
which I was very allergic to and did not
know the cost was incredibly high and
basically it manifest as body-wide
inflammation that was affecting every
system badly in order to discover that I
had this allergy I had to go to extreme
lengths to eliminate wheat from my diet
completely 98% is not nearly good enough
you have to really be careful and over a
long period of time to see these things
and I do think it points to the need for
all of us to figure out if there's
something that's common in our diet that
we are reacting to badly and just
identify it so you can eliminate it but
just to just pinpoint this thing you
said again an elimination diet needs to
be an absolute elimination diet to work
or else not only don't you have the data
you think you do well it's that you
don't have the data that you think you
do if you just did a little bit of
whatever it is you're eliminating from
your diet and you will be confused into
thinking that therefore you now know
that that item whether it's wheat or
peanuts or chocolate or eggs or whatever
it is you will be confusing to thinking
that it's not a problem if you just
reduced the amount that you were eating
so that's a bit bit far afield from the
original question but and again you know
the wim HOF breathing we've both been
exposed to it it seems like it's
potentially interesting don't know much
about it
alright Chris asked how oh this is a
hard one to parse jumping forward how
much difference to within this question
how much difference can I make by
socially distancing and staying at home
when possible if a large portion of
people aren't doing the same well you
can certainly have a big effect on your
own life you could potentially prevent
yourself from contracting it even if
other people are spreading it around but
but that goes sort of both ways if
you're if you aren't already positive if
you haven't already been it exposed you
substantially reduce the chances they
will that you will get exposed and if
you have been exposed you are now
protecting the entire population that
you're not exposing by going out so
whether or not you know your status
staying home even if other people are
not if you turn out to be negative
you're protecting yourself and if you're
trying to be positive you're protecting
others but that will be the case
regardless of whether or not the rest of
the population is staying in or not even
if you're negative you're protecting
others you're protecting everybody who
would be downstream of you if you
contracted it and so so if you're not
negative now but you become positive or
if you are negative now but you become
positive when you're out then be a bunch
of people down the stream of you some of
whom will die so you're probably saving
lives this is a place where a game
theory comes in really handy though
because yes you you are in a position to
do a tremendous amount of good even by
just isolating yourself because anybody
who would be downstream if you won't
then get it at least from you and
therefore won't die as a result of your
behavior but the cost of isolating goes
to you and the benefit goes to all of
these people you'll never know and so
the game theory does not support this
behavior even though it's the right
thing to do so do the right thing
ignore the game theory would you be
concerned about taking a hastily
developed and tested vaccine yes under
these circumstances I would be less
hesitant than under circumstances where
so for instance you know we're all our
entire family is vaccinated against
yellow fever which most viewers probably
aren't because you haven't had reason to
be vaccinated against it if if the CDC
came out with a new vaccination for
yellow fever and said
well this is 2% more effective but we
just developed it there's no way that if
our titers were low and we needed a new
yellow fever vaccination that I would up
for us or our children to get the new
one all right so this is this is a
different situation than for a disease
that we've already long had a
vaccination a back seen for or where it
exists only in certain parts of the
world and you can protect yourself
simply by not going to those places for
the moment so if I would also want to
say in answer to Arthur's question here
that this is a place where I would
really want the testing because as we
described in our first live stream
there's a strong possibility that some
or all of the people in our nuclear
family had kovat 19 back before it was
understood that it was in the US in any
significant way and if we have had it we
may effectively already be immune or
close to immune to it in which case I
would definitely not want to take the
risk of a novel vaccine whereas if we
haven't had it I would be much more
inclined you know I would like to know
something about how risky it is thought
to be but I know full well that without
following people for a very long
extended period of time after such a
thing you can't know with any certainty
that what you're dealing with is safe
I'm dealing with a calculated risk
there's also the question of what how
much does taking the vaccine lower your
risk of contracting the disease
so if acts seen is never 100% protection
and for instance I think it's the
cholera vaccine which Bret and I have
lived and worked in places with all the
tropical diseases you can think of and
have considered all of the vaccines and
we certainly got yellow fever when we
needed it and right the others never got
cholera vaccine in part because cholera
affects you if you do not have access to
fresh water and we were always in places
where we would be able to get fresh
water but more to the point the cholera
vaccine has an efficacy that is so much
less than 50% that the risks of the
vaccine which there are always risks to
any drug that you will take seemed far
higher than the benefits of taking the
vaccine so built into the answer to the
question about how concerned you would
be about taking a hastily developed and
tested vaccine is
what are the people who hastily
developed it I think its efficacy is all
right thoughts on oh so this is Nate
asks thoughts on creating a tax filter
disaster savings fund like the HSA or
IRA to encourage companies and
individuals to create nest eggs for
these types of situations and mitigate
the need of bailouts borrowed against
the future these are good ideas what I
would say is we need some system and I
can't see how it does not emerge from
either an incentive that is built by a
large governmental structure that is not
sensitive to the lower level game theory
or deployed by government itself so
these ideas may be good ones what I
would like to see is the most effective
ones at the least cost and really what
we need is very smart people who are
broad minded to engage the question of
what is the best way to protect against
plausible crises you know and and how
would it be constructed to to resist
captures for example and the game theory
enters again - so the wording here is
creating a tax sheltered disaster saving
fund to encourage companies and
individuals to mitigate the need for
bailouts well if companies have been
encouraged to create these things but
bailouts may still be coming because the
government tends to do bailouts then
those companies that that contributed to
such a thing may actually end up failing
because of their good intentions so
there need there needs to be some way to
make sure that those people who actually
would those those corporations and those
individuals who actually did save for
the future did not take a hit because
they were saving for the future yep
that's that's a really important point
the cost of the system has to go to
those who put us at the greatest risk
not those who do the most to avoid that
risk okay Anthony asks can virus testing
be done DIY what is required we've
answered this probably the the test
can't be generated DIY but they could be
potentially administered DIY
to the extent that's possible it would
be great to see it yeah Matt asks needs
more data regarding the viability of a
bandana and then Jason in the very next
question says a 2010 study and applied
biosafety suggest 11 percent
effectiveness for bandanas versus ninety
percent for n95 and 33 percent for
surgical masks I did look at this paper
and at first I was thrown by that low
number I am not at all convinced that
the methodology successfully models
viral transmission and what I would
really like to see if I want to know
what effectiveness is I want to know the
definition of effectiveness
if definition of effectiveness had to do
with aerosolized saline solutions it's
salt water salt water being broadcast by
a nebulizer that got through these
things that is not at all the same as
detecting whether or not a viral
particle would be likely to make it
viable into the lung or nose of a person
who had encountered a coughs oh my
suspicion is that bandanas are far more
effective I would very much as you Jason
would like to see the bandana tested and
in fact in our either first or second
live stream I mentioned that I was
planning to run a small-scale test of
the bandana before kovat 19 was ever a
thing I wanted to see how it was gonna
affect cold and flu and anyway I'm still
still hoping to see that data but I do
think the methodology tests something
but it is not clear to me that it tests
the correct parameter to predict in fact
the test was generated in part to model
dust storm resistance if I'm remembering
the paper correctly so what I would say
is my test in which I took the bandana
and I put it over a camera lens and came
up with greater than 99% effectiveness
at intercepting photons says one thing
this test says something else but the
gold standard is a test in which people
wear these things and we see whether or
not
they have a reduced likelihood of
contracting colds and flu viruses aren't
the same as photons but they're also not
the same as salt water and I will say we
didn't end up talking about today but
there's a 20-17 paper the the blurb from
which is basically that if you salt your
masks that work a lot better than if you
don't salt your masks now it's not quite
that simple and these these researchers
were taking apart I believe it was n95
masks and immersing the middle layer in
salt water and then putting them back
together and finding that they became
effectively an 100 masks almost and the
idea there is excuse me that upon
exposure to a virus that is contained in
a water droplet the salt water basically
that the salt in the mask crystallizes
ardi crystallizes around the virus
surrounds it and renders it completely
useless
so it basically traps even more
effectively to a large degree the viral
particles then then an unsalted mask
does now I have no idea if you could
salt your bandana and have the same
effect you would at least chap your face
for sure if you did so right or yeah any
of the masks this is the sort of mask as
well right this mask which was made by
your mom yeah this mask which was which
was made by my mom right so that's a
washable cloth mask so I feel certain
that actually soaking in insults would
have the same effect because I think it
probably would but you would end up with
with skin issues but so given given that
we know that salt water has a distinct
effect on viruses throwing salt water at
masks and using that as the proxy for
how viruses will move through those
masks seems like actually a very poor
proxy yeah I think it is a poor proxy I
mean it may be a very good proxy for
their primary objective which was to
test for their dust storms but yeah in
any case all right
Nord REE says good job - Zac I
I would just say for our part we also
are very fond of Zack we regard him as a
keeper as is his brother and anyway
we're grateful to him as well let's see
seems like woken us has taken a backseat
during this age of Kovan do you think
once this is over we will revert back or
mature past the silliness I'm afraid
we're gonna revert back I have wondered
the same thing Jessie it's almost hard
to imagine people going back to
bickering about it so anyway maybe maybe
there is something to that maybe I guess
I doubt that it will disappear entirely
I just don't see that happening it's so
entrenched in so many systems at this
point but we can hope that some number
of people who were deeply woke have will
have lived through this and have seen
what intersectionality and
in the progressive stack and all of
these ways of thinking about the world
we're able to do for them under this
time of global pandemic and maybe emerge
with a more skeptical view so that may
perhaps the woke army will be a few
soldiers fewer when we when we emerge
from all of us all right Nate asks if
stories of the CCP destroying samples
lies about transmission release of
likely infected travelers buying and
hoarding of international supplies etc
what consequences should they face well
unfortunately we are stuck with a bunch
of contingencies here are the stories
true are they partially true
are they being spread by people who have
other reasons for sowing disinformation
don't know yeah what consequences should
they face well in an ideal world one
thing in a real world where you have to
deal with the fact of the CCP being a
continuing player them effectively
having tremendous power over us by
virtue of the fact that virtually every
supply chain including vital stuff like
computer tips goes through China given
the reality of the situation
I don't think figuring out what
would be deserved in the event that
these stories are true is a very
productive line of questioning the line
of questioning I would like to see us
engage is how the hell do we render
ourselves less vulnerable the next time
given the situation that we find
ourselves in it's an important important
question okay what are your thoughts on
the problem of combinatorial inflation
for the origins of species you still
believe in Darwinian evolution yeah I do
yeah so I don't believe that
combinatorial inflation is an actual
challenge to the Origin of Species I do
believe define it not really I want to
it's basically a mathematical challenge
that there's too much possibility space
for Darwinian selection to account for
what we see I do think that the modern
version of Darwinism that we teach is
broken in a couple of ways I do not
regard that as a flaw in Darwinism
because I believe that the solution to
the flaw that we have is more and better
Darwinism in other words I think Darwin
got it right in part by virtue of the
fact that he couldn't address details
and so gave a broad picture that was
correct but the mechanistic details I
don't believe we have the full story yet
I don't believe we have a powerful
enough version of the story to account
for many of the things we see which is
creating false hope for many of the
people who think Darwinism is broken but
I would say ironically enough when it
comes to Darwinism keep the faith you'll
see Darwin was right okay where are we
any advice for people who have had a
significant other hospitalized oh it's
hard since you can't visit yeah III
don't know how possible it is we have
not been in the situation I would say
what you want to do is figure out a
mechanism where you can stay in contact
I think you know I've read some terrible
stories about people dying alone because
their families couldn't visit
and really think ahead of time about how
you will stay in contact and see if
there's not some mechanism I would love
for somebody to solve solve the question
indeed okay what do you think current
problems have to say about religious
prescriptions on certain foods ice I
think I think the question is about some
kind of precautionary principle where
the deity is thought to be finicky and
therefore would probably frown on eating
exotic things from other places okay but
which which we would call you know in
our language these are often literally
false metaphorically true dietary laws
like kosher and halal and such which
have made terrific sense in the
environments in which they evolved and
stuck and some of them may make less
sense now in the age of refrigeration
for instance pork is no longer going to
give Farrah many people of trichinosis
but certainly religious prescriptions on
anything that have been persistent that
have that have endured through time and
through some cultural change had some
adaptive function that we should be
careful about abandoning until we know
what that adaptive function was yeah the
problem is that these rules to the
extent that they are sensible which is
liable to be a great extent there's no
guarantee that rules that were sensible
continue to be in such a novel error and
there's no guarantee that things that
should have rules against them will be
found in these texts because the texts
evolved in response to a prior world
that we just don't live in okay next
question is is Jack's testing vaccine
number on primates yet all right not
sure what this means here let me take a
swing at it
okay there is talk about using micro
seevis the mouse lemur as a new model
organism I would say I don't think it is
up and running yet it is potentially
useful also there's there are ethical
considerations about using
these animals but I would say in
addition to mice yes and in part in
response to the fact that the mice have
proven to be bad models now the mice are
bad novels in some ways they could be
freed Mike receivest not nearly as fast
well I don't know how fast you could
breed Mike receive it won't be as fast
as mice but it could be comparatively
fast because they're so tiny this is an
animal we've had experience with they
were totally in heathers field site in
particular has many little primates not
monkeys so they're the smallest primate
but in any case the danger if my
telomere work is right then taking any
small mammal and breeding it for profit
is liable to produce exactly the same
telomeric flaw because you will end up
breeding young animals to escape the
cost of senescence and when you do so
you will select for the same problem as
we've seen in mice and hamsters in
chickens and some others via rats so
anyway I don't know if that's what
you're asking about but if it is it's a
real problem what do you think would be
some ecological impacts of eliminating
species like mosquitoes ticks fleas and
other species with similar detriments
well let's just take mosquitoes for the
moment mosquito isn't a species it's
probably thousands I don't know actually
but it's at least hundreds of species
and most of those species are not known
to vector any human diseases but they
are known to feed know to be the primary
food of many other species which then
are you know low in the food chain which
other things then eat and so you you
take out all mosquitoes which would be
frankly impossible throughout the world
and you will collapse ecosystems because
there's nothing for the things at the
bottom of the food chain to eat I know
less about how many species of ticks
there are certainly not as many as there
are mosquitoes fleas is probably a
smaller clade yet each of them obviously
vector diseases that have killed untold
numbers of humans in each of the cases I
know less about what fleas and ticks
doing in the ecosystems in which they
live I'm sure you know obviously things
are eating them frogs are probably
depending on them to some degree but I
don't think Tech's or fleas comprise as
huge proportion of say many species of
bats diets as mosquitoes do yeah
although it's only certain bats but it's
a hard question to answer I think
eliminating particular species that have
devastating impacts on human wellbeing
might worth be worth the cost
indiscriminately eliminating creatures
that seem like the ones that are
transmitting these diseases would
probably be a big error alright so that
was Tyler's question Phil's question how
about facts proximity to humans living
in barns and houses and livestock for
blood side so this is a good question I
would say the rest of the question since
we know what it is but you didn't say it
out loud as features Addington virulence
yeah so we've seen with for example
rabies in vampire bats that this has
become a serious problem but it is
actually human caused that vampire bats
are actually exceedingly rare creatures
in their natural environment because
blood meat blood meals aren't all that
common in tropical forests when humans
start raising livestock that is
effectively sitting ducks for these
these vampire bats we create an
opportunity for these pathogens to
circulate in a way that human beings can
encounter them there's certainly a
question about entering caves that would
otherwise have been impassable as a
result of them being too dark so there's
all of these dangers and then there's
also the other question which is human
beings interacting with these species
may be transmitting the the
nose fungus that's killing so many so
many animals so anyway the bottom line
is that you have a world of pathogenic
phenomena and then you have human beings
behaving in novel ways that are causing
new opportunities for those pathogens to
circulate and it's been bad for humans
and it's been bad for these creatures
and in general we need to start thinking
about not simply innovating because we
can and then discovering that the
downside of it is causing animals to go
extinct or human beings to die by the
thousands or millions that's right and
we should also say that you know blood
sucking in bats is restricted to three
species of bats it's only three species
of vampire bats out of well more than a
thousand species right and is that only
one of those it's actually a mammal
specialist and - or avian or the other
way around
yes it's only one of them is a mammal
special so one species of bat out of out
of as motives rotundus is one and it
doesn't kick Asian leave and it gets up
in blood of humans it gets up into this
very southern part of the southern US I
think but it's a new world
you know maybe right it's mostly not in
the US I think it I think it's not in
the it's you know it gets up into Mexico
yep and down through I guess the Amazon
yep it's not in the old world yep right
so no vampire bats in the old world
interesting that the story of vampires
shows up in the old world yes what's why
vampire bats are known as vampire bats
it's the old world story having been
grafted onto bats in the new world along
with the epithet vampire which shows up
in many of the Latin names for bats that
don't ever drink blood of impressive
vampire umm hiram yeah all these bats
but okay where are we a second one down
Brett have you have you and Eric spoken
about the overlap of mathematical
functions and epidemiological biology
and what can we learn from this what's
his take I was just asking Eric or maybe
I should have him on and yeah he can
answer that question I mean obviously
all of the stuff is possible in
mathematic
times I don't know I mean this question
is really about the interface between
what we think about and what Eric thinks
about I don't think we're capable of
answering it on our own on the podcast
with Eric you Brett said that you need a
pen and paper to explain the genetic
complexity of you social behavior and
ants when can you make it so I do this a
lot when I was teaching animal behavior
I loved it
it's a lot of fun we're not going to do
it for a bit but we could we could we
could start doing little technical bits
like that
yeah it's tremendously fun and you know
the takeaways are your sisters or your
full sisters or three-quarters related
to one another and males don't have
fathers those are a couple to take aways
if you're an aunt if you're gonna be
okay
let's see tune in drop out says time
important timing more important looking
at the situation in Hong Kong with riots
and protests the degree to which this
virus was able to clear the streets
simply cannot be dismissed as
coincidence I would not say it cannot be
dismissed as coincidence I would say it
raises a question about whether it could
be something else but the fact is if the
virus is plausible on its own and
protests happen and the way they would
interact results in the clearing of the
streets we don't know what it is
presumably it is it is mere coincidence
regardless of initial circumstances
would you say the CCP has weaponized the
circumstances through their allegedly
deliberate deliberate cover-ups
that's certainly worsened impact around
the world you know Nate the nicest
circumstances I wouldn't say that
because I think the role that China
plays with respect to producing the
goods that keep the West running they
could be doing things far more
devastating than what we have so far
seen it doesn't mean they won't but I
don't think we can regard them as
putting the pedal to the metal with
respect to using this crisis to harm us
I think so
Pharr that's just not what we've seen
yep thawing permafrost releasing ancient
viruses is this a real threat or
websites just posting clickbait both
maybe I gotta say stranger things have
happened but I wouldn't bet on this
being likely because a virus would have
to survive intact in the permafrost over
such a long period of time now of course
permafrost is the right place if you're
gonna try to preserve it for a very long
period of time but viruses in general
aren't understood to be extremophiles
all right so extremophiles organisms
that live in places like the high sulfur
pools in Yellowstone or deep Undine the
abyssal plain in the ocean can deal with
extraordinary circumstances for long
periods of time viruses in general
aren't known as extremophiles but that's
not to say that there aren't some that
are possible well they have this strikes
me as possible I don't know of any
examples of it right the idea again -
thawing permafrost releasing ancient
viruses I don't think that we have
actually seen any examples of this on
the other hand maybe you'd have to have
been there to know that that's where a
virus came from well on the other other
hand you know with you know we can match
up this virus to known viruses and bats
and say yeah we're pretty sure this came
from one of these clients of bats and
that says actually it's not the
permafrost in this particular case so I
would say there two other things one
because the viruses have dispensed with
the cells that make them do their work
they're more capable of becoming
extremophiles because the things that
would break down under extreme
circumstances are largely not present
but just as meat that is in the market
dead even if the animal was sick when it
was alive is very often not in a
position to transmit a virus because it
isn't coughing for example permafrost is
even less coughing and so to the extent
that some virus was inhabiting mastodons
and got frozen in the permafrost and
remained viable it still doesn't have a
good
have to get into a creature so I would
say rule of thumb don't eat yellow
permafrost
you'll probably be alright excellent
alright yes I think so so so many of our
norms institutions of trust are
predicated on preventing or punishing
bad faith interactions the threat were
facing doesn't require bad faith to
cause harm how do we recalibrate that
from the steel man podcast yeah it's a
great question is well this is what
human beings do right we take novel
situations and we adapt ourselves and if
you think about how this will have
functioned in the past we have narrative
stories to deal with phenomena in nature
that have nothing to do with intent or
anything like it and so the ancient way
to deal with this would be to encode it
in some kind of a story where we you
know fashion some you know enemy spirit
the modern way to do it would be to get
over that and say well this is a
phenomenon it has this nature there's
these game theater theoretic obstacles
to us dealing with it well and you know
to encode the literal story so I think
that's the answer is we have to figure
out what the literal story is and then
we can teach it and begin to discuss its
meaning well I guess so you know I said
this thing I guess at the end of the
last podcast about not being interested
in taking pre modern or postmodern
questions or approaches and only taking
the modern one but your framing their of
the narrative apparatus that all humans
seem hooked into and particularly likely
to be compelled by even when the
narratives are wrong or misleading could
therefore be seen as pre-modern
but I prefer to think of it as one of
the many things that are evolutionary
and I don't I don't think that a
majority of people will be just as
compelled by a linear description of
facts as they will be by those facts
embedded in myth or allegory or parable
or a good science fiction story or any
number of
of other things I think that there has
to be a way to do what we need to do
through narrative as well I don't
disagree but I do think our tools are
better to a understand the underlying
mechanism and B to convey it and you
know we're watching the world talking
about fairly deep issues of virology and
epidemiology and mechanisms of infection
and you know one of the things that
actually impresses me about the
situation is that given something that
has focused our attention people are
many of them at least ready to level up
and have that discussion so I'm not
arguing against narrative but I am
arguing that some things just don't lend
themselves to it it's true all right
where are we
thanks for addressing conspiracy
hypotheses great term we're doomed if we
stop questioning or discussing the jhen
the gated institutional narrative
especially during crises so a comment
and then a question thank you
could the worldwide fragility we are now
witnessing to do Tuco vat19 help explain
the Fermi paradox yes yep of course
absolutely the meaning being why is it
so quiet out there in the universe
because there are things that challenge
anybody who evolves to the point that
they may be may be something other than
quiet so yes that will be game theoretic
flaws and the fragility we are seeing is
a natural evolved phenomenon one we have
to get over or we will perish from it
yeah non anti fragile civilizations do
not go interstellar yes they do not get
into the future
all right are you familiar with the
Hendra virus it is a horse to human
transmissible disease originating from
bats tear poets it's mega bats in
Australia I do not know the Hendra virus
do you I don't and the idea that terror
potent a virus to horses how would that
be I mean I guess maybe so pteropodidae
our plant visiting bats of the old world
and a flying foxes flying foxes there in
Corydon pteropodidae
these are non-echolocating very often
roost not all the species but many of
the species roost outside in trees
so Wow I wonder what the story is I will
say this though the conspicuous part of
what you've said the pteropodidae are
bats and the only placental mammals in
Australia are bat natively some
placental mammals have made it in to
Australia non natively including things
like the dingo horses cats cats rats etc
so the tarapada t transmitting a virus
to horses in Australia is a matter of
one Australian animal transmitted virus
Australian endemic transmitting to a
human introduced animal the horse that
then is transmitting to human is also
human introduced who's also yes so
anyway it's a very intricate area I will
look into it and see if there's anything
more to say yeah okay um Lewis would
like us to mention the Bretton Woods
Agreement please and very important to
fix the banking system Heather and I
will begin fixing the banking system as
soon as we are done with this live
stream he continues Thank You FDR thank
you FDR indeed I don't know for sure
about Bret but I will say that I am out
of my depth on the Bretton Woods
Agreement I don't know what it is
so consider it mentioned because we've
read your read your question but I don't
know offhand off the top of my head what
it is
yes it's an it's an agreement on the
rules that keep industry and banking
from the New Deal yes anyway I hope I
haven't said anything wrong there I also
feel like I should brush up on it a bit
before saying any more okay scott
mccloud final question well final
question from the previous might had
policies that drove the German economic
miracle after World War two be given a
fair hearing what is the question even
about I again don't know I can't I can't
dress it yeah sorry Scott so let's uh
there's another spreadsheet is there
okay so no more question so we're going
to go through the questions that have
come in at this point but there's AK
tells us that there are a ton of them
and you're gonna start showing them to
us okay so any questions that you ask
now from now on out or we are not we
just don't have time to address
apologies we may look at them we find
your questions very interesting but we
just we just don't have time we don't
actually I mean we do live here but we
don't live here we live here we don't
use chairs no we are still seeing the
old spreadsheet yeah okay we are holding
on due to circumstances beyond our
control we are still looking at the old
spreadsheet so at this point if we can't
fix this we will have to guess what your
questions might have been yes we do what
no no that's the old one you jumped it's
not it's the same questions we just
answered all right we are experiencing
technical difficulties getting the the
questions that arrived after the first
spreadsheet was created up onto the
screen Zack I just don't know what to be
talking about well how are you holding
up during the Cova 19 crisis oh boy that
question huh I guess yeah I think I
think we're doing pretty well right I
think one of the things we've talked
about the lucky position we're in here
in the forest with our children whom we
love and spend time with and so we do
have the new the spreadsheet yes we can
see it now but let me just finish saying
it occurs to me that we're both sort of
constitutionally able to deal with not
being around people for long periods of
time and I was thinking about what
happened when I emerged from my longest
field season in Madagascar the one that
you weren't with me for and I had a
field assistant with me but when I came
out having been on this little island
off the coast of Madagascar where I was
in a tent
showering in a waterfall studying frogs
and it only had Jessica my field
assistant and the two conservation
agents the two mala Ghazi guys
conservation agents on this island to
speak to you for five months and I went
to visit my parents who were then living
in London I found myself for the first
time ever wanting to talk to people on
the street it was actually very hungry
for human interaction and human
conversation in a way that I hadn't ever
known myself to be before but the fact
is I'd spent five months mostly tramping
around the rainforest and not just not
interacting very much with people and it
takes a particular kind of personality
when I when I used to teach animal
behavior I would one of the things that
I was trying to do was show students
through having them do fieldwork that
their romantic ideas of what it is to
you know study wolves which is just very
very hard are usually not what it
actually means to be in the field you're
alone most of the time and you don't see
your animals most of the time because
they don't want to see you so this this
situation we find ourselves in I think
is easier for us especially than it is
for the people who are hyper socially
connected all the time that's true yeah
that's true although we do have pretty
good tools even for them because we're
connected through oh absolutely through
the net yeah all right paid handsomely
thank you very much to asked us to hold
hands and smile and while in general we
do not engage in any sort of kink on
this channel will do will go this far
yeah
good alright thanks Pamela let's see
Austin says rationality rules made a
video about me recently okay well if it
was critical then I must say I disagree
with it and if it was favorable then
thank you rationality rules alright mmm
for the last topic regarding some
closures time to take up fly-fishing the
ultimate regenerative secluded activity
here in Oregon but from Cameron yeah if
if you have land that you can find that
you can go to that you're not going to
be kicked off of but yes fly-fishing for
you certainly not no I think it's
immoral since I don't eat flies what
that was pretty good okay all right
excellent yes math nerd isocaloric
strength training I so you mean
isometric maybe I don't know what
isocaloric strength training is known
isometric strength ok isocaloric
strength training compromise your immune
system during recovery not knowing what
that is it's hard to answer the question
but it's like high levels of cardio do
make you weaker and more susceptible to
disease high strength training and high
cardio you're you you shouldn't be
really really pushing it right now if
you're trying to fight off or not get
disease but I don't know the technical
term that's being used here do you know
I would say if isocaloric strength
training is a real thing then you should
engage in it responsibly oh that's such
a solid advice thank you for that it is
solid advice terrific have you heard of
the broad spectrum antiviral Draco
created by dr. Todd Reiter from MIT I
have worked in vivo and been repeated
please have dr. Reiter on I must say I
don't know what this is in reference to
I would love to look it up and figure
out what's down this road yeah I'm
thanks for the suggestion Kevin we don't
we don't know it yeah ten awesome all
right thank Jon
10 he says I need help understanding the
NIH article titled a SARS like cluster
of circulating bat coronaviruses shows
potential for human averred emergence
please check it out an answer in a next
live stream I think this may be the one
that I was referring to that I didn't
have in my notes for this time i if that
title is the right one we should be able
to find it just a logistical geek note
if you want us to look at a particular
article give us the at least the name of
the for the last name of the first
author and the year in which it was
published and it won't have been
published in NIH that's gonna be the
funding agency with that title we should
be able to find it if that is actually
the title though yeah and and we'll take
a look I think it is the one that I was
referring to that that that begs these
questions in which there were a couple
of authors who were associated who have
their affiliation at the wuhan virology
lab you know what were they doing why
were they looking into other bat native
coronaviruses there could be totally
honorable and upstanding and important
public health reasons to do so and of
course there could be the exact opposite
all right next question from Matt
Ericson how is putting the unhealthy
first putting safety over productivity a
good evolutionary strategy what about
the trout that risks a new stream rather
than playing it safe Brett Explorer mode
this is a great question here's the
thing it's not a good evolutionary
strategy and there's a question about
why we want to engage in a good
evolutionary strategy a good
evolutionary strategy here might involve
simply letting the chips fall where they
may and being productive while everybody
else is offline right the problem is
people that you care about are going to
die and the fact is the value that we
have to each other
is a proxy for an ancient mechanism for
getting your genes into the future but
why the hell do you care about getting
your genes into the future
right that's what evolution cares about
you shouldn't care about it it's an
absurd goal so what I would say is the
fact that we are putting safety over
productivity is actually the best
feature of our humanity
to emerge against our basest
evolutionary instincts yes we could take
advantage of this crisis but we
shouldn't I don't think that the analogy
to the trout the salmon that risks a new
stream rather than playing it safe is
quite right here I don't think that
productivity is the Explorer mode salmon
that goes up and potentially founds a
new population but may be at risk of
dying and leaving no offspring at all
there there are two distinct questions
here that I think are slightly falsely
analogized okay all right Adam asks any
chance you guys would ever do an episode
on the politics of the disease for
example many niche substrates of
anti-democracy personalities are hopeful
for extreme change appreciate you guys
yeah it's a great question and I don't
think this is it's sort of next level
but how this is interacting with the
political structure the various
strategies is a fascinating question and
it's one we have to wrap our minds
around or it's going to get the better
of us so yeah it's a good topic and we
should figure out how to integrate it
hmmm my friend doesn't get the common
flu vaccine because he they hear things
like it's not a hundred percent
effective how can I help convince them
it is still worthwhile and disambiguate
from something like kovat 19 I'm not
sure what the second part of this
disambiguate from something like open 19
I'm not sure exactly how that play is in
but you know the question the question
assumes that everyone should be getting
the common flu vaccine and you know we
have a we have a more nuanced to take on
this you know there are many years when
none of us get the flu vaccine I happen
to have this year the only one in our
family who did and you know got very
sick from Kovan 19 probably no
relationship but who knows the idea that
you don't take a vaccine because it's
not a hundred percent effective is
obviously a crap argument that just that
makes no sense the thing about the flu
vaccine that is tricky is that it is
variably effective from year to year and
no one can Bank accurate predictions
when you are expected to be taking the
vaccine how effective it will be that
year it's it's a quest
of how good was the prediction of the
public health people in guessing which
flu strains were going to be most
dominant in the population this year so
you know not a hundred percent effective
isn't a good argument it's I don't know
you add something here yeah this is a
tough call
the idea that it's not a hundred percent
act effective is not a good argument
against it there is a individual versus
population level question about costs
there's a question about how much we
know about what the downside of routine
vaccination is and I actually think this
is a complicated question on everybody
in in which most people think they know
more than they actually do know so how
do you convince your friend first of all
you would want to establish that you
understood much better than they did and
then you would want to know something
about about downsides that I think we
don't know yeah what is there besides
kovat 19 that could get us as bad or
worse are you prepared for any of those
could you make a list of 10 most wanted
wonder if you're talking about pathogens
in particular or you know
across-the-board existential threat and
such there are there are many things we
could guess most of them we don't have
names for yet over in the the pathogen
space yeah I mean it's sort of a it's a
difficult question to answer because
evolution is so darn creative that it
can have generated all manner of Horrors
and trying to speculate on what they
might be is I think a fool's paradise
but let's just say as bad as this is an
awful lot of people seem to get it and
have no symptoms which means it could be
far far far worse without invoking
anything really interesting at all
yeah okay do you predict far-right
politics will be supercharged in
countries most affected by Koba 19
because the right is more sensitive to
disgust response fascinating question
yeah really interesting and so this the
the contingent part of the question is
or the assumption and the question which
is true as far as we know is that the
right that conservatives tend to be more
sensitive to to tend to respond in
greater degree to disgusting things and
this has been repeated several times I
think in the research I think it's an
interesting hypothesis I hadn't occurred
to me I guess there's a question of
whether or not this is viewed as a
disgusting disease you know it's not a
stomach bug it's not a GI bug which
tends to evoke disgust response yeah
coughing does not tend to evoke disgust
in the same way obviously being hooked
up to ventilators and respirators and
such you know people very ill in
hospital can invoke can provoke the
disgust response but the disease itself
is less disgusting I think that many
yeah I could also see it going the other
way because since there are very few
solutions at the individual or small
group level here this was going to
reveal the necessity of of properly
functioning governance and that could
take us to the left and I hope if it
takes us to the left it takes us to a a
new and better left rather than a
backward-looking version of
progressivism yeah okay okay yeah why
why didn't I take your name yeah why
didn't you take yeah said said with
affection I think I more affection for
you than me though okay
so I'm gonna see I've seen a version of
this question I started seeing a version
of this question after you broke into
the public eye when evergreen blew up
and you were on Ruben and then on
Tucker Carlson and such and the few
people I saw it from its it struck me as
very very right-wing and regressive and
pre-modern and you know there's there's
a lot behind the rules and culture
around who when you know when hetero
couples get together and make families
what what the rules are where do you
move it's a question of locality are you
matrilocal do you move to the wives the
wife's home or village are you
patrilocal you move to their husbands
home village are you matrilineal and you
tend to track families through the the
woman and in those cases you would tend
to track the woman's name where your
patrilineal you tend to take the man's
name who tends to have the power
matriarchal versus patriarchal all of
these are good solid anthropological
ways of tracking how power and name and
resources and people move through time
and space and we live at a moment that
is in which many of the historical ways
in which women actually haven't had the
ability to live to their full potential
are breaking down it's good but what it
means is that some of the systems that
were kind of functional are also
breaking down so it was certainly easier
to track families when everyone in the
family had the same last name and here I
live in a house with the three people I
love the most in the world and three of
them have the same last name and I have
a different last name and then a bus are
confused but it is it is occasionally
confusing out in the world and yet I
inherited my father's last name and it
was who I had been for 20 you however
old we were when we got married 28 29
years of my life and the idea of beings
of having my identity switched from the
one that I inherited from my father to
the one of the man whom I loved and was
marrying didn't seem like anything I had
any interest in doing so does that sort
of not third way of not fourth wave but
you know honest feminist approach to
imagining that women can do can make a
difference in the world the same way
men can confuse extant systems it does
it's not a perfect solution but you know
we never considered hyphenating our
names that would have been a disaster it
was just a decision to maintain our
individual personalities and identities
while also creating a third one which is
the accommodation to make a choker yeah
my part I'm just you know it matters to
me much more that you do what I say
oh sure then take my last name so anyway
I got what I wanted
all right is it possible that the theory
of dogs self domesticating by eating our
garbage could be related to the fact
that we tend not to share diseases I
suppose I don't like this self
domesticating version of the story at
all
something happened but self
domesticating is not it's not the right
way to think about it you have more to
say on that yeah just that it's it seems
likely that dogs may have been
domesticated multiple times in which
case it is also probably likely that
whatever that domestication event looked
like it was different in in the various
cases I would say our dog self
domesticates every morning every morning
yeah that's a lot of different
domestication events all right thanks
for answering my questions you've given
me a lot to think about Nate you're very
welcome
Jimmy tutos says is there a way to use
viruses as a way to combat bacteria such
as MRSA yes where is a delivery for new
cancer treatments yes yes yes of course
there are ways harness these things and
in fact had a bacteriophage lab one of
the premier bacteriophage labs in the US
and this cup came from that lab with t4
bacteriophage on it so anyway yes
harnessing bacteria in order to get
genetic material into cells or to attack
bacteria is a great idea the Russians
were way ahead on that
so yes there is hope down that road are
we lucky the kovat 19 isn't as deadly
and we at least we can build a better
herd immunity for an even deadlier virus
to develop we are lucky it isn't as
deadly as it might be but any herd
immunity that we long-term build against
cover 19 will not work against any
deadly virus unless it's the same thing
that became more virulent but in fact
what we see I think always although I'm
not I'm not so certain of that that I'm
not going to say almost always what we
see almost always is the longer period
during which a pathogen and a human are
Co evolving together the less virulent
the pathogen tends to become rather than
more yep okay the histrionic heroine
asks yes can we trust the jacks vaccine
round number two can you see emails from
a PayPal transfer so this is the this
was the person who asked about the jacks
the primate vaccines before and I'm not
remembering exactly what the question
was sorry I'm not speaking into the mic
I'm not sure what the question I'm not
sure what the question is either the
jacks vaccine round
maybe I'm just unaware of something and
then can you see emails from PayPal
transfer do you mean can we see messages
that come along with the PayPal transfer
yes we can see that and we will make a
point of looking if you mean something
else not sure you could send an email to
support at Brett Weinstein net I will
see that okay
why Josh wants to know why does Eric
always interrupts and browbeat you Eric
is my older brother and he cares about
me very deeply and he's also a highly
unusual human being with a very special
set of skills so we have a dynamic it
emerges from childhood and Beyond and I
must say I couldn't be happier with Eric
as an older brother even if I am not
always thrilled with the position it
puts me in but
but I really have no complaints well
done sir
thank you all right what are you taking
a grad student outside of this box
outside of this if I'm not sure with the
basement
yeah we're not in a position to take
grad students right now but thank you
yeah I appreciate your thoughts I think
we are there you're done well it's a
little chaotic it's been long and
chaotic but hopefully there was a lot of
worthwhile stuff there to consider and
we will do another livestream soon on
Friday on Friday I don't know why
Twitter seems very reluctant to show
people announcements at least when I
make them but pay attention to our
channel here subscribe and like and then
you'll get a notification through
YouTube follow us on Twitter you'll get
notifications there if you if you go
looking and we will see you next time
okay well
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]