Friday's idea cafe today we're talking
about the year 2030 what does your
project look like anyone want to start
today right yeah I just started looking
at this a little bit ahead of time I
guess it's hard to say how fast the
adoption would be so let's look at
best-case scenario
yeah I'd really pull off onto a drew if
you have something already planned
then go ahead but I could pontificate
well no plan for this I mean I think you
and I are probably in the same boat
where it's like we've planned it out to
sort of see what it's like in her heads
over time and there's a you know a bunch
of different places it could go I mean
if we're talking hey hey Medusa
talking like sort of big best-case
scenario
I mean odds are it would have definitely
changed a couple elections that would
sort of be the new like go-to place for
a politician to set up their profile and
to communicate with their either actual
constituents or potential ones it would
have either replaced or gently nudged
existing news sources into sort of being
more transparent about their evidence
and sort of making it a bit harder for
them to just tell bold-faced lies um I
mean there's so much oh just like day
there pronounced I keep going but good
good I could dive in so I I would like
to see by 2030 and maybe reason score
being used in something like ad riyals
project so you know as as they're
looking at us do science studies that
comes out or people are having political
debates that it would be one of the
resources you go to to group and
categorize and assess the kind of facts
of the case it would be nice if goalie
bought which
kind of a personification of the system
would be a place that people would link
to to kind of like Snopes and politifact
and i wish i could think of the
conservative version of that but I don't
I don't think they have a really good
fact-checking site that leans that way
although all the effects check sites are
not supposed to be leaning but there's a
perception of leaning so yeah kind of
have a community of people who are
starting to categorize facts and
information in a holistic way and being
and you know and sharing that content
know in a hundred years I have a
different thing so awesome they'll be
next week next week to say 3020 that's a
thousand years 21:20 what is your
project look like I'm not here what
would it look like for me in ten years
stick with like solution raising in and
process raising I would love if we had a
site that anyone could come on to and
either start with an idea or start with
a problem and a process to work through
with ten thousand or more people so that
solutions are from the ground up just
like we want to be part of the solution
rather than trying to figure out what
the mass is want and trying to market it
to them actually just recreating
solutions and so I imagine that that is
hopefully what I have going in a couple
years and therefore we have we have done
solution raisings and done this process
on dozens and dozens of areas of life so
we have an app that works for food and
maybe local community projects that work
for hubs and anything that anyone can
spark there's a way to go through
through the process and we don't need to
relate we don't need to rely on outside
third parties solving things like we can
actually work through the process in a
way that we want to be part of so that
is what I would love to see I'd love to
see it a lot sooner than twenty thirty
Matus what was your project look like in
23
ah ok so the thought was a question you
could say oh it's camping I can meditate
and then I have to reverse engineer what
the question is
so yeah what you said actually and the
best scenario for my project would be to
be the application to do exactly this
from now on yesterday I finally managed
to get my VPS up and running so the
first time I can actually show it almost
because I still work on some
configuration but in 10 years it was
like the most popular mapping tool for
solutions and blueprints and
documentation about all things related
to the things we talked about that that
would be the ideal outcome right now all
right the conversation in stay in 2030
or time travel back and forth between
2020 and 2030 maybe go back a few years
it's kind of a weird space to live in he
said maybe we can go back to 2018 who
would have thought that was simpler time
Jubilee I was wondering on your picture
do you see it as like being a 10,000
people or is it like some 50,000 people
that may choose to join a project or
have you thought and I and I know you
know you're not you're not determined to
follow a specific path but I'm just
wondering if you've had that part of the
vision yeah yeah I would definitely hope
there's millions of people on the site
but the idea is to create it so that it
works if there's only 10,000 people
that's all they need to connect their
mic ok
okay that's happening so so there might
be a million people in there and someone
says hey this is what I'd like to do and
the hope is that at least like for each
of those projects some 10,000 would
choose to participate in that solution
yeah that there are 10,000 or more
I mean we're hopefully coming up with a
process that works for 10,000 people so
it'll hopefully work for more it's just
the bar but yeah if I could go on any
any problem in the world right instead
of like someone ought to literally I
could be the ought to like let's start a
conversation see what comes out of it so
there's something going on instead of
like leaving it up to the big other or
taking it all on like okay I am a
solution and then rolling it out how do
do 10,000 people work through it and
then yes I imagine there is multiple
projects I guess we could we could let
shallow differential but I got a
question for Marty show and me get back
to the discussion how do you want to
share your answer what your project
looks like in 2030 I would love to hear
the answer assuming it like started now
at you guys all right I'm having some
technical difficulties so I'll check
that all right all right thanks all
right
what's your question for Mateus so much
I was just so you mentioned your mapping
software and we've talked a little bit
about it but is this a general mapping
software like like the brains and all
those other things or is there a
specific kind of vertical that's not an
easy question to answer because I
started stuff in two very different and
only after seeing all the mind mapping
tools recently I realized that what I am
doing is in fact some sort of general
generalized mapping tool for not
specifically going B but I my personal
use for it something like babies never
got the memo and this is like only their
freedom of speech that's all
yeah so it is general but I would love
to and I am doing that to map stuff
related to games okay I just wanted to
mention also that in the canonical
debate group it's a mapping software
specifically for debating but there's
several people joining from other debate
groups like there's Jerry's from Jerry's
brain in that group now so you might
find that community an interesting one
to hang out with just to see how the
debate tools are using mapping software
so so it's the canonical debate lab oh
oh it's a another group I'm member with
so canonical debate lab calm or you can
just message me and I'll get you on the
slack channel if you want to listen in
or or whatever you might find that
interesting as a specific vertical
implementation of your tool might be
interesting for debates then I'm trying
to know I want a question for Adriel
because cuz I asked everyone else a
question that I can't think of any does
anyone want to hear my crazy diabolical
hundred year plan yes okay I think the
the plan I'm gonna you know when you're
when you're giving like your plant your
your thoughts of what this tool could
your tool and your project could be used
for you you you have to decide how far
down the path you're gonna get them
because people think it's impossible and
it turns out the the initial nut of my
idea is impossible
so I don't usually get to go further but
I was thinking if it works out and this
is kind of how people come to a central
understanding of what reality is what
like what's real and what's true and one
of the definitions of the word true
meaning kind of what's the objective
truth here on a specific narrow fact if
that's all possible then I kind of hope
that the decision-making process in
governments and a lot of things we vote
on today and
things that the Congress people in
Congress and Senate and the different
you know most of the governments that
will have some sort of legislative body
that they would use this as a tool for
making the decisions and also deciding
what to do so someone would float this
you know a a I can't a bill I have to
think back to my classes on how
government works but they'd float a bill
but the the whole United States an
action for the US or actually anyone
from around the world if they have a
good idea to contribute to this since
it's kind of fact-based as opposed to
just opinion and stuff that you'd be
able to you know create legislation out
in the wild and by the time it comes
around you wouldn't even really have to
have a vote because it'd be obvious that
this would be the right thing to do so
you might still have the voting at that
point but maybe in a hundred years it'd
be like well this is the tool on how we
make decisions and you still have
elected officials to an extent that you
need someone to make decisions and short
term but for a long term legislation
change it's really a group of its
society using this tool or something
similar it has this mathematical model
in it using to decide how we want to be
governed and that's just one of the
things yeah anyways but that's the crazy
thing I don't normally talk about those
people but they flip what call flipping
the blow bozo bit sure that we're
supposed to not that's the weird thing
about transformative technologies though
right if you're explaining them before
they happen they always sound stupid
like if you went back in time and tried
to explain
Facebook or Amazon to someone be like
there's no way you're gonna get a
billion people using the same site like
that's stupid yeah it turns out yeah and
the thing that one must first project
was oh we're gonna put people on Mars
people would have been like I don't
think so buddy right but now it's like
it's done the way they're you're like oh
might do that like Bentley when you were
first started your hundred year it
brought up so in the Omega Group
Wednesday conversation we're having a
really imagine seen emerging
conversation about more of like the
religion that's not a religion or God
that's not a God something that's
emerging from that space because it's
emerging from all of us individually and
then it's like it's not am I crazy do
you experience this the same way it's
like I can't come to my sanity and I'm
pretty sure that's the same but I also
understand it sounds crazy because
everyone else does too there's like this
it's not a new religion everyone has to
agree with it it's like we're on it's
like we're excavating something and
discovery in something but it's not
scientific like it can't really be
reasoned or sense made but I don't know
if you can do reason and sense making
without it like I don't know if you
can't honor we show up and say hey does
your world work this way it's okay if it
doesn't right I don't need it to work
it's not just gravity exists it's like a
different a different space whether you
guys even play in that space for your
projects so there's a group for the
general that it's not a religion no it's
just it's an Omega cos Omega brutal
converse we started the group in the
fall to practice Omega roll and what has
come out of that group is a lot of
talking about like our own personal
lives like the magic God the universe
whatever you call it that runs
throughout it and the we venus of this
indie game be space in the world but
like there's an emergence that happens
so yeah the way i think about all of
that in relation to my project is my
project is pretty much i guess right
right brained it is very rational and
logical and mathematical but it's just
simply a tool it's like a checkbook you
know it's like an you know a bank
account system it's it's just the place
where you kind of keep track of the
numbers and stuff like that and it's
supposed to free us up so that we can
then use this you know the skills and
this wonderful brain that we have that
can make leaps it
logic things then that can communicate
to other people and these and and touch
other people in a way that so that's
kind of the generative function that
type of conversation and that type of
feelings and emotion it's a jitter and
of function and then when you want to
actually put something in the world this
kind of helps you get down to the atoms
and the bits to make it happen so so my
system does kind of stay out of that but
it knows its boundaries so it's not
going to say oh you shouldn't do that or
you shouldn't be emotional and there's a
lot of ways that you can put emotion
into the system because you can say well
people feel this way or let's do a
survey and all the people feel this way
or this experience has happened and then
you can use that in your logical
reasoning on whether you should do it
together as a community but so the it's
definitely not like an isolation of
emotions but it is it is a tool - it's
it is after kind of it's after that step
but that's a very much needed part I'll
say that what the election does sort of
have some plans to handle something like
that where it's not meant to be sort of
cut and dry and this is true and false
and that person is good and bad I mean
the true and false hopefully we can get
there but the the good and bad a big
part of is what the person values and
one of the main things is that it's not
trying to tell you what you to value is
just trying to categorize things you
tell it what you value and then it can
say based on what you said you know
here's what uh you know you should know
about that person that organization this
election whatever it is it's sort of you
know shows you those things so if
Bentley and I are both members but we
have very different values we're gonna
see different information either even if
we're looking at the same person we're
gonna see you know different scores for
different categories if we were both
interested in the same category it
should be the same score yeah so that's
sort of an attempt at it partially
because a lot of people vote based on
religion and emotion and stuff like that
and so you're trying to come up with a
system to help people vote you can't be
purely scientific
in my mind because then leaves a whole
swath of people out so there is some a
little bit there there's something I
don't know if anyone saw the thing I
posted in gave me this week that wasn't
very game B but there was some reason I
post it there of like the influencers
the person trying to influence the
influencers No did you guys about the
people that click on it okay so so the
person had it had a fake a picture they
had taken of them trying to be an
influencer and they had it behind the
screen and they had three privately
pretty well-known influencers on
Instagram I don't know them but and had
them in this in this cafe taking with
props a picture right they could go
around and take any any picture and
because of the subconscious thing he did
in the beginning he the anyway he got
them all they had hundreds of rolls on
their film they all picked one all
posted at the same time and then he
basically said hey did you pick this
prop did you pick this location
me too and so he was showing so all
three of them had the exact same prop
they held it in front of their face they
were on the exact same the same thing in
the in the restaurant and they of course
were like oh wait this was an original
thought it clearly wasn't right and to
me it made it more it like was was a
bigger than if they had had the thought
themselves that wasn't their thinking I
thought they couldn't be influenced I'm
like the fact that you're an influencer
on social media says of course you can
be influenced but like there was
something about like if you're not
dealing with the magic behind the scenes
or like that that subconscious bias of
like that this just emerged right if he
hadn't been he had that picture there
and hadn't had that happen it still
could have happened and they all would
have posted it and then like you copied
me know we all posted the exact same
time like there's something about if
we're not dealing with the emergent like
the what can emerge in that space
otherwise you have we can have a debate
and we could maybe say who won and who
didn't but if we're not owning what our
emotions is behind it and what that is
that's like I like anyway just like
owning that it's there so that we can
somewhat be discounted yeah and I just
thought of something else on how my
system kind of tangentially hits that is
that a lot of times people are voting
and making decisions and we feel like we
know the reasons why and there's been
lost oh you're saying that you
you tend to generate a story on why you
came to that conclusion and it doesn't
match usually really what the influence
was and that seems crazy but they've
done some really crazy studies showing
that that that's kind of true that the
the reason the logic the reason why
someone said why they made a decision
couldn't have happened because I set up
the experiment in such a way it was
really fascinating to see but what
reason school kind of does is it it does
help you kind of dig down into your
reasons why no further than if someone
challenges but two people were different
that it does make you kind of think
through why do I believe this is true or
why do I want this to happen so I think
it helps you explore those emotions
because sometimes you just feel an
affinity for this person you want them
to win the election well what are the
real reasons why not saying that those
reasons are right or wrong although when
you when you actually ride them out and
see them maybe you'll realize some of
them are wrong but well yeah that's
another way that I think it helps people
explore that space a little bit yeah I
think that's good yeah but it's like
people haven't have an intellectual
stance but nobody has an intellectual
stance right like you're gonna bring all
of your emotion and bias into it but
like your concept like this is the only
conclusion you could come to and you
came to the wrong one and you're not
actually dealing with the debate because
you're not owning that there's any of
that piece there and I've had a few of
those conversations right yeah and
what's great about the way reason score
helps and I won't stay on my project too
long but is that when the way that you
end up kind of coming to a different
stance than the other person is that
some of them say something and they'll
do what you just kind of though it'll be
dismissed by the other side because
they'll say they'll say this and so no I
have like 50 facts that put that so I'm
gonna just throw that away
but in reason score when you put it in
there it affects the score so they have
to address that point directly as
opposed to this kind of even not
intentional dismissing but like I said a
lot of times someone will throw five
points at you and you only have time to
address one or two so
yeah having a system that kind of keeps
track of the of where your discussion
has been and the gaps that you haven't
finished talking about I think also
helps in in situations like yours
ha ha I don't know what your tech is at
the moment do you want to share what
your division is or just one chime it
like have an open conversation and as
long as this works well I'll try to give
my is it 10 years in the future yeah ok
10 years in the future with my project
idea would be that we would have mini
hubs like community hubs across the
world and all of them working towards
the greater good for the health and
well-being of each individual in their
community as well as the environment and
we would have our meta currency system
that would be valuing all the good that
we're doing so we're kind of rebuilding
all of our broken relationships
localized but also globally so we're
working towards a kind of a unified
humanity I mean all individuals able to
have their own opinions or beliefs or
whatnot but a way that we are unified so
that I don't know we're going out into
space and who knows what we're gonna do
next but if we're just a rival risk
human existence that's pretty rough to
think of how great space can be in a new
frontier but if we do have ways to unite
that are supported by the community and
there's like a bigger support system for
people they don't really fall through
the cracks we support one another's
needs if anybody has needs in the
community they can come to their centers
stay what their needs are people in the
community that are available can help
them you know if they need a new roof
different things where money is less
important but really what we're valuing
is our interconnectedness and our
ability to help each other out because
it like raises our own well so it's
building this humanitarian wealth that
permeates every aspect of humanity at
the same time balances capitalism
balances that power structures and we're
powerful without needing money
because we're United so shadow is that
I've been hearing that it almost sounds
like it's kind of like your local
library except for it's kind of yeah and
in a way it's a form of code governance
like I know there's a lot of those Co
governance wording going around in the
world but in my mind when I thought of
governance years ago it was like
actually citizens governing in
cooperation with our bigger government
so that we were meeting each other's
needs on the ground level instead of
just trying to if we needed help from
our government it's really hard to ask
access just like right now people are
really struggling but we already had
this I guess in a way it's an
institution but it's not really an
institution from the top it's
institutions from the bottom so they're
like neutral centers like if we had hubs
across the world that say they're also
like the Commons and it's a place for
people to go like I could go and travel
the world neck me through Commons
instead of just the capitalist hotels
and having that kind of experience you
actually have like a really yes I'm in
too deep wealth and deep experiences
though yeah I don't wanna
it sounds great just because you kind of
started off your talk we're talking
about space I couldn't help but think of
sort of the difference between Star Wars
and Star Trek like it's just Star Wars
tends to be sort of very combative and
there's the one group in charge and the
Star Trek is very much sort of all going
in the same direction like the I forget
the names of everything but that's just
what came to mind when you were talking
that sounds really nice I appreciate
that
one of them longer okay please this cuz
it happens in the political right versus
left the right ends up being sorry the
right is kind of more United in the left
is very fractured that because like the
left's values are to change but to hold
out like to hold values that we hope
right not just a change for change sake
but like we want progression we want
less racism we want less but it's a lot
easier to be traditional right it's a
lot Eastern be like note we're staying
here and we can agree on this it's hard
to agree when you're dispersing right
like you're changing so there can change
in any direction and although that
tension right now is hard to hold in
that like we're holding it here together
tech in a different way right we're like
everyone has their own project let's
figure out on new in solutions so we can
all have our projects you create them
there's something happening like it's
because I'm talking about the political
left but also like the game be space the
like world changing space of like again
when I was a countering this week of
like the frustration myself with the
frustration with his person of like
everyone has their own ID and they don't
want to come on board with everyone
else's I'm like yeah what's your
solution well they come on board my idea
like yeah exactly that's my solution I
like that except with my idea instead of
that person's idea but I think it
happens in the political left of like oh
no no but racism we just have to solve
racism the like currency and it's like
what about all of it right like can we
hold our sovereignty you hold that they
can be different and they're still an
ally like there's still that I think
that is the D main thing where the left
will like JK Rowling is a great example
right he gave ton of money like super
philanthropic all the stuff said one bad
thing about a trans person it's like
you're canceled forever and well and
even then she's she's come out and does
stuff that people have been happy about
but like at what point are you willing
to do that and it seems like the right
is way more willing to forgive and like
yeah that's why we still have enough in
common come on over and the left as he
said kinda tends to fracture it tends to
be like well on the list of a hundred
things
99 but that one sorry get out and so
you're constantly getting a smaller
smaller group I just watched the
documentary you know safe spaces and
that's basically a lot of what I'm
talking about is like that the left
cannibalizes itself that it's like you
know all these people that they're
protesting like ben shapiro and jordan
Peterson are actually leftist right
they're just not as leftist as you and
so it's like more of complicity but then
there's like more security on campus
it's just like it's it's we're hurting
ourselves but it's really hard to zoom
out and be like am I also causing the
problem right because it's like I know
I've been in on it or it's like yeah so
come on my project right like I've got
the solution and it's like I don't even
think you can possibly open unless you
can at least own that right like that
that exists and like the babies of like
wanting to control other people and am I
trying to control other people or might
try to offer them something am i trying
to create a better world for me or right
trying to control the world and
constantly being in that dance how can I
invite people to this how can without a
force and I think you know I hope the
solutions I think I have this mission
and I think yeah one of the main kind of
solutions partial solutions to that is
is this kind of take out the tech thing
where we volunteer to help on each
other's projects and we get feedback and
stuff and then it hopes it's at some
point you know if if we lose passion and
one of our projects or find out it's not
gonna work then we can jump on another
and start building up or just someone
gets the ball rolling and stuff like
that so yeah yeah I am anyone who ends
up watching this I think there is a
point you get far enough along in this
space but all that tension is still
there you can see it and therefore you
can start to see the emergence of okay I
may be may be my solution as much as
this is mine right now I'm focused on it
because I can't focus on the other ones
it's not the solution and someone has it
right like that us all winning is us
winning like
like it doesn't matter if it comes from
me it doesn't matter that like and you
I'm still annoyed by other people saying
what I just said right they're like wait
no my is the umbrella on what you can't
even see how ironic that is and because
they're not they're not there yet that's
that's fine but that if there's a
progression that you get there and then
it breaks open in the most beautiful way
it's still frustrating but I think I'm
like over that hill and it starts to
come together or not it's why I'm kind
of weird because that's kind of a hybrid
of the like two sides with the ellipse
and right where it's like here's my idea
and they're sort of almost a purity
involved with I trying to keep it close
to its thing but then it's also it's
fine the peanut agrees he'll come over
still come over here at help and we'll
all work on agreeing with me together
yes I love it yeah
I guess that is one of the strengths of
this is that there's no real like
there's no project owner for together
tech or GME projects it's just everyone
brought a project and that's kind of the
separation and to me like that I haven't
heard of anyone else doing that so like
this is as far as I know the only Mehta
project the only thing where it's like
you know keep your project family you
keep reason score Julie you keep the
whatever you're doing everyone keeps
there and then also keep that and still
be whoever you're gonna be and own it
and be predictive of it but then be that
person here together so we're all
protective of our projects but then also
like at the end of the day my goal is to
fix misinformation if my thing crashes
and burns and Brenda and that leads is
taking off sweet as long as something is
working I don't care mm-hmm yeah exactly
I think this is how like it's tackling
it from any angles this is one way to
tackle it this I love it yeah and I
think the fact that there is no owner is
one of the reasons why it works it's
because it's no no it's not doing me
it's join us you become you know these
Hicks box it's become you know every
other week it's doing whatever so that
you don't still still own your project
no one's taking it away from you the
structure of this is built so that you
can keep it but then come here and sort
of add to this together conversation on
how do we move forward together and as
you try to you know walk the walk with
game B and actually cooperate yeah and
yeah and if we're not doing it right
thing come help us do it right without
controlling what we're doing right
language you can bring your ideas to the
table
but you don't get to co-opt it and that
is what I know I do this too it's like
but I don't like it so let's start from
microphone you didn't do it the way I
wanted so it's like a redo it the ground
up yeah it's funny and software we also
have a similar problem problem you'll
come and you'll hire a new developer and
you'll have some code and Adriel
probably hasn't hit this yeah but he
will show you well and the new developer
comes in whatever you got that
you know he just looked at that's just
crap it's like well no it works and you
don't know what what stresses the you
know what's the play between the amount
of time spent making it perfect and the
amount of time getting it out the door
and stuff like that
and I felt really bad because I'd been
working on a project for five years and
then I'm handing it over you know you
know there's skeletons in there you know
where some of them are but you can't but
are perfect but people are gonna come a
new person gonna come in with their
ideas of the right way to handle this
project and I even had a project that I
worked on for like 15 years for a
company and they came and said oh well
we replaced it and you know in a weekend
and I'm like well the business
requirements had changed in that time so
the original design requirements were
completely different but anyways the the
main thing is that yeah anytime anyone
comes in it's gonna be like well I want
to start over from scratch everyone
prefers what we've got greenfield which
element so interestingly I haven't
experienced that as a developer but I
have experienced that being a part of a
development team and experienced a
number of times and the interesting
thing is that when the new person comes
in you don't know if they're good or not
yet so they're asking to refactor it
you're like I've worked with developers
who were rock stars and then they left
somebody came in like we have to redo it
we're like but are you better than the
last person because if you're not then
no and unless you're like light years
better then still no because we aren't
really gonna get anything out of it
except that you'll be more comfortable
working but what about the next person
they're gonna say that about your work
so yeah there's always quite a bit of
personality and what we do because even
software development is part art and
database and project management I see
this same thing comes into factor when I
get a new doctor or specialist when
they're like alright bring it I'm like
I'm not I'd bring you can't bring me
down to scratch it
restart do all the tests and like I've
done the tests I can tell you what they
are off my heart it's like no we have to
redo it like no no we don't my codes
already in place for good yes that's
true
welcome here to I guess that's in almost
every every Avenue
which I think I might have a worst
version of that normal because I have
that for myself if I did it like over a
week ago I was like what a daddy idiot
do I gonna start over again yes I do
that to have enough of a memory problem
that it is to truly fresh like I'll have
this same idea went together and be like
oh yeah the food app and it will be like
it's brand new but like with a different
layer to it I'm like the memory problem
is you're actually helping like a
different angle and got to the same
place so this is brilliant sound
familiar right sometimes I think I did
that in reason school recently like now
I came out there there oh now I'm having
too much trouble picking like debates or
decisions to do so now I'm just gonna
pick something I'm passionate about but
they're too big and I thought oh I'll
just break it down to smaller pieces and
I thought you know I think I had that
idea a year ago but I had that exact
same idea so yeah yeah so even yeah even
our temporal selves are different and
thankful well I think we always trust
our current mindset that we're in even
if the one that we're comparing it to is
us yesterday we're still like I'm not
sure where that guy's head was that and
what his problem was but I'm thinking
right now and I'm sure that me a week
from now is gonna agree with this right
yeah that is partly what process raising
I'm hoping can hopefully like own that
because it it is it's like we're gonna
have every time someone comes in there's
gonna have been work done and then it's
somewhat right you're gonna want to
bring it down to scratch does that make
sense right but like if we can bring it
down to scratch and keep building it but
owning what as individuals we know it
actually can make it better and better
but there is cuz it happens I was like
that when I came into the game bees face
I have a solution here who'd want to
talk to you now that other people are
doing that I'm like dude pull back but
you don't even understand you know no no
I know what game be is I'm like you
don't is if you think you do you don't
I'm like I know and I'm still gonna say
I know six months out but I also it's
been broken so many bunnies and re
repaired then now I'm more confident in
my confidence of not being
some layers here the person who posted
the infographic of like a or became B
game a B - positive and I was like so I
wanted to post it again with a zoom out
and like game be like that is game be
like you're not okay argue your own
thing oh yeah and jublia is thinking
solution raising might really kind of
help with that because one of the
reasons why I think that it's so
difficult to jump on projects is that it
a lot of us started on our own and thus
we have a lot of ownership around those
initial decisions and stuff so if it
started in a group I think you hold it
less tightly so I think it'll be easier
if you start with a group of three or
five or ten or ten thousand working on
this project I think the natural
tendency to need to be less dogmatic
about the solution and to know that it's
a compromise I think there's also an
element of that if you were just part of
the group
like there's things that I've built
where like I was actually the one in
there building it but then I talked to
somebody about it later and they think
that they like were the main person that
was responsible for that thing and then
like there's three or four people who
all think they're responsible it's cuz
we sort of designed it as a group and I
just went and built it cuz you all
picked the watermelon swing with the
thing in front of your face and then
thought it was an original thought and
it wasn't it was like some subconscious
the super conscious that they happen
that's took me a while to figure out
what the hell you were talking about
mentally all the Instagram thing oh
here's your watermelon swing what bring
that into oh yeah they all picked the
watermelon swing with an ice cube tray
over their mouth just like almost like a
smile dressed they had really weird
props like right things that weren't
glamorous what's the whole point you
I've been thinking I mean maybe we're
going we're not in the ten year thing
anymore but I do keep coming back to
this how do we like you know Mar -
Shandi are helping out an Angels project
because he's gonna spend some
hard-earned cash what is that is that
the limiting factor someone has to be
willing to to pay you to work on their
project and maybe it is which is also
with not to bring a process but like
when you have a pool of money and then
you're deciding on it and that's a new
group decision right that you can then
kind of get behind it be like either
agree with it or I don't but the group
decided in a different way then like
this is what it is and then just uh you
know decide to decide differently like
there's I think it is about we have to
keep owning our emotions like what works
and doesn't work in this process what
works and doesn't work in this
conversation and like how can we keep
inviting because we do have that meta
conversation right how do we invite more
people here are we getting something out
of this what could we offer to other
people to get something out of this well
also yeah I keep thinking about starting
a patreon but then I'm like - I started
over one project and then what happens
when I go to another project so I keep
thinking I just need to do it like fun -
Bentley's crazy ideas alright and this
is what I'm working on now
stick around after we go off being live
I have something for that - I like fun
but you are in - and also something to
tell you when we're not not live also
Bentley then everyone else can be privy
to just not YouTube's biggest buddy I
don't know yeah I don't know I am
looking forward to 2030 if that if that
so you're hopeful huh with all these
things yes cuz it's emerging like
something is coming together in all of
the chaos and all of the stuff it's like
things are happening and coalescing it
and that is more what I want to give the
world than anything else that just like
hope is on its way there are so many
people working on so many things and
it's a what if it fails like we can't
all fail but all of this is emergent and
the same thing that's that's that's
annoying to me that we all are fractured
is also its blessing and it's like a
bench label coalesce eventually we'll
figure out if it's not processed or
anything someone will figure out how do
we bring people together
what does governance look like without
it needing to be for me like all of the
stuff is being solved in many different
ways it's almost like we need this it's
bringing it back down to like the base
right you create a code - for governance
or ID or whatever it is and nobody comes
on board so it fails and like people
keep doing that process until enough
people have done over there like what ID
and governance aren't even needed it's
like no bring it back down so we can
figure out what went wrong on each
project and how can we come together
create something or one succeeds right
like one of the sense-making succeeds or
they don't and you all guys are all so
frustrated you do bring it back and say
okay what can we weave together with all
of these things yeah which I think
that's one of the strongest counter
points to the new person coming on board
and saying we have to start from scratch
if you have like a crowdsourcing you
know a document saying how things work
say great here's what 30 people came up
with tell us what should change because
usually in my experience it's just like
they don't like the code structure it's
like something kind of minimal that
really no one else is going to notice it
sort of saying no we're not just going
to read you everything based on what you
want here's what the community decided
if there's something wrong there by all
means we'll discuss it with the
community and usually there is a time to
go back and kind of clean things up when
you're redeveloping something you know
there are some many fresh starts I guess
right yeah large project there's a
reason like hey it's super slow then
yeah it probably does need some
refactoring but if it's like doing great
and you're just like I just don't like
the way they coded no we're not gonna
spend time on that yeah and in the same
way this pandemics kind of a bit of a
veil it mini reboot for certain areas
like in and you know they're working on
like vaccines to only take 15 years and
they're gonna try and get it down to one
or two which is sounds way too long but
you to prove it stuff like that yeah and
just like Jubilee was saying that this
catastrophe is it does have
is a forcing function and an inspiration
to improve the world funny cuz I'm
atrial and I have moved a lot in our
lifetime and so my ID like I clean my
house when I move like it's like I you
know I throw away packing into
boxes move throw away while I'm
unpacking it and that is how I down suck
you know and I haven't moved in nine
years and so now it's like I have to
actually take it on my kitchen in my
shed you know what I mean like I have to
tackle it and that's the economy like
that is there gonna be like what
impossible one do is bring everything
back to zero and be like how do we
recreate it but you can't because we've
lived here right like we got billions of
years on this planet we can't raise it
and start again it's like how do you fix
this piece and this piece and this piece
and still have it be like you moved in
fresh with every with every you know
yeah I haven't looked at the seasteading
though it'd be nice to just go out and
build an island and start fresh on the
island at least yeah it's not it's not
possible talk to you long yeah actually
I want to do it yeah I mean it may be
the palm is what all do you want what
all can yourself produce and you still
have to work with the outside world to
some extent and global climate change
still affects you so yeah there's
there's some stuff we can start over and
there's some kind of painful overlap
yeah I thinking about this I have this
picture in mind of domes
and how they would be very appropriate
to exist in any environment as well as
in severely climate changed environments
like oh not even climate changed but
Sahara and extremes and then the same
thing in space once you have a dome that
sealed and resistance to the conditions
outside
well it's gonna be yours even on Mars so
yeah other places yeah it's an
interesting experiment I was remembering
the biosphere one or something that
experiment a while back and they found
out some of the problems with oxygen and
stuff was just because cement did stuff
we didn't know like Oh cement is that it
interacts with water and it creates this
type of acid and it's like no one knew
that that chemistry was going cool so
yeah it'd be great to experiment with it
here when you have a escape hatch rather
than on Mars where you know a lot harder
to start over
I don't think spacefaring is like if you
like like that's the solution like we
get off of the planet I'm like I really
don't think we get to that level of
spacefaring like yes we can get off our
planet but like we're not getting to
like actually get further places unless
we can actually live in equilibrium with
the world that's designed to live in
equilibrium
that being said part of me is like oh if
the rich people all want to go live on
Mars let's let them go for it can
automate your world and we'll all have
this one and we'll figure this hood just
don't break it first don't take
everything and go we'll have this one
instead of guillotine you sure go live
on Mars have fun with that
I know we all watch Hitchhiker's Guide
to the galaxy in this story there was an
arc that they sent off and they didn't
take all the like standard workers like
the telephone cleaners and then they all
died of a disease they got off their
telephones and then so the rest of the
human race was everyone that was left
behind kind of funny girl Hitchhiker's
Guide to the galaxy at the beginning of
this cove in ninety it was like some
some dolphin just said so long and
thanks for all the fish
alright should we end the conversation
and then we can do the other part it
starts when we stop recording yeah sure
I'm part of that alright goodbye YouTube
and Facebook see you tomorrow for a
roundtable 9 a.m. Pacific Standard Time
bring your project