[Music]
[Laughter]
economics has to do with two primary
areas of concern one allocation of
resources to meeting needs and creating
value and to influencing patterns of
human behavior our current global
economic system is not only broken with
regards to both goals but is unstable
and rapidly self terminating the
problems originate at the level of its
core axioms so retrofits eg gold back
the dollar or replace it with a crypto
equivalent reinstate glass-steagall etc
to the current system still sale the
level of technological advances that
have contributed to modern economics
instability also change many of the
foundational axioms upon which it was
built
for example technological automation
replacing the labor economy and changing
the need for extrinsic incentives
digital value being non scarce computer
science innovations blockchain public
key cryptography dive merge etc offering
solutions to critical issues in game
theory Byzantine generals etc
intellectual property partial
attribution etc and information fidelity
and access high signal-to-noise ratio
distributed sense making etc the sensor
and data science capacity to maintain a
real-time balance sheet of the global
Commons the complexity science and
technological capacity for closed-loop
regenerative technology ecosystems etc
economics is a facet of societal
architecture inseparable from culture
governance law defense information
systems education infrastructure human
development etc these systems co-evolved
and Co influence each other they are
currently all fundamentally inadequate
to the scope urgency and nature of the
issues and dynamics civilization now
faces and must undergo a discrete say
shift to axiomatically restructured high
order systems the emergence of a new
adequate system of economics and
attendant systems requires three
interrelated areas of focus one
developing and implementing transitional
systems that are intelligible to and can
interface with the current system while
vectoring towards post transitional
systems to the development of post
transitional systems that emerge from
the transitional systems and are
adequate to the long-term needs of a
civilization with the degree of anthro
complexity and exponential technology we
are facing and three protective work to
ensure that none of the catastrophic
scenarios made possible by and incented
by the current system come to pass these
three taken together following the
criteria outlined below constitute a
necessary and sufficient set of
activities to ensure humanity's survival
and increased thriving into the
foreseeable future
[Music]
[Laughter]
for all systems of structural incentives
the incentive of an actor individual or
group must be rigorously aligned with
the well-being of all other agents in
the system and of the Commons at large
ie all externalities must be
internalized all consequences of
activity within the system must be
included in the system's accounting
regarding resource allocation between
different groups or metrics the system
must orient towards synergistic
dialectical synthesis rather than theory
of trade-offs ie all fundamentally
desirable meaningful qualities must be
factored as design constraints of the
system eg choices that benefit quality
of life now and increasing quality of
life into the future simultaneously
local and global benefit of local and
global choices simultaneously increased
individual freedom and
interconnectedness etc any of these not
well supported by the system will lead
to the system's failure taken as
dialectics that constitute design
criteria that can be synergistically
benefited by higher order synthesis
solutions the system vectors towards
progressively more abundant and less
scarcity where as trade-off theory
seeking optimization points Nash
equilibria etc in the allocation of
scarce resources fails for several
reasons once with increasing complexity
it vectors towards increasing scarcity
to it in X early misaligns
agents who are more identified with
different goals 3 it is impossible to
actually find optimization points in
highly complex systems etc
it most disincentive all activity that
can lead towards catastrophic
existential threats intentionally or
unintentionally must not incent local or
near-term positives that increase
probability of global or long-term
negatives this is particularly critical
to get right regarding the incentives on
the development of exponential
technologies it must orient towards
supporting the intrinsic motivation of
individuals including the intrinsic
drives to connect collaborate and
contribute and decreasing the need for
extrinsic motives the economic system
cannot not be a source of human
conditioning as such it must condition
towards Omni consideration and in no
ways conditioned towards psychopathy it
must simultaneously condition agency
uniqueness self-actualization with
communion cooperation care can must
condition consideration beyond the
Dunbar number similar to how Buddhism or
Jainism achieved reliable abstract
empathy deeply enough to determine
behavior just as it must condition
increasing personal intelligence care
capacity etc it must also support the
evolution of collective intelligence
capacity and coherence at all scales
this economic system will be
inextricably interconnected with new
systems of governance collective choice
making law collective choice enforcing
intelligence collective sense making
infrastructure collective need meeting
worldview collective coherence and
values this system must Co emerge with
those systems and support their ongoing
development rather than interfere with
or subsume them documents on the
necessary criteria of these other
systems and how they interface to come
it must be anti fragile factoring
distributed exponential technology and
insofar as it influences technology
development its influence
factor the relationship between
technology people and the natural world
and between information choice making
processes and choice impact potential
and incent the development of increasing
whole system's reliance over the
development of dominance capacity within
the ecosystem it must not be captured
all forms of value must be accounted for
in the system it must not reduce
critical complex information to fit
simplified models it must not make non
fungible realities fungible perverse
incentives must structurally obsolete
all perverse incentives economic
advantage from managing problems creates
a bias to maintain the problems
suppressed solutions that could actually
obsolete the problems and even increase
the problems eg military-industrial
complex and false flag operations prison
industrial complex healthcare etc
valuing things in relationship to their
scarcity leads to maintaining and
artificially manufacturing scarcity
rather than seeking to obsolete it
corporate market competition
incentivizes hoarding IP preventing
knowledge synthesis hoarding limited
resources radical duplication
manipulative marketing intentional
disinformation to competitors etc
economics interface with the legal
system is bi-directionally corrupt
companies using courts for financial
advantage and judges lawyers politicians
getting rewarded by companies for ruling
bidding in their interest the Commons
not having a balance sheet rewards
ecological externalities and
competitively penalizes internalizing
costs race to the cliff scenarios where
non-cooperative
gaming dynamics lead to pursuing local
maximum that lead to global minimum eg
an arms race
interest driving expansion of the
monetary supply driving unsustainable
growth of the materials economy and
rewarding hoarding cannot avoid
structures that offer asymmetric
economic advantage fractional reserve
banking derivatives exploiting digital
tact with exponential return potential
over physical tech etc short term
optimization in terms of influence
government officials focused on things
they can better before reelection
corporate directors focused on quarterly
profits to keep their jobs etc leading
to radical nearsightedness and
mortgaging the future reductionistic
value metrics that maximize externality
to optimize for the movement of
relatively meaningless metrics first
mover advantage with new innovative tech
incenting speed over due diligence which
leads to a race to market on
increasingly more powerful and less
familiar technologies with radically
more possibility for unanticipated
catastrophic third and fourth order
effects with little time able to be
invested in securing against them
ownership private ownership leading to
inexorably widening wealth gaps and all
the problems of economic inequality
conditioning comparison selfishness
greed jealousy envy social posturing
decreased honesty decreased empathy
psychopathy leading to disempowering
hierarchies and the commoditization of
people etc radical goods duplication and
owned resources neither in use or in
circulation asymmetric power potential
decoupled from good decision-making
ultimately all the perverse incentives
require private ownership and would
cease without it valuation
valuing things relative to their
scarcity optimizes for scarcity and away
from abundance combined with private
ownership this gives rise to win-lose
gaming dynamics valuing things that are
scarce independent of actual utility
leads to decreased system utility
holistically eg cut down a forest to
mine the gold under it and put it in
underground vaults that provide no real
utility to anyone only fiat value
valuing people's time erratically
asymmetrically leading to inevitable
disempowerment hierarchies not valuing
the Commons leading to an extraction
area commoditizing externalizing system
that with exponential population and
technology leads inevitably to biosphere
collapse
relative valuation based on economic
advantage possibly over real quality of
life enrichment potential eg income
potential of venture capitalists and
corporate lawyers compared to teachers
or nurses or precious gems and metals
compared to food and clean air leading
to systemic incentive away from
foundational quality of life areas
[Music]
you
[Laughter]
you
[Music]
[Music]
[Laughter]
[Music]
[Laughter]
[Music]
you
[Music]