right hello welcome to Wednesday's
possibility in the pandemic where we do
solution raising this week is the meta
solution how they all interconnect
together and next week where you are
talking in energy specifically
ironically because this is also we're
going to be breaking up energy a lot
today because we both watched the
documentary that Michael Moore is behind
what is it called planet humans energy
and how it's not so green and I did a
video last week of almost a week ago on
it and Eric here just watched it and
posted so I'm sure it'll be coming up
during our conversation but we're here
to discuss what it's currently what is
the meta solution ie there is no better
solution currently look like what could
it look like and what is the adjacent
possible that we could do at ten
thousand people and a hundred thousand
dollars and would you like to start Eric
about what kickoff with because I've
mentioned a couple of times in previous
ones that I think sometimes the more
important question rather than looking
for solutions that there are already
solutions and what are the blockages to
those solutions being implemented right
and and and so I think that's often
which which leads nicely into as you
just mentioned that might a bit we keep
referring to it as a Michael Moore
documentary it's not a Michael Moore
documentary he executive produced that
he actually had very little to do with
the making of it other than other than
funding it and putting his name behind
it so but yeah anyway they for anyone
that hasn't seen this film planet of the
humans base the story it basically tells
is that the green movement the drive to
create renewable energy sources has been
captured by the market and is now just a
vehicle for capital to root to make more
capital and that many of the solutions
particularly biomass and ethanol
are completely counterproductive right
they require the use of fossil fuels in
a quantities greater than the amount of
energy that comes out at the other end
of the process in the first place right
so it's absolutely insane and it's being
done purely for the reason of directing
government grants into the hands of
corporations and
that literally is it is as simple as
that and I know this sounds kind of
conspiracy theory kind of stuff and
there's been a lot of I mean I've just
posted about it on Facebook and there's
been a lot of pushback people quoting
Guardian articles to me and then when I
look and this is this is really the
point of the whole story right when I
look at the Guardian article that
someone put up as a rebuttal yeah this
film is based on this information bla
bla bla bla bla it refers to according
to research recently undertaken it is
now the case that the total amount of
energy put in is less than the total
amount of energy yet right in other
words things like electric cars and and
and so on are actually energy efficient
in that context but then when you click
on what the research is and who's done
it and who's funded the people that did
the research it's all very very very
very spurious and this is exactly the
point of the film is that the market has
captured the entire process including
the process of evaluation and research
and commentary on the thing afterwards
right and so the the meta solution is
for people to wake up and
realize that the entire thing is in a
state of capture and that you absolutely
cannot trust governments and
corporations and the existing
institutions to come up with these
solutions let alone the meta solutions
to these problems because they have been
completely captured often without their
knowledge I mean I'm not saying that all
of these people are evil and in on it
right they're they're very very very
clever there's a lot of deception goes
on there's a lot of misinformation goes
on they've even got activist groups
behind them right throwing their weight
behind these solutions yeah oh yeah this
is great this is green but but but it's
not you know they've been duped they've
been fooled and because the activists
are saying is good everyone else thinks
is good they quoted another thing in
there that 91% of plastic that is
supposedly recycled is not recycled this
is it's just dumped now I don't know
whether that's true or not that was a
figure they quoted I mean it's a pretty
precise figure so I'm assuming they've
got some data from somewhere as I say I
cannot speak to the to the truth of that
number but it's but it's just another
example of the deception right to be
seen to be Green is far far more
important than actually being green and
and and that is a sickness that
pervades our entire culture and the meta
solution
has to involve and I know Jubilees way
onboard with this has to involve
transparency at every level right people
just open about as best they know it the
truth of the situation not trying to
cover things up not trying to hide them
to make more profits not trying to hide
them to avoid prosecution by some
legislative body or whatever it is yeah
but actual open transparency where
everyone can see the books everyone can
see the research there's no hiding I
mean god this International Panel on
clean transportation that's who funded
this research right
sounds like an official body right
sounds like a reputable official body
it's not it's a private institution
funded by private individuals for their
own ends do you know anything the whole
thing is a giant con and so yeah you can
sell I'm really angry I just saw this
film yesterday and its really got my
hackles up because it's it's it's just
it's it's the taking of genuine good
intentions on the part of people and
turning them into and that is that
is just evil at it so I can't think of
anything worse than that right that's
that's my rant over for now awesome
thanks Eric Shila do you want to share
on what you think the meta crisis or
meta solutions currently looks like what
we're currently doing how everything
intertwines with everything else if you
solve one one breaks and you know a meta
the meta thing I'm just gonna have a
wait and kind of chime in afterwards I
totally agree with what Eric's saying
and I just totally I think we need a
whole new counterbalancing system to do
exactly what you're asking all right
awesome
I will I will share my rent all right so
yeah I look at our current gaming world
and I picture the Weasley house from
Harry Potter like that it's held up with
magic and hope and sometimes that's good
hope and sometimes it's bad hope and
it's like a business comes up and solves
a problem but when they're solving that
problem they create all these
externalities that it then it's on
somebody else to solve and in that
transparency is the fix which we'll talk
about the next part but it which is a
big piece is information and so we don't
have the information that is what a lot
of people commented what I commented on
this final human last week on my channel
feel like although it doesn't have the
right to the right numbers and like
that's the problem with the documentary
I love documentaries but there I feel
like they're an outdated technology and
then as soon as they're done they're
done that informations based on ten
years ago because they want it they want
that to be a profitable project right
the documentary itself they need to sell
to you so it has to be sensationalized
and what I want is the information I
want the data I want to actually know
what goes into the solar panel if you
have a solar panel company you're there
to sell solar panels so you can only
look at from the point we make them so
that I can sell them to use they make
you energy and it doesn't have the
information of what's going into that
solar panel how much water how much
energy how much of the mining you got
like of the materials that we needed to
make this and so currently everything is
interconnected you have people living in
desperate poverty both the people who
put them in art the people who have
collected and amassed the wealth are
responsible for that poverty and
environmental degradation that there
whatever you know they're passing off
their externalities but there's also a
lot of environmental cost that comes
from being poor people mining people
doing poaching and things that like we
don't look at as rational choices but
when you're starving they are absolutely
rational choices and then you see you
have like the people at the bottom of
the socio-economic costing a lot to the
planet and the people at the top and one
of those people has power one of those
people has a choice but do they with all
of their money and amass power comes
from the bottom and the misinformation
the lack of transparency so it is all
interconnected but in the same way that
like you pull one brick out and it might
all collapse we also can build the
scaffold and it makes it stronger and we
can look at ways because when you
because if you solve one thing and it
causes all of this havoc and you pass
off those externalities there's also the
positive externality side right if you
solve education in any way you're
helping everyone if you solve poverty in
any way you're helping everyone and so
it can unstow ball the same as it can
snowball in the same direction it's just
about the transparency and having that
Khan
feedback loop in the information and I'm
getting off-topic because I'm now I'm
talking about like the possibility but
it's right now like honestly we can
create a system that isn't documentaries
like documentaries is still this like
news feed system instead of a dashboard
of like wait where are we with
alternative energy what does that
currently look like not so Michael Moore
Jeff Gibbs can sell a film and not so BP
can look like they're being green and
not so our governments can look like
they're being green what currently is
actually the best solution what's the
best solar panel we have and how can we
improve it what's what makes it the best
because there probably isn't one best
one probably uses at least amount of
water or one probably uses the least
amount of coal probably and so looking
at what is the data what is the
information and yes just that picture of
the Weasley house it's like kept up with
like band-aids and magic and you pull
one thing out and it collapses and so
the world is waking up right now to the
fact that we don't have magic and we
live in this Weasley house it is gonna
any kind of quake and it's gonna
collapse and that is that is my I like
that's exactly what we are right now is
the house of tiles held up by magic hope
that's really nice that's really ugly
yeah there's that there's something that
occurred to me while you were speaking
there do believe that this need for
transparency it's it's such a long way
off right that that mindset that
produces transparency because you know
it's in everyone's long-term best
interests right even if you up
here being honest about that you
up is actually good for everyone right
and you know the understanding that this
fuckup happened and why it happened and
so this is this is good right and so
creating an environment in which people
can be transparent without fear of
retribution right because this is one of
the great barriers to transparency it's
it's not just about people wanting to be
secretive right that's that's not the
issue the issue is is is people unable
to be forthcoming and transparent for
fear of some kind of consequence whether
real or imagined right but fear a bit
but fear of some kind of consequence so
you know if you're gonna drill right
down into the meta the meta is creating
that environment of security and safety
and lack of lack of pointing fingers and
looking to blame people for you
know what I mean and and and yeah I mean
how the hell do you do that in a world
where as you say people are starving and
struggling to get by and don't have
access to clean water and know how
they're going to pay this month
electricity bill and bla bla bla bla bla
bla bla you know how do you it just
seems I'm so deeply depressed by that
firm when he saw in my post I said open
my closing line was God we are so
and and we really are because it's not
just the mess that we have but the
complete inability of the majority of
the population to actually look at that
mess in the face for what it is and to
and and and to start from that point you
know what I mean to be just just to
allow the world to be transparent to you
to see just how far down the road of
 ourselves we actually are you
know and and I can see from the
responses a couple of posts I put up
recently there's this one there was
another one about an interview with the
Swedish epidemiologist and this a
totally off topic but is actually on the
meta topic where the responses from
people were you could see it was like
defensive trigger responses right the
interview was about the the reason the
justification behind the Swedish policy
of a much more relaxed approach to
lockdown and so on right and the
response is I go oh yeah well they're
doing really well look at these death
numbers and they put they obviously
hadn't listened to the interview you
know what I mean and listen to what the
guy had to say before making their
comments and this this willingness to
make snap judgments and think you know
what the you're talking about when
obviously you do not and and and and
this is this is everywhere so yeah I uh
another rant I'm sorry but I just find
it really
cause you have this part this part let's
ranch it out so we can move on to the
possibility right there like what does
the future look like without this I
think that's a berry along the current
path we are right if we need
everyone to get on board with either
that green energy is the solution or
it's not right there's this division and
they're both right it's like right we
need like clearly over our
planet and pumping toxic sludge into it
is not a solution
neither is pretending that we have a
solution those are great anyways you
pump the exactly yeah yeah and if
anyone has information right someone I
think did post on your game be caught
post something and I looked at it and it
was like the tablet table of solutions
or something like that and I was looking
I was like oh this looks really cool but
also who are you how do I trust you
right like how do I trust this
collective of information and that is
why one person doing it a tiny group of
people doing it isn't going to be the
solution it has to be something that we
trust something that you know like isn't
from our governments in the 1% media but
truly like that website that that person
posted those are the kind of things if
we're able to look at it truly honestly
together but we're not having a tiny
group of people say oh here's the solar
that's the best is it your solar that's
ironic look it's like what is truly the
best right without it because you're
always gonna find your company the best
the one that either employs you the one
that you own is it's where your money
your food is coming from but we need
that safety net like we need both the
ability to UM emotionally and socially
make mistakes and still be okay right
that both I know I'm not gonna starve no
matter how much I up and I know I'm
still gonna be able to find some kind of
connection and community unless I like
really royally up right like I'm
not murdering people maybe you don't get
community but other than that like
that's the bar anything shy of that I
see the wrong thing I have a really bad
day and freaked the out on people
that there's like social safe like a
social safety and a resource safety that
I both know
I'm not gonna be destitute even if my
idea even if I create a solar panel and
there is something fundamentally wrong
with it
even if the company goes bankrupt I
don't go bankrupt my kids don't start I
know that I'm taking care of me I can
take more risk and the shame part which
we have to like I can't solve that for
7.5 billion people but I can solve it
for me by finding people who will
support me even if I make mistakes right
and so there's there's something
something there and now unless China
wants to add something to this portion
we can move on to the second portion
I'll just give do you want to add
something to this portion China this is
the rant time is currently copied in the
world with the menace
we're just stating what is right now I
agree with everything so far and I guess
I'm ready to move on to solution all
right yeah now we can talk about our
what does this look like in our perfect
world as much as we can envision it 5 10
100 years in the future however much you
need it to be in the future for you
think that's plausible and they do not
need to match the hours can be three
different three different utopians
because it's all use energy seeing as
how we have been talking mostly about
energy can I use energy as a sort of
specific example but that could be
applied in a meta fashion is that is
that all right all right because I think
I think this notion applies right across
right across the board so I mean just
using my self energy to go up and I'm
not trying to blow my own trumpet here
but I'm just saying you know I I am able
because I live in a place that past Sun
most of the year right in the winter
it's a little bit of a struggle I am
able to have a few solar panels on my
roof and that's it no connection to grid
no emissions no nothing now exactly what
the trade-off is with the mining and the
materials that are used and the panels
are good for maybe 15 years and then
they need to be replaced and factoring
all of that in over the lifetime of the
equipment batteries as well eventually
run it you know lose their life and has
to be replaced and and so on so they you
know it's not it's not a simple matter
but the what you were saying before
Jubilee about having the information
right the information needs to be a
accessible so that anyone can understand
it easily without having to have a PhD
in in in battery design right or
whatever to actually be able to
understand the information so it's about
finding metrics that are a meaningful
and truthful and be easy for the
layperson to understand right even if
they have no training so something like
energy for example is a pretty simple
one right so for the equation that I'm
talking about with me using solar panels
to produce my powered rather than gas
burnt at a power station and then
transferred to me via cables with the
loss of cables and the necessity to put
up cables and maintain cables and so on
and so on and so on right there's a cost
to all of this needs to be factored into
the overall equation but it needs to be
done so in such a way that you can read
it and so energy in energy out right
energy joules of energy required to
produce the thing joules of energy
produced by the thing during its
lifetime and this is a this is a and so
this kind of metric I think could be
pretty easily figured out for everything
I mean foods a little tricky because
food calories is not a great measure of
food right there's other nutritional
things other than just the calorific
intake but you know we're through data
but so and so two things firstly having
this series of simple metrics that give
a true reasonably so I mean a simple
metrics never going to give all the
nuance right but but that broadly
speaking gives a true picture of the
situation and secondly having liked it
like fractal production in all of these
areas and so you know at an individual
level a household has the capability to
produce some of its own power maybe heat
some of its water with a tank on the
roof grow some of its food in the garden
that kind of thing
a neighborhood collectively could have
maybe a big diesel generator between
them all for when there's a power outage
and this kind of thing and so production
and use being
localized to the degree where it is
sensible to do so right not that it has
to be a dogma where everything must be
this but where it is sensible to do so
so food production is probably not
sensible to do on a household by
household basis but you know a thousand
households maybe something like that
obviously it's not as simple as that
it's got to be adapted everybody but a
thousand households something like that
could be responsible for at least their
fruit vegetable egg production for
example right maybe meat dairy oil they
have to get from from elsewhere but you
know that and so where it is sensible to
do so localized things and where things
need to be big centralized things be big
centralized things and that that seems
to me to be the foundation of the of the
meta solution all right I will continue
on I can try a minute we winnin if she
want um met a solution it was like well
you were talking about like wait this is
the thing like this is this is if we
have the tech go up if we have my
version and that is the better solution
but it's like what does that actually
look like in five 10 20 years I'm not
gonna give it a hundred because I think
this is everything I talked about is
plausible in five 10 20 years once we
get started and the solutions start
snowballing and said if the problem
starts no Molly that exactly what Eric
talked about having solutions that are
local makes sense local and having the
ones that are collective and more
universal makes sense and having it make
sense down to the individual sovereignty
that you can choose where and how you
get your energy clearly I can't be in
Vancouver and expecting to use only
solar but Vancouver could even may
Hoover could probably use some solar
especially if its temptation so Lord
when it's more efficient right now
actually
thank you for probably should when it's
it's not a sufficient of the kebee
having access to information that is
both trustworthy and usable meaning that
you have that that surface level
information that anyone can access this
is what my six-year-old can understand
seven oh my seven-year-old can
understand on how batteries work and
solar power works and here's the numbers
but you can get debt even a
solar-powered engineer could get down
into
the data and doubt like that you can get
more more complex with it
but there's still that surface level to
explain it to 90% of the people and then
if we have information we can trust and
use and the technology the
infrastructure to be able to connect
with other people both at that local
level hey who is growing what what
energy is coming from where how am i
solving my needs and as I solved them
and that both everything feeds back into
the system so if you start with a
solution and healthcare a solution and
education a solution and energy it isn't
about that ever being the final solution
it is about continually improving it is
this in any way okay with what we have
currently going on right a solar panel
might not be able be better than than
oil right now but it's starting and then
how do we get it more efficient how do
we get the mining more efficient to get
these resources how do we make it last
longer how do we get more efficiency out
of it is something we can crowdsource
together and so this combination of
having access to information that we
trust and can use and access to the
infrastructure to be able to create
solutions together and monitor them to
see wait we thought this was a solution
to education are people learning more
are people enjoying this process and so
this constant feedback from the user
themselves empowered to create solutions
themselves together is my version of a
world that I want to live in and it's
not utopian because you're not ever
getting into perfect you're constantly
looking to improve it together and never
leaving it up to governments and
corporations who you know we're gonna
 it up or profit or power it's us
creating them in ways that we want to
use them that's not creating them for
power or profit either us creating them
to use the solution I don't want to
create a solar Factory
I want to use the energy so I can I can
charge my devices so I can have a fridge
so again like that is what I want so I
want energy available to everyone at
that right I want energy available that
is efficient and cheap and all the good
stuff without siphoning off profit to
give to shareholders or passing off
externalities onto everyone else and
that's where the data in the info come
in so that is that is
and it's my vision of a future that I
would like to well it sounds great
of course in my system all of us
happening just like you and so in my
future I see this counterbalancing
system can told them it's decentralized
actually like individually sand-like
sovereign but yet we're recording the
data we know that it's legit because of
the data thread and the timestamp and
like it's not like coming from some
vague place that's coming from all of us
we use this system to value all of these
solutions that we're using and to
monitor them and to track them and to
see exactly what's working what's not
working the system itself creates our
interconnectivity and actual social
safety net so then if you do have a
solar business that isn't as good as you
want for the environment you have you
can either you know stop doing that
business and have a safety net that
catches you within your own community
with value or you can just step back and
reassess do some more science figure out
another better way to solve it maybe we
purposely make factories to be easier to
transform so that we can make changes
instead of just really rigid factories I
think that this is where we're going we
are becoming our own agents in the world
to solve problems to be valued to not be
controlled by big business big
corporations and by with the
transparency we create trust that's
where the trust comes from it's going to
be hard to say oh everyone be totally
transparent but as we build systems that
are transparent I think other people can
see where the value is in that
and then more people get on it's like a
snowball effect we become more open to
trying new stuff like I see in our
communities in the future not too far
where we have the opportunity to try
different forms of energy creation let's
save all this all these odd weird
alternative ways that are never allowed
because of our laws and corporations
really make it difficult to test these
out once we have this counter structure
set up I see people coming to their
communities and saying I want to try
this type of energy I don't know it's
what is this that when you harvest from
your waste it's not really geothermal is
it but anyway you know just different
types that aren't really allowed you can
come to your community you can set up a
proposal this is my house I want to
design it it's very green bla bla bla I
want to share it as an
information-gathering idea and if it
works then you have all your tracking
all of my metrics for it and then if it
does work people can also do it and try
it as well in other places and we get to
share that technology and it's kind of a
way to get around our rigid laws because
we're so transparent with it and if it
doesn't work then we can bounce back and
be like okay new new solution how do we
fix this problem I created but you're so
open about it that your community is
interested there also you know it's
valuable I just think that that kind of
a world is so fulfilling and desirable
because you're constantly important in
your life and the life people around you
so probably really rancid and maybe
didn't make any sense
all of our brilliant minds do that and I
understood it and Eric understood it so
we're good people in the conversation
understood I think my most articulate
when I'm renting I would really get up
ahead of staring there was something I
wanted to say what was it
[Music]
 it's gone
it'll come back if it's meant to yeah
yeah the they weird it is although I say
it every time the beginning of this
section that our ideas don't need to
match right we can just because it's out
the whys we're arguing way I don't think
that's feasible no that's not the
priority there are actual versions of
the future almost always aligned it's
that how we get there that doesn't like
that's still like and yet the Tenjin
because we're doing the adjacent
possible next that's also something
again we might disagree on what the best
adjacent possible is but most of us
aren't going to argue that we need an
adjacent possible it's there yeah we can
all agree on the needs it's the
strategies where we may differ but we
can all agree on the needs it's really a
great model it's a great model that
enviously I remember what I was going to
say now by the way from an Alan Watts
talk right that you won't these problems
won't go away until you put the
direction of nature back in the hands of
nature right and and stop trying to
around with it just just let it do its
thing and so yeah I mean it seems like
an impossibility right we rely so
heavily on technology but it's about
part of the meta solution is about
letting go of this need to control
everything in the world and everything
in our lives right and yeah you know
things like washing machines and and and
you know hot water for showers and and
things like this and you know nice soft
beds and all of that kind of thing
lovely I'm not saying get rid of all
that but I'm just saying we need to at
an individual level as well as at a
societal level really really ask
ourselves the questions what is the
minimum of the manipulation I can do to
nature what is the minimum I can extract
from in order to have a life that is you
know comfortable and and and and
bountiful and whatever you know without
without how just having tons of but
you know that is a value system
adjustment which has to come along with
this
I don't know how you do that but it's
essential anything you track that and
value the tracking of it and that brings
us perfectly into the next section which
is the adjacent possible now that we've
talked about what the world currently
looks like what the meta-crisis it's a
 show if you missed that part the
second part our beautiful version of the
future which is truly connected and
amazing and we have accesses information
what is a step we could take towards
that beautiful future if we had 10,000
people and $100,000
to create a solution and then make it
better and for me it's transparency it's
creating a system that we trust to
monitor what is currently going on that
is only going on because it happens in
complexity and secrecy right it's too
complicated to know it's too
overwhelming to know and it's too
proprietary to know well no it's not
wait
we know how mining works we know how
unless you're gonna tell us you're
mining works better we can make the map
of our supply chain right what
especially with alternative energy
what does goes into a solar panel what
solar panels are out there and how ever
they mind and what goes into it what
water what food what food food I guess
but water and energy goes into creating
us and those are the kind of things we
can create together in fact tons of
people are creating it it's just they're
not creating it together so then they
have to sell it to everyone like that
cool website that was postponed baby I'm
like cool and bear are you getting this
information from and how do I trust you
if I could just get that snapshot as
soon as I was on that website yeah
anyone else had some because I I could
go on but this is a cool half an hour
and Jason possible my recommendation is
take the hundred thousand dollars blow
it on hookers and drugs because it's
 hopeless it doesn't matter what
we come up with they will capture it
they will manipulate it they will
deceive us into thinking that something
that they're making money out of is the
thing that we want but it's not actually
the thing they want it just looks like
the thing that we want and yeah it just
it seems to be an inescapable cycle
until the whole thing collapse
in ourselves so take your hundred grand
and go and enjoy it and then when it
runs out jump off a bridge every ten
dollars on false pretences take the
hundred grand and go and blow it just go
out with a bang
I prefer because I agree like there
everything is Co optimal everything but
if we were doing it together it's so
much less co-op table it's so much less
able to be used as a tool against us and
transparency is a big part of that if
there's no behind and so what is
something if we had so again they're not
looking to create a solution for 7.5
billion people but ten thousand so what
would transparency look like to those
ten thousand people what would get you
to trust these solutions how would you
know a solution is trustworthy how would
you how do I want to know which solar
panel is the best not by listening to
the marketing from the solar panel
people who are creating them I want to
know the actual physics the chemistry
involved in the creation of this and you
can manipulate that a bit but you can't
put like oh how did you create carbon
but there was no carbon here like then
there's part that you can't lie about is
it's like well where this by-product go
like you're missing a molecule here one
cop into the nitrogen and there is
transparency we can invoke on behalf is
the wrong word but on behalf of the
corporations and governments the
government used to have that rule right
they're the ones we went to for
information they gave us the food
pyramid this is this is healthy in the
dairy industry tell us do you daring me
haha pretty sure dairies not really hard
about that we don't trust them anymore
but if we did what would that look like
we can create that for the ten thousand
Canada can't create that but ten
thousand Canadians come together we
could assess what a food pyramid should
look like without the dairy industry
involved right I like dairy great and
doesn't mean you can't eat it it's just
not on the pyramid it's not necessity
it's you know what does that information
source look like and how they're gonna
discredit us I can be discredited 10,000
of us coming together that's really hard
to discredit that's hard to be like what
would he trust and then create it versus
me creating it and telling you to trust
it yeah and then one of the 10,000
accepts you know 50 grand from the New
York Times to blow the lid on this crazy
bunch of hippies you know what I mean
and and that's it the whole world thinks
you're nuts because the New York Times
said so and and that's it no one will
sell you anything know the information
it so there is no blowing the lid off is
first of all we're doing it all it's not
that there's zero possibility in those
things happening it's that their way
lesson when we're transparent about how
we're creating it show us the lie right
show me where Eric said that it's like
what are you two like it's not finding
like okay well Jubilee stole when she
was you know in grade six yes she
totally said that in all of these videos
right like there is no way to come and
bring Brooks first of all softly
centered on an individual so even if
that individual falls from grace it
doesn't fall apart the information
itself you can pick apart for that
science cool awesome thanks for helping
us right you can't create a new entity
that sounds like it's official you know
the global society of making sense of
the world not then that it's like gonna
come to grow since making the Royal
Institute of sense name and then because
we're gonna have transparency on my back
right right if like who owns what and
where's when we have the IMDB for
politicians and CEOs and executives
because it exists out there we just
don't care right we don't know by who
Bernie em is we don't know who this CEO
of DuPont is right but it's out there
and he could follow his or her I'm gonna
go in his his track record on everywhere
he's worked and all of his buddies right
we can see that
clearly just like Google can see it on
us we can see it on theirs and theirs is
more is transparent it's just not
organized and so we can organize the
information absolutely check out see
people and $100,000 and then yeah they
might sue us but which one of us you
gonna sue the entity we created our own
entity that sounds official and we're
not doing it for everyone we're only
doing it for the ten thousand that's
what we care about how does we did it
for the ten thousand it's gonna draw an
army alright if Eric's involved in it
whoever trusts Eric is gonna come and be
involved in it and so they're not
actually gonna trust the New York Times
/ Erin nor circle my circle is gonna
trust the New York Times / Eric but they
might not trust New York Times over me
that area of it right that it when we
solve things together it's a different
well because it's real that's the thing
that's the difference right it's an
actual real thing that actually does the
thing that it was designed to do because
that's all we actually cared about when
we were making it we didn't care about
how it looked or who was gonna do what
the share price was gonna be or how much
money we were gonna make it was it was
actually built to do the thing you know
and therefore it's real that's that's
the power of it that's that's why it's
uncorruptible it sell it fast to the
people it's so alien it just I mean it
actually made me laugh out loud the
notion of something just actually being
the thing that it is and that's it it
just doesn't exist in my work it just
it's a fantasy that simple honesty is a
fantasy in our world there's always an
angle is always an agenda there's always
a withholding of some kind whatever it's
just but the beautiful part is you can
have if you have 10,000 people coming
together and they've said yes here's my
$10 they put their money where their
mouth is those 10,000 people being
involved in the solution like one of
them can't really break it unless we let
them like there isn't what are they
gonna do and if they do it the first
time
awesome well I didn't see that come in
then we fix it wait you're bluffing
oh look so what 10 co-opted I didn't see
that happening then the next solution we
don't allow like what could we have had
in place to have make sure that doesn't
happen again and creating something for
purpose instead of for profit
right now we're incentivized to lie you
can't be in honest solar company how
would you possibly be out there in the
world on selling your solar panels being
like well it costs a thousand units of
energy and you're only ever gonna get
900 out of it but you know you're not
paying for those thousand you're paying
for the subsidized so you're good
no one's gonna pay you so it makes sense
it's if you only waive that
all right that's that's the thing you
know ok fair enough so I get to
externalize 400 dollars you need so I
still make 300 units out this cool you
know and if people want to be like that
they're gonna be like that but at least
it's on the table and they know exactly
what they're doing yeah and we like the
industry isn't good out of the goodness
of their hearts and solar industry might
because the good players might put their
information out there but they're
playing with the bad players and the bad
players like what good are solar panels
just flipped into existence with no
energy or water input I don't know what
you did that was broken but like that
there's an invoke of transparency on
behalf on our behalf like what is the
information and there's also that that
piece in Torah I have a conversation
with Freeman together this is where
we're starting is on the transparency
piece because he thinks lets me just put
words in his mouth that like it's all
you don't invoke transparency on behalf
of the other and I'm like oh we invoke
transparency on behalf of the other when
the others entire existence is about
profit and about keeping us in the dark
they don't exist if they're in the light
then they shouldn't exist and we can
give them the light but they don't want
that we want and that's an incentive in
a way because we are the customer of
their business so eventually as we are
having more transparency and we do see
that they that's incentive for them to
change their ways and be more green
whatever it is actually green but yes
three more
anymore cause the pressure that the
masses need to have to be able to put on
them I think that's exactly where we'll
go once we have this system and and I
love that you brought Raymond in because
of course that was where I was going
next I would love to see like I know
that you I think it's very similar like
when you talk about your 10,000 people I
think they're near you and so if anybody
within your 10,000 has that problem or
does something Shady
it's all in there like everybody knows
so that's incentive to for people not to
be associated as well even though we're
all driven because we're part of this
game a system right now I mean that's
how we think the winners think that way
and that's how they're gonna be winners
but it's so the transparency really I
think makes people try to be their best
and I think that's key so in my big
world vision I would love for the 10
whatever ten thousand hundred thousand I
would say this multi-level system of
metrics which is probably a lot of what
Raymond is talking about I listened to
your your video and it sounds exactly
the same I must is my system because
we're both coming from that meta
currency project idea so by being able
to see these different connections
within people in the planet and all this
it's the currencies I would like to be
able to offer go to communities offer
this value system to a community and
hopefully there's 10 dozen or whatever
however many people and just let them
start to record and map their different
currencies which sounds weird is kind of
hard to describe currency and the meta
currency project it's really just being
able to visualize see an exchange in
different levels so anyway they start to
map their own value what they're doing
if they're recycling and they're
starting to map that themselves so there
is a way to value it and
start to build that entire mapping
system so I then you go to another
community and let them start theirs and
it starts to build and eventually we do
have this worldwide mapping system that
is showing where the externalities are
where we've been proved on our own where
we're putting the pressure on other
corporations to do the same those are
people to work through a solution with
and figure out what their values are
like my focus is on the very much needed
other side of that that it's it's like
finding where can we start mapping our
data as individuals what out of the
10,000 could we use right so instead of
finding 10,000 Vancouverites we're
mapping everything it's like finding
10,000 people globally and mapping where
we're finding right well how much are we
paying what are we eating I was like so
that something can come out of that
right but that's not necessarily what
the solution raising is this is amazing
it is more of a system of that right
like what what would a food app that you
wanted to put your data into and what
you're getting out of it you can get
something out of your data and to be
able to put your data in because they're
not going to put tons of time in what
I'm heating when I'm not getting recipes
out of it or I'm not getting suggestions
or not I need something write it as a
solution so that I am like I don't I
would probably involved in it in any in
any level but with yeah I don't know
what I'm saying hi my brain actually
feels like it's on something and it's
not it's not on anything at the moment
good times good times it's on meta
solution but I do think with 10,000
people any like even having a handful of
people that actually understood the
chemistry right having like a dragon
stand but instead of five billionaires
seeing if your idea is worthy enough so
sharks tank is what it's known each day
it's having those ideas be able to be
seen and then or will we invest in it
having five or six people look at it and
being like oh yeah this is the best
solar count not because we're going to
invest
because now my money is here and I get
all this money but like no compared to
the other ones out there like what does
it look like what does it look like to
be the best seller panel what are the
metrics and how can anyone put those
metrics in right like Eric has solar
panels there's that on the box what it
says it does and then there's what it's
actually doing for Eric Eric could be
feeding that information though it's an
interesting point actually that comes up
here because the thing is I'm not I I
would actually have no nothing to offer
other than personal anecdotal experience
which is that they are sufficient right
it's enough sometimes in the winter you
know when there's only like seven or
eight hours of daylight anyway and it's
overcast all day I need to run the
generator for a couple of hours to talk
the batteries up which means I'm using
petrol right which is which is not great
but it's that's the price you pay with
solar is that you don't always always
have enough Sun during the summer even
on overcast days it's enough and so but
yeah I mean I couldn't give you
numerical data on how much it produces
do you know what I mean I can tell you
that seven panels is good enough more
than enough actually most of the time
yeah but that's part of it right like
it's if we're feeding data back into the
system it's not necess
where you're like a Tuesday afternoon I
didn't have enough well that information
we know that it's overcast because we
know what it's doing in Spain at the
time if there was other people putting
their information and and you then are
like wait I'm using solar but this
person my neighbor who have remain
indoors I didn't even know was using
wind that you were you could use theirs
during that time and they could use
yours right like you can't do the
numbers and if we need the numbers from
you we're gonna need to send you an
equipment right or you're gonna need to
buy the equipment like we need to meet
people where they are which is like I
use them I don't know how they work it's
like okay we'll plug this in tell us
what the meter reads right I don't I
don't know what that was like
but those and then that could be a tool
library right we're like okay we're
gonna send this out to you do it for a
month then you're gonna send it to
someone else is gonna do it for mum or
it stays at yours and constantly as
smart and feeds back into the system
when you need more power and when you're
not able to do it and that kind of
information that it's again you're not
gonna feed that in if you're not getting
anything but what you're getting is the
idea that maybe your neighbor has a
solution right and as those things start
to come together if we already have the
the power grid online
it was like anyone who's using anything
alternative put your information in it's
a threshold of people once once enough
people are honored it paid it pays for
itself in information right you wants
what your information is you're getting
information oh but it's it's reaching
that threshold which to me is something
we can do much more easily together by
saying hey ten thousand people in Spain
who have their own energy want to create
an energy grid just to say how you're
doing it how that's working yeah there's
not there's not one within miles of me I
mean I'm the I am literally the only one
for miles and miles around no no I'm
just saying that no but I I know that's
a very specific just me example but but
this is a general point right that these
these 10,000 people used for many things
not all things but for many things need
to be within reasonable proximity of
each other and so the question then
becomes well who's going to actually you
know pick up their clipboard and go and
start knocking on doors using themselves
and actually drumming up 10 the own
beginnings drum up sent that or at least
arming up 100 so that each of those
hundreds and then go and drum up send
more and write as somebody who would
love to live off the grid but I also I'm
not really gonna do that what do you not
buy myself anyway it might be that you
put yourself on that map
and there is nobody within a big
distance of you but someone else in
Spain wants to do what you're doing and
they could connect with you as a mentor
and then you don't I mean they're like
probably gonna move close to you so you
could start that power grid and then
once there's two of you the third person
is more likely to join you like it
doesn't necessarily mean you need 10,000
people together it can coalesce together
around that if what we're creating makes
that makes sense right again you're not
gonna put your information in unless
there's something to gain that game
might be that you're waiting months or
years for other people to come and see
you if it's not costing you anything and
it's just just that you exist and you
have seven solar panels right I don't
know you see right now if I did put my
information out there then I have
someone from the government coming
around demanding tax from me I mean they
don't know I have it cuz I post it from
the UK but right now even if you're off
grid I believe you are required to pay -
for what why why do I have to pay you
I'm using absolutely nothing of your
 so ya know so what
I think it was when I was talking to max
Porter's but I might have the person
wrong that we were talking about I don't
think it was max a solution to like the
uber right break basically broke the law
to come into existence there's a lot of
gray area laws where it's like it's not
quite illegal cuz we don't even know
it's a possibility and if we were doing
it out in the open we actually couldn't
create it but uber can create uber and
then now we can because to do like uber
exists you're not gonna let the
collective one exists that isn't but
there's a truth to that that if we all
had our information in the system on
that we're living off grid and our
governments can tax us there's a cost to
that right that now we have to get taxed
or we didn't have to before there is
some amount of cost of transparency on
some of those things which is also why
we might want to start our transparency
onto them and not on us right or on the
US where if there's enough of us
involved guaranteed someone's like wait
I usually put our information in here
the government can find us and start
taxing us so one we need to make it more
secure where it's just the data we don't
know we can't trace it back to Eric but
then how do you find your neighbors but
they don't like there's there's stuff to
be gained with transparency cost with
transparency if we had a million of us
on the grid in Europe who are like
listen your technology isn't really a
solution I've come up with my own
solution and we're coming up with a
solution you have enough people to like
change the law in a way that the
lobbyists can't compete with right
because if we have money and the actual
voting power that's not a lobbyist
that's like democracy more you're
actually supposed to be doing but they
have to counteract that with the
lobbyists like we we can start changing
and breaking laws when there's enough of
us and we have to own that as part of
our process that we can't start with the
things that are gonna cost us money when
it comes on the open like barter systems
there's been a ton of barter systems
online that have been tried to be put up
right you give an hour of your time I
give an hour of my time we're both
freely in that exchange they break down
because the government start taxing them
so you're a lawyer you gave an hour of
your time I want taxes on the $500 even
though you only got an hour plumbing out
of it yes
I have a lot to say about all the you
guys have talked about there um I think
that to get around that the taxing part
well there's so many levels here okay
for one I would say what if this
counterbalancing system actually values
that you're using solar air and you
every three months or so just report
back yes I mean I'm fully sustainable on
solar and then that is valued not in the
monetary as in money exchange but in a
way that is anchoring that you're
valuable you're becoming more
sustainable I mean that's the bigger
goal with this gained me is to be
sustainable so there's a as as you're
building your own value that you're
reporting back to your community other
people would be interested in and also
want to do it but another thing another
connection with this underlying system
is the fact that we become the GUP to
pencil ownership of yourself you kind of
need to be also responsible if you're
going to be sustainable you're being
responsible but that's in a way
governance so we take on I believe that
we start to Co govern with our
governments so they're still there and
they're like propping up game a or
whatever but then game B is another form
of governance so that we are able to not
pay taxes to them because we're taking
the responsibility that supposedly we've
given them and that's why we pay taxes
so that they can take responsibility for
us so we start doing our own recycling
we build those programs into our
recycling in our local areas we get a
value system that's recognizing that so
then we're paying less taxes from our
community we're becoming more
responsible for ourselves we become more
resilient to disaster because we're
interconnected we're already taking care
of ourselves so I see that that is a way
to get out of the tax part as well
another additional thing I wanted
is that in near in the town near me in
the capital they have like a solar
cooperative and so they collectively get
money together to put Azimut they're
trying to get as many solar panels on as
many houses as they possibly can which
is great and it helps with the cost and
all that and and yet I'm sure they're
trying to always get a better product to
get more green better manufacturing but
what if we as a community valued the
more resources of their more renewable
energy we had within our community our
communities become so wealthy as we
improve upon our communities with this
new value system and it's not a
competitive way it's in a way that
really establishes our ability to
respond to whatever comes our way
basically as a community therefore the
momentum the support that the ease to
change up what we're doing so we're
being more less and less harmful to the
environment because it's the full
transparency again and I just feel like
there is incentive to do all these
things even though even if we're just
tracking our intrinsic incentives in a
way that shows the value of them and
then what we're doing to stuff I know
that was really but it's it's I love it
but now that we're close to the hour how
we like to wrap these up is for each of
us to take a turn to give our best
adjacent possible what is something you
see having the biggest impact that you
would most want to be in existence for
10,000 people and $100,000 if Eric you
want to stick with hookers and blow that
[Laughter]
so we all just today is it's that
document sure I'm just feeling
particularly hopeless at the moment it
just seems to be no way out of it I
think I've described the monster see you
before having either the octopus with
many many many tentacles which then
subdivide and they just reach into
everything in it and it's just
everywhere it's just everywhere and so
yeah it's even hello they find out where
you were I think the biggest wind I
think has just blown a door open
somewhere excuse my police come over
take them that's also the beautiful
thing about it being global like having
10,000 people local there's a lot of
beautiful and amazing things with that
and there's also a lot of beautiful
amazing things that mean people ten
thousand dollars ten thousand
is that even if our governments want it
to like stop what we are doing you
literally need someone begging on Eric's
tour in Spain and even Canada you invest
right like it's like good luck
coordinating that okay all right well
even if we somehow were the three you
know heads you needed to cut off at the
hi drugs like and there is like everyone
is their own sovereign cell but it's the
system that brings us together which I
think I guess is my adjacent possible
having an aid information source on
products specifically the thing that
outcompetes marketing the thing that is
trust and truth on marketing on what we
trust marketing tell us what actually
goes into this what is the durability
and then feedback into the system they
say in the last 25 years
do they last 25 years you know is is
Eric solar panel breaking down at the
fifth-year instead in someone else's
last 40 years what is the actual
durability of the product what went into
it and how and what is happen what is
coming out of it right what is the
output of the reason you have it
whatever that purpose is that having an
information source that ten thousand
people created what could a website look
like to to give us everything marketing
to give us information on the products
that we use that we want to use either
at its personal level so we start with
like
tasting canned goods and/or at a static
community level
what kind of solar panels what kind of
plumbing what kind of like either
solutions Yelp or a product Yelp is my I
think best what we could absolutely do
and have a huge impact with 10,000
people and $100,000 and then from that
we can I mean once you have 10,000
people using that then they can choose
where to boycott we can see that the
possibility of let's create our own
toothpaste company let's create our own
toilet paper company let's both buy this
let's create solutions that are actual
solutions to the purpose not the profit
yeah China how about you what's your
biggest what do you think is the biggest
thing we could do for you I would just
go on for an hour so I'm gonna say I
love what you just said I totally agree
transparency and our connectivity
sharing that the feedback loops very
important with all of that right no I
agree to I you know I agree to be lovely
but I just that I always get lost at
there how you know what I mean I just
don't actually see this happening in the
world I what I would like and this is
slightly off what we've been talking
about but I think what I would really
like to see is a willingness to just
slow down right we don't need to be
doing all of this stuff that we're doing
right just slow down we don't need to
change our phones every six months we
don't need to have a straw in every
drink that we buy you know anything we
don't we don't need to have huge
wardrobes full of 27 different outfits
and 57 different pairs of shoes and blah
blah but you know we just don't need
this and yeah that's just yeah
there we go
yeah we don't need all this but
also I don't think we can dictate that's
other people like telling somebody who I
think I can you to still reduce my
wardrobe I can choose to be part of and
the more we can create the systems to
truly make that be a choice where I
didn't have to rely on like you know
goodwill and
Salvation Army yours and where it's like
I'm buying my clothes secondhand even
though they're more expensive to do in
some case like this doesn't make sense
it's like how do we make clothes from
scratch because we're eventually gonna
need them in a sustainable way and make
our wardrobe sustainable right like how
many pieces do you need and how can we
help you with that as opposed to dictate
what that is best of both worlds is
really easily spoke right you have
clothing exchanges in the high street
right and so at home you might have four
or five outfits when you get tired of
one of them you bring it down there you
dump it there you grab a couple of new
ones you take them home and then when
you're tired of those you bring them and
so and then when they wear out they wear
out and the material is recycled in
whatever way it can be I mean it down
the road further when we can do this
printing clothes right and so you
download a design off the internet you
print it out you wear it you throw it in
the thing it recycles when you print
something else out of it you know I mean
this is this is the future sweet you
don't need to have any clothes what you
want when you want it I just get radical
you know and then once ignited in
addition I was going to say with this
multi-level system that I'm picturing it
really helps to show that buying all
those clothes and things isn't
satisfying but you could be recording
how by doing all of this renewable type
stuff that's more satisfying because
you're purposely trying to make an
impact a positive impact in the world
and so you can see it in this
multi-level value sister for yourself
and then other people can see it from
you and you can share it anyway I just
all right say goodbye to YouTube and
then I have one more thing I wanted to
say