[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so we have been looking
at the cognitive science of intelligence
and we've been looking at the seminal
work of new orleans simon and we've seen
how they are trying to create a
plausible construct of intelligence to
drive many different ideas together into
this idea of intelligence as the
capacity to be a general problem solver
and then they're doing a fantastic job
of applying the naturalistic imperative
which helps us to avoid the homonka door
fallacy because we're trying to analyze
formalize and mechanize our explanation
of intelligence explaining the mind
ultimately in a non-circular fashion by
explaining it in non mental terms and
this will also hopefully give us a way
of resituated the mind within the
scientific worldview we saw that at the
core of their construct was the
realization via the formalization and
attempted mechanization of the
combinatorial explosive nature of the
problem space and how crucial relevance
realization is and how somehow you zero
in on the relevant information they
proposed a solution to this that has
far-reaching implications for our
understanding of meaning cultivation and
of rationality they propose the
distinction between heuristic and
algorithmic processing and the fact that
most of our processing has to be
heuristic in nature it can't pursue
certainty it can't be algorithmic it
can't be Cartesian in this fashion in
that fashion and that also means that
our cognition is susceptible to bias the
very processes that make us
intelligently adaptive help us to ignore
the combinatorial explosive amount of
options and information available to us
are the ones that also prejudice us
prejudiced us and bias us so that we can
become self deceptively misled this was
a powerful that they deserve to be
seminal figures and that they exemplify
how we should be trying to do cognitive
science and they exemplify the power of
the naturalistic imperative but there
were serious shortcomings and New
Orleans Symonds work they themselves and
this is something we should remember
even as scientists the scientific method
is designed to try and is a psycho
technology designed to try and help us
deal with our proclivities towards
self-deception they fell they fell prey
to a cognitive heuristic that biased
them they were making use of the
essentialist heuristic we can which is
which is crucial to our adaptive
intelligence it helps us find those
things that do those classes that do
share in essence and therefore allow us
to make powerful predictions and
generalizations of course the problem
with essentialism is precisely it is a
heuristic it is adaptive we are tempted
to overuse it and that will make us miss
see that many categories do not possess
an essence like the Kim Stein famously
pointed out the category of game or
chair or table New Orleans Simon thought
that all problems were essentially the
same and because of that how you
formulate a problem is a rather trivial
matter because of that they were blinded
to the fact that all problems are not
essentially the same
that there are essential differences
between types of problems and therefore
problem formulation is actually very
important this is the distinction
between well-defined problems and
they'll define problems and I made the
point that most real-world problems are
ill-defined problems what's missing in
an ill-defined problem is precisely the
relevance realization that you get
through a good problem formulation we
then went into the work in which Simon
himself participated the work of Kaplan
and Simon to show that this self same
relevance realization through problem
formulation is at work in addressing
combinatorial explosion we took a look
at the problem of the mutilated
chessboard in that and that if you
formulate it as a covering strategy you
will get into a combinatorial explosive
search whereas if you formulate it as a
parity strategy if you make salient the
fact that the two removed pieces are the
same color then the solution becomes
obvious to you and very simple to do
problem formulation helps you avoid
combinatorial explosion and helps you
deal with ill-defined Innis and this
process by which you move from a poor
problem formulation to a good problem
formulation is the process of insight
and this is why we have seen throughout
insight is so crucial to you being a
rational cognitive agent and that means
that in addition to logic being
essential for our rationality those
psycho technologies that enhance our
capacity our insight are also crucially
important indispensable
we know that an insight relevance
realization is recursively
self-organizing restructuring itself in
a dynamic fashion so insight of course
is not only important for changing
ill-defined it nests so this is what
problem formulation is doing or as all
later call it problem framing it's doing
this right it's also doing this it's
helping me avoid combinatorial explosion
but it's also doing something else
something that we talked about and saw
already before with the nine dot problem
it's helping you to overcome the way in
which your relevance realization
machinery is making the wrong things
salient and obvious for you so insight
is also a way right in which this
process is self-corrective in which the
problem formulation process is self
corrected because you can mislead
yourself be misdirected so insight deals
with converting ill-defined problems
into well-defined problems by doing
problem framing problem formulation or
doing reframing when needed
it helps us avoid combinatorial
explosion by doing problem formulation
or reframing as with the person who's
shifted from a covering strategy to a
parent sorry yet from a covering
strategy to a parity strategy in the
mutilated chessboard or it also helps us
correct how we limit inappropriately our
attempts to solve a problem by what we
consider salient or relevant and it
allows us to reformulate reframe and
break out of the way we have boxed our
cognition and our consciousness in so
insight is
crucial and the cultivation of wisdom I
want to go on now what we're seeing is
many long what so we're we're doing this
thing where we're understanding
intelligence and we're seeing many
things just converting on converging on
the idea of being a general problem
solver and then we're we're seeing right
many instances already within that right
once we get this notion of trying to
come up with a general problem solver we
see that that in turn right many
different things are feeding into this
issue of relevance realization as what
makes you capable of being a general
problem solver so we have many things
feeding into this and then we're
analyzing so this right it has
tremendous potential right I'm trying to
show you a plausibility structure many
converging lines of how we measure and
investigate talk about intelligence lead
to understanding intelligence as a
general problem solver and then we're
starting to see that many of that many
lines of Investigation are converging on
what makes you generally intelligent is
your capacity for relevance realization
I want to continue this convergence I
want to make it quite powerful for you
right so presumably one of the things
that contributes as I mentioned to your
capacity for being a general problem
solver is your capacity for categorizing
things I already alluded to that when I
just discussed this issue last time your
ability to categorize things massively
increases your ability to deal with the
world if I couldn't categorize things if
I couldn't see these both as markers I
would have to treat each one as a raw
individual that I'm encountering for the
first time kind of like we do when we
meet people and we treat them with
proper nouns so this would be Tom and
then this would be Agni and meeting Tom
doesn't tell me anything about what
Agnes is going to be like and we talked
about this when we talked about
categorical perception right
but if I can categorize them together I
can make predictions about how any
member of this category will behave it
massively speeds up my ability to make
predictions to abstract important and
potentially relevant information it
allows me to communicate I can
communicate all of that categorical
information with a with a common noun
marker your ability to categorize is
central to your ability to be
intelligent so what is a category a
category isn't just any set of things a
category is a set of things that you
sense belong together
now we've note we noted last time that
your sense of things belonging together
right isn't necessarily because they
share an essence that's the common
mistake all right how is it that we
categorize things how does this basic
ability central to our intelligence
operate I'm not going to try and fully
explain that that's I don't know anybody
anyone that can do that right now all I
need to do is show you again how this
issue of relevance realization is at the
center
the standard explanation the one that
works from common sense is the one you
see in Sesame Street right you know you
you give that you give the child you
know here are three things three of
these things right you know here are
three is these things they're kind of
the same one of these things is not like
the others three of these things are
kinda the same and you have to pick out
the one right and so these go together
this one doesn't
these are categorized as markers that's
the Sesame Street explanation what's the
explanation I noticed that these are
similar right I noticed that this one is
different I mentally group together the
things that are similar I keep the parts
that the things that are different
mentally apart and that's how I form
categories isn't that obvious
well again explaining how it becomes
obvious to you and why how you make the
correct properties salient is the
crucial thing why well this is a point
made famous by the philosopher Nelson
Goodman great name what a great name
Goodman what a great name right
Nelson pointed out that we're often well
I'm gonna use our language I think this
is fair but we're often equivocating
when we invoke similarity and how
obvious it is between a psychological
sense and a logical sense and in there
in that sense we're deceiving ourselves
that we're offering an explanation so
what do I mean well what does what does
similarity mean and logical sets
well remember the Sesame Street example
kind of the same similarity is partial
identity kinda the same okay but does
partial identity mean well you share
properties you share features and the
more features you share the more
identical you are the more similar you
are there you go well that's pretty
that's pretty clear well Nelson once you
agree with that
Nelson Goodman's gonna say well now you
have a problem because any two objects
are logically overwhelmingly similar
because pick any two objects say a bison
right and a lawn mower all right all I
have to do is list Lots that's to get an
S I don't know what a by zhanna's I have
to pick properties that they share in
common okay
well they're both found on in North
America neither one was found in North
America 300 million years ago
both contain carbon both can kill you if
not properly treated both have an odor
both weigh less than a ton neither one
makes a particularly good weapon in fact
the number of things that I can say
truly that are shared by this and this
is indefinitely large it's common are
totally explosive it goes on and on and
on and on and this is Goodman's point
they share many many indefinitely large
number of properties now what you you I
imagine you're saying is yeah that's all
true I didn't say anything false
notice how truth and relevance aren't
the same thing I didn't say anything
false but what you're saying to me is
yeah but those aren't the important
properties you're picking trivial on
and no that's what you're doing you're
telling me that I haven't zeroed in on
the relevant properties the ones that
are obvious to you the ones that right
stand out to you at salient so what
you're now doing is you're moving from a
logical to a psychological account of
similarity in what matters right for
psychological similarity is not any true
comparison but finding the relevant
comparisons and the thing about that is
that doesn't seem to be stable bars Alou
pointed this out so I'm going to give
you a set of things is it a category
okay so it's your wife pets works of art
gasoline
explosive material is that a category
works of art your children your spouse
gasoline explosive material is that a
category you go no they don't share
enough in common
now here's what I say to you there's a
fire oh wait
all those things belong together now
because I care about my wife I care
about my kids
but in fire can kill them Pat's an
explosive stuff and flammable stuff is
dangerous now it forms a category in one
context not a category and another cat
in another context a very tight and
important category now the logical
sharing has not changed what shared
psychologically is what properties or
features you consider relevant for
making the comparison out of all of what
is logically shared you 0 end you see on
the relevant features for comparison you
do the same thing when you're deciding
that two things are different
because any two objects any objects you
find think are really the same also have
an indefinitely large number of
differences and when you when you are
holding things as different it's because
you've zeroed in four in here
you know shape and use are relevant
differences so at the core of your
ability to form and use categories is
your capacity again for zeroing in on
relevant information now one thing that
people sometimes say to me when I start
talking this way as they say oh you know
Darwin Darwin Darwin Darwin and we'll
talk about Darwin again right and
Darwin's very important and we'll talk
about it his work but what they mean by
that it's like you're doing all this
abstract you know but you know concrete
survival situations right I just got to
make a machine that can survive right
that's just obvious right it avoids this
and it finds that well first of all is
it so one of the things a machine has to
do for example is avoid danger danger
Will Robinson
right danger what set of features do all
dangerous things share don't tell me
synonyms for danger I mean holes are
dangerous bees are dangerous poison is
dangerous knives are dangerous lack of
food is dangerous what do all of those
share and don't say well they lead to
the damaging of your tissue that's what
danger those are synonyms for danger of
all what they're talking about our
causes of danger what do they share how
to use zero in on them
you still say wow I sort of get that but
still you know just moving around the
world finding your food okay well let's
do that let's try and make
machine that's gonna find it's gonna
deal with that very basic problem it's
gonna be a cognitive agent looking for
its food now because it's an electronic
machine it's a robot we're gonna have it
look for batteries this is an example
from Daniel Dennett so here's my robot
it's mobile it's got wheels right this
appendage for grabbing stuff it's got
all these wonderful centers it's got
lots of computational power but needed
you do to do okay so we know what we
need to do in order to make it an agent
a cognitive agent that's what we've been
talking about from the very beginning it
has to be different from something
merely something that generates behavior
everything generates behavior that this
behaves in a certain way this behaves in
a certain way this behaves in a certain
way what makes you an agent I mean this
isn't all that makes you an agent this
is a philosophically complex problem but
the crucial thing about what makes you
as an agent is the following you can
determine the consequences of your
behavior I'm using that term very
broadly you can determine the
consequences of your behavior and change
your behavior accordingly so this
ability to determine the consequences
the effects of your behavior is crucial
to being an agent so we build a machine
that can do that it can determine the
consequences of its behavior now we give
it this problem very basic problem
here's the right so here's a wagon right
it has a nice handle and on it is a nice
juicy battery now the robot right will
try and do what you and I do right and
this this is also a Darwinian thing
because for most creatures you have to
not only find food you have to avoid
being food and so you don't just eat
your food where you first find it even
powerful predators like leopards move
their food to another location because
it will get stolen they could get preyed
upon etc you know each of food where you
first come across it and fast food
restaurants are somewhat of an anomaly
but you know like when you walk into the
supermarket you just don't start eating
you try and take your food to a more
safe place you try and share your food
with other people because that's a
socially
valuable thing to do that's why when
you're eating something you don't like
you give it this taste horrible taste it
you want to share right you want to use
food as a way of sharing experience
bonding together so where the robot is
programmed to take its food the battery
to a safe place and then consume it well
that seems just so simple right that's
so simple well we have to make this a
problem because we're talking about
being a problem solver and on this right
on this wagon is a lip balm
the balm is lit which means there's a
very high probability the fuse will burn
down and the bomb will go off and we put
the robot in this situation and what
does the robot do the robot pulls the
handle because it has determined that a
consequence an effect of pulling the
handle is to bring the battery along so
it pulls the wagon and it brings the
battery along because that's the
intended effect right that's the
consequence that it is determined is
relevant to its goal okay but of course
the bomb goes off and destroys the robot
and we think Oh what did we do wrong
what did we do wrong there's something
missing and and then we realized ah you
know what we made the robot only look
for the intended effects of its behavior
we didn't have the robot check side
effects
and that's really important right every
year this happens people fail to check
side effects they go into a situation in
which they know flammable gas is diffuse
but it's dark and so they strike a match
because they want the intended effect of
making light but it has the unintended
effect of creating heat which sets off
the gas and explodes and harms or kills
them so ah we say ah we have to have the
machine not only check the intended
effects it has to check the side effects
of its own behavior okay so what we're
gonna do is we're gonna we're gonna give
it more computational power right it's
gonna write more more censors way more
censors way more computational and we're
also going to put a black box inside DES
like they do in an airplane so that we
can see what's going on inside the robot
and then we're gonna put it into this
situation because this is a great test
situation because once we solve this
simple Darwinian problem we'll have a
basically intelligent machine so we put
it in this situation and it comes up to
the wagon and then and nothing happens
it doesn't do anything and we go what
the bomb goes off right why didn't it
just move away from the wagon or why
didn't it try to lift the battery off
well we take a look and we find that the
robot is doing what we programmed it to
it's it's trying to determine all of the
possible side effects so it's
determining that if it pulls the handle
that will make a squeaking noise if it
pulls the handle there front one right
wheel right the front left wheel will go
through 30 degrees of Arc the fright
without front right wheel will go
through 30 degrees of our the back wheel
same way back left wheel back right they
that there'll be a slight wobbling and
shifting in the wagon the grass
underneath the wheels is going to be
indented the position of the wagon with
respect to Mars is
being altered do you see what the issue
is here the number of side effects is
combinatorial explosive oh crap so what
do we do right well we think we'll give
and this is something I'm gonna argue
later we can't do we come up with a
recipe a definition of relevance nobody
knows what that is I'm going to in fact
argue later that that's actually
impossible and that's going to be
crucial for understanding our response
to the meaning crisis but let's say
let's give the possibility we have a
definition of relevance and that what
we'll do is we'll have the robot right
determine right which side-effects are
relevant or not know so that's great so
we we add that new ability here we give
it some extra computational power we put
it in here and it goes up to the bomb
and the the wagon and there the battery
and the bomb goes off and it doesn't it
just sits there calculating and what's
going on and we notice we look inside
and it's making two lists and it's you
know here's the wheel turning that's
irrelevant and it's judging you that
that is irrelevant
oh here's the change in marker here too
relevant and it's making a list and this
list is going and it's just yeah it's
correctly labeling each one of these is
irrelevant but the list keeps going and
going and going
see this is gonna sound like a Zen Cohen
you have to ignore the information not
even check it the see relevance
realization isn't the application of a
definition it is somehow intelligently
ignoring all the irrelevance and somehow
zeroing in making the relevant stuff
salient standing out so that the actions
that you should do are relevant to you
are obvious to you
this is the problem of the proliferation
of side effects in behavior in action
this is called the frame problem now
there's different aspects of the frame
problem one was a technical aspect a
logical aspect in computational
programming and shanahan and I think
it's correct that he and others have
solved that technical problem but what
Shanahan himself argues is once you
solve that technical version of the
frame problem that this deeper problem
remains and of course he calls this
deeper problem this deeper version of
the frame problem the relevance problem
right
he happens to think that consciousness
might be the way in which we deal with
this problem we'll talk about that later
many people are converging on the idea
that consciousness and related ideas
like working memory have to do with our
ability to zero in on relevant
information but let's let's keep going
because what about communication isn't
that central to being a general problem
solver you bet especially if most of my
intelligence is my ability to coordinate
my behavior with myself and with others
communication is vital to this we see
this even in creatures that don't have
linguistic communication social
communication makes many species behave
in a more sophisticated fashion and I
already mentioned to you there's a
relationship between how how intelligent
an individual is and how social the
species is it's not an algorithm there
seem to be important exceptions like
octopus the octopus but in general
communication is crucial to being an
intelligent cognitive agent let's let's
try and use linguistic communication as
our example because that way we can also
bring in the linguistics that's in
cognitive science and see so the point
is when you're using language to
communicate you're involved with a very
particular problem and this is this was
made really clear by the work of Grice
HP Grice he pointed out that you always
are conveying much beyond what you're
saying it's much more than what you're
saying it always has to be and that
communication depends on you being able
to convey much more than you say
now why is that because I have to depend
on you to derive the implications and
that's a logical thing and then but he
also called implicature which is not a
directly logical thing in order for me
to convey above and beyond what I'm
saying so I Drive up my car I put my
window down and I say excuse me there's
a person on the street I'm out of gas
and the person comes over and says oh oh
there's a gas station at the corner
thank you drive away okay so notice
let's go through this carefully so I
roll down the window and I just shout
out excuse me okay now what would I and
actually need to be saying to capture
everything that I'm conveying I would
have to say I'm shouting this word
excuse me in the hope that anybody who
hears it understands that the me refers
to the speaker and that by saying excuse
me I'm actually requesting that you give
me your attention understanding of
course that I'm not demanding that
you'll give me your attention for like
an hour or three hours or 17 days but
forms a minimal amount of time that
somehow relevant for a problem that I'm
going to pose that's not too onerous I'm
and again what I'm saying I I mean this
person making the noises who is actually
the same as the one referred to by this
other word me I'm out of gas
and of course I don't mean me or either
speaker I mean the vehicle I'm actually
in I'm not asking you to make me more
flatulent I'm asking for you to help me
right
find gasoline for my car and I'm
actually referring to gasoline by this
short term gas and by saying this I know
you understand that my car isn't
completely out of gasoline there's
enough in it
that I can drive you know some
relatively close distance to find a
source of gasoline the other person oh
by uttering this otherwise meaningless
term I'm indicating that I accept the
deal that we have here that I'm going to
give you a bit of my attention and I
understand that it's not going to be too
long to ownerís I can make a statement
seemingly out of the blue and that you
will know how to connect it to what you
actually want which is gasoline for your
car that's not completely out of gas I
will just say the statement there is a
gasoline at there's a gasoline station
at the corner you will figure out that
that means that you can drive to it I'm
talking about a nearby corner somehow
relevantly similar to the amount of
gasoline like this isn't a corner
halfway across the continent there's a
gasoline station this is what will
distribute gasoline for your car it's
not forgiving you no helium to blimps
it's not a little model of a gas station
it's not a gas station that's closed and
not has been has not been in business
for 10 years it's a gas elation that
will accept Canadian currency or credit
it won't demand your your your your
firstborn or or or fruits from your
field and you know how all of that's
going on because if any of that's
violated you either find it funny or you
get angry if you say excuse me I'm out
of gas and the person comes up and blows
some helium into your car you don't go
oh thank you that's that's that's what I
wanted I wanted some gas helium yeah
it's ridiculous if you drive to the
corner and there's a gas station that's
been under business for 10 years you go
what what's going on what's wrong with
that person
you're always conveying way more than
you're saying
now notice something else notice I try
to I try to explicate what was I gave
you a whole bunch of sentences to try
and explicate what I was conveying but
you know what each one of these sentence
is is also conveying more than it was
saying and exactly if I was trying to
unpack what it said but it was conveying
and what it says I would
have to generate all of its sentence its
and so on and so on and you see what
this explodes into you can't say
everything you want to convey you rely
on people reading between the lines by
the way that is actually what this word
means at least one of the etymologies of
intelligence is inter ledger which means
to read between the lines so what the
gray said we do well what we do is we
follow a bunch of Maxim's we assume that
we're trying to communicate when we're
trying to communicate there's some basic
level of cooperation I don't mean social
cooperation just communicative
cooperation and we assume that people
are following some Maxim's so you're at
a party alright and you hear me say
write somebody and you asked me well how
many kids do you have and I say oh I
have one I have one kid you know okay
and then later on I'm talking and you
overhear me somebody asked me the same
committee case you have oh I have two I
have two sons I mean what you come up to
me you say what's wrong with you why did
you lie and what I didn't lie if I have
two kids I necessarily have one child I
didn't say anything fault saying I have
one kid and you'd say what an asshole
because I didn't provide you right with
the relevant amount of information I
didn't give you the information you
needed in order to try and pick up on
what I was conveying you spoke the truth
the logical truth right or I did in this
example but I didn't speak it in such a
way this is again why you can't be
perfectly logical I didn't speak it in
such a way that I aided you in
determining what the relevant conveyance
is so gray said we follow four Maxim's
we assume the person
is right trying to convey the truth
right and then a maximum of quantity
they're trying to give us the right
amount of information this is actually
often called the maxim of quality it has
to do with truth though right and then
there's a maximum of manner and then
there's a maximum of relevance
right use so this is basically people we
assume that people are trying to tell
the truth they're trying to give us the
right amount of information they're
trying to put it in in the kind of
format that's most helpful to us in
getting what's conveyed beyond what's
said and they're giving us relevant
information there it is again
oh look there's the word relevance then
Sperber and Wilson come along writing a
very important book which I'll talk
about later
I've criticisms out but it's the book is
entitled relevance and what's
interesting is that they're proposing
this not just as a linguistic phenomena
but about more general cognitive
phenomena they argue that all of these
actually reduce to the one maximum be
relevant
okay so manner this just just what is it
to be helpful to somebody well it like
present the information away that's
helpful them well what you do is you try
and make salient and obvious what's
relevant okay that's easy quantity give
the relevant amount of information what
about this ah
and you say ah John I gotcha you can't
reduce this one because this is truth
and you have been hitting me over the
head since the beginning of this series
that truth and relevance are not the
same thing you're right so what did
suburban Wilson do about that while they
do something really interesting they say
we don't actually demand that people
speak the truth because if we did we're
screwed because most of our beliefs are
false what are we actually asking people
to do we're actually we're actually
we're asking people to be honest or
sincere that's not the same thing you're
allowed to say right what you believe to
be true not what is true
okay so what'd you say well that means
the maxim is actually be sincere
what does sincere mean well convey
what's in your mind everything that's in
your mind everything that's going so
when I when you ask me you know how many
kids do you have
I've got all this stuff going on in my
mind about you know this marriage is
failing I what am I gonna do to take
care of these kids you know I love this
kid but it's oh but I convey all of that
and all no no oh man if you've been
trapped with somebody that's like
getting drunk and they talk like that at
a party it's horrible you're trapped it
you say one a relative you have any kids
and you're trapped for three hours so
that's not what we mean we don't mean
tell me everything that's in your mind
right now convey it all to me John give
it to me all that's not what we mean
what do we mean we mean convey what is
relevant to the conversation or context
out of all of the possible implications
and implicatures zero in on those that
you might think are relevant to me our
conversation and the context so that
also reduces to relevance so at the key
of your ability to communicate is your
ability to realize relevant information
notice what I'm doing here I'm doing
this huge convergence argument again and
again and again what's at the core of
your intelligence what's at the core of
your intelligence again and again and
again is your capacity for relevance
realization
it's even more complicated than this put
it putting things together that we
there's so much more I could teach you
all remember this all of the information
available the environment overwhelming
combinatorial explosive you have you
have to selectively attend to some of it
so this is doing relevance realization
selective attention and then you have to
decide how to hold in working memory
what's going to be important to you Lin
hashers excellent work showing that
working memory is about trying to screen
off what's relevant or irrelevant
information you're using this in your
problem-solving right you're using this
and here is where you are trying to deal
with the combinatorial explosion in the
problem space all that stuff we talked
about that's also interacting with the
proliferation of side effects like we
saw with the robot in the battery when
you try to act so you're trying to
select you know what do I hold in mind
right how do I get move through the
problem space once I start acting what
side effects do I pay attention to which
ones do I not pay attention to and all
of that has to do with out of all the
information in my long-term memory how
do I organize it how do I categorize it
how do i improve my ability to access it
long term memory organization and access
is dependent on your ability to zero in
on relevant information and this of
course feeds back to here this feeds
back to here it's feeds back to here
right feeds back to here right these are
interacting
these are interacting this is the
relevance problem that that's the
problem of trying to determine what's
relevant it's the core of what makes you
intelligent
now why does that matter what I'm trying
to show you is how deep and profound
this construct is this idea of relevance
realization is at the core of what it is
to be intelligent and we know that this
isn't just cold calculation right your
relevance realization machinery it has
to do with all this stuff the stuff
we've been talking about salience
obvious 'no sobota veyts you what
arouses your energy what attracts your
attention relevance realization is
deeply involving it's at the guts of
your intelligence your salience
landscaping your problem-solving okay so
what do I want to do what I want to do
is the following I want to propose to
you right that we can continue to do
this we can I can show you how all of
this is I could do more right but how
it's all converging on this then I want
to do two things I want to try and show
how we might be able to analyze
formalize and mechanize this in a way
that could help to coordinate our
consciousness our cognition or attention
our access to our long-term memory how
old is working then what do I want to do
with this I want to try and show you how
we can use relevance realization in a
multi app fashion
to try and get a purchase on these
things we have been talking about it the
historical analysis can we use relevance
realization how it's dynamically
self-organizing in this complex its
self-organizing within each one of these
number I showed you how an attention is
bottom-up and top-down at the same time
all of these are powerfully
self-organizing and how the whole thing
is self-organizing we know it's
self-organizing an insight can I use
relevance realization to explain things
that are crucial to wisdom to self
transcendence to spirituality to meaning
that's exactly what I'm gonna do I'm
gonna use this construct once I've tried
to show you how it could potentially be
grounded building the synoptic
integration across the levels and then
do this kind of integration and think
about why this makes at least initial
plausible sense relevance realization is
crucial to insight and insight is
central to wisdom relevance realization
and you're getting a hint of it seems to
be crucial to consciousness and
attention and altering your state of
consciousness we've already seen can be
crucial to wisdom and meaning-making and
that would make sense look isn't it sort
of central that what makes somebody wise
is exactly their capacity to zero in on
the relevant information in this
situation to take an ill-defined messy
situation and zero in to pay attention
to the relevant side effects the
relevant consequences to get you to pay
attention to what are the important
features to remember the right similar
situations from the past
Yeah right well you say okay I sort of
see that what about the softer
incentives well we already see that this
is a self-organizing self-correcting
process we already know that there's an
element of insight the very machinery
that makes you capable capable of
insight is the machinery that helps you
overcome the biases or helps you to
overcome the self-deception and it helps
you right solve problems that you
couldn't solve before we talked about
this with systemic insight okay so
consciousness insight wisdom but what
but what about meaning come on like
where's all that well here's the
proposal that what we were talking about
when we talked about meaning in terms of
the three orders the Noma logical the
narrative and the normative would yes
we're connections that afforded wisdom
self transcendence very much but what
connections
well the connections that were lost and
in the meeting crisis there are
connections between mind and body the
connections between mind and world the
connections between mind and mind the
connection of the mind to its to itself
these are all the things that are called
into question the fragmentation of the
mind itself
what if that sorry and we saw how this
all throughout had to do with again the
relationship between salience and truth
what we find relevant in terms of how
it's aliens are obvious to us and how
that connects up to reality and how it
connects member Plato connects parts of
us together in the right way the optimal
way what if what we're talking about
when we're talking when we're using this
metaphor of meaning is we're talking
about how we find things relevant to us
to each other parts of ourselves
relevant to each other how we're
relevant to the world how the world is
relevant to us all this language of
connection is not the language of
largely causal connection it's the
language of establishing relations of
relevance between things perhaps there's
a deep reason why manipulating relevance
realization affords self transcendence
and wins wisdom and insight precisely
because relevance realization is the
ability to make the connections that are
at the core of meaning those connections
that are quintessentially being
threatened by the meaning crisis that
would mean if we get an understanding of
the machinery of this we would have a
way of generating new psycho
technologies redesigning reappropriation
alder cycle technologies and
coordinating them systematically in
order to generate those regenerate
that's the word I want to use regenerate
regenerative of these fraying
connections real ajith amay tanda ford
the cultivation of wisdom self
transcendence
connectedness to ourselves and to each
other and to the world and that's in
fact what I want to explore it with you
and help explain to you in our next
session together on awakening from the
meeting crisis thank you very much for
your time and attention
[Music]
you
you
you