so these are my thoughts
these aren't anyone else's thoughts if
they trigger someone especially someone
who's gone through figuring out their
gender I'm sorry but they're just my
thoughts someone on a Facebook page that
I'm part of it definitely is like troll
territory someone posted to get trolls
was like trans is a mental illness and
I've something about like well
everything pretty much anything in
society's mental illness if not enough
people support it if we decided that
wearing blue is a mental illness and
then you really liked blue and more blue
you'd have a mental illness like it's
just it's like culturally people
accepting and especially with gay and
trans that's very I don't think that
there's necessarily more people who are
gay and trans well maybe we might have
evolved to have more now but that when
like society's like they don't exist and
they exist it's like that's abhorrent
how did that like I'm not like that how
dare you be like that it helps like
everything inside triggers was outside
and vice versa like the only way like
anyway so seeing this this person post
that there's a time when I would have
gotten really angry about that and now
I'm just like oh I can't like you're
although you're just trolling but still
like even that is it's a there is kind
of the one with the mental illness
currently like it's like once you go
through like one society gets to the
point where they're more okay with with
whatever group they used to think was
mental illness and our leg oh yeah no
actually no that's all this turns out
and now it becomes like the people who
are left behind still thinking it's it's
abhorrent are the ones with the mental
illness like they haven't caught up and
it's hard to be the pioneers and be the
first people coming coming out and being
like this thing that we didn't know
exists and like is it talked about guess
what it exists I am it like and and
pushing forward and I think and then of
course people were like what about
schizophrenia
like first I wasn't saying all men till
this was this way but that is kind of
what happens with mental illness that we
have as a society like it's illness
because it's a paradigms different than
what we we think you should be and I
think that that all of that including
physically mentally emotionally at least
my life is going is going away because
there is no there used to be Mary many
boxes we were so stupid into and you
knew you were you were like off your
rocker when you weren't in those boxes
so like that you were like of course
many are sis and male and Mary cysts
feminine women like that's just how
things are and then we know which box
you're in and we know what your role is
and we know like that if you can't have
children and or don't want to have
children like you're broken like that's
important that's off the path and so we
need to like get back there as opposed
to and I'm realizing how much of our
society is completely ablest including
trends and and homophobia and racism and
everything like we don't accept and of
ourselves for who we are so we don't
accept and love the world for what it is
like the individual and so if we're not
loving on ourselves we're gonna find
ways to be fearful and hate other people
whether that's because of their race or
whether we're more woke and now it's
because they are racist is like to some
degree the same thing we can't and
because we're all races what do you says
that's horrible I couldn't possibly be
racist it's like right then you're just
seeing it in all of the like everywhere
in the world and getting angry at it in
a way that like I don't know like causes
more of it it's just I don't know like
this person think he that trans is a
mental illness unless they're out
committing by acts of violence doesn't
cause me to stress because I know that
like I'm like oh no like I get it I've
been through the gender the gender
and and although I came out on the other
side yeah I missed this woman I'm gender
non-conforming but I like
by she and her and but I am constantly
questioning all the things society puts
on me as a woman I'm like wait what do I
do I want to take that on is that
something I'm okay though then we're not
going to and I don't care a society says
like just because I'm supposed to do X
because I'm a woman
including polite things nope especially
like if it's different to me if it's
across gender lines and it's like
everyone's supposed to do this cuz
you're a good human being like be kind
and courteous which is why I'm okay with
both having the door held up for me open
for me and holding the door open for
other people because that's a kindness
courtesy thing on both levels so yeah
I'm down with that and like this I don't
know like having this conversation spur
send and like the truth is of I don't
know people with schizophrenia at least
not that are open about it and have told
me whereas I dunno people with them OCD
and bipolar and anxiety and depression
and I myself have anxiety and ADHD and
also I think that I am possibly on the
if not on the spectrum then definitely
have the processing decide what it's
something process it's called senses
sense processing disorder SPD
if not the rest of it I have pieces of
it and I don't even need the diagnosis I
don't need it's just it's a piece of who
I am and it's not broken it's not that I
need it diagnosed cuz it's not a medical
it's not a thing that needs to be fixed
it is something that I feel like we have
more compassion when someone's like
socially awkward and they're like what a
logistic it's okay it's like right but
it's not switch on switch off like heart
is if you're not it's like it's a
spectrum and we all exist along that
spectrum we need to have compassion for
people all along that spectrum not
require everyone can read everyone's
emotion all the time you know exactly
what to do in the situation not spelled
out for them like no it's like okay then
fine those everyone neurotypical needs
to be and it's like neurotypical I don't
even think exists that like we can only
I spend so much of my life and I'm
getting to realize how unimportant it is
but like comparing myself to everyone
else like wait not am i smart am i
smarter than other people
like how do I compare compared to other
people and how broken that is cuz it's
like wait and a big piece of that is my
disability cuz I'm like okay like I know
I think I know I'm tired I know I'm get
cranky I know I can like lose my on
my kid I know but it's unlike gearing it
towards everyone else right like why but
I lose myself I mentioned on my kid like
less often than other people or am I
more exhausted than your regular
everyday person and yes I know I am but
like do I know I am no because I'm only
in my own body so like realizing both my
life is awesome my life sucks
and I know nothing about anyone else is
like a big it's my constant learning
it's like okay like that the whole world
triggers being based on sight and sound
and smell and everything I have is both
considered to some degree in or like a
nerd look not to some degree is a
neurological thing like my neuro system
has been damaged by undergoing radiation
and surgery and it does weird now
and okay that's interesting that's a fun
life to live but society very much looks
at it like they look at people who are
mentally ill like oh you should be
getting over this and you should be I'm
like it's not it's like not having an
arm like you can't just grow it back
like my neuro
my neurons misfire minor like it's like
there's no there is no cure it's like oh
you could just not be anxious here take
this pill I'm like that's gonna cause
more problems with my neurons that's not
that's gonna count the anxiety but not
actually because it's gonna cause all
the all the cascading of repercussions
that come from having having pills and
yeah all of it like simultaneously we
need everyone to go through the gender
 like we need like okay gender is a
weird thing it's like the culture of sex
is and you can be it and not like you
can be as like feminine cysts female as
you want to be or are there's nothing
wrong with that it's requiring everyone
else to be that way is the problem and
the same on the the other side it's like
the whole spectrum that there are things
that are like for women or for men is
ridiculous it's like okay do you like
this smell or do you like this
do you like this color do you like this
color do you want to be the like person
who pursues some in a relationship for
the pursue e do you want like what what
is it you you want to do more so than
like oh you're you're the man you should
be taller and pursue and be richer and B
it's like no it's me who wants than that
who are you and then who are you not
like on this tall's I'm like Mustapha
and I know this or I've experienced I
going from being a hundred percent
feeling like I was a hundred percent
heterosexual and like definitely wanted
a man and definitely was a woman too oh
wait that's all broken open is an
experience and so it's an experience and
not always pleasant it can be a negative
like parts of it or negative I'm so
happy I went through it I'm so happy I'm
going through it that there's other
people who are going through it to share
the journey with but at the same time
I'm like it was this is at the analogy
I'm just getting now is at the end of my
pregnancy which I really wanted I would
like she was a planned wanted baby and
at the end of the pregnancy I was like
oh I've never been more pro-life and
pro-choice at the same time like I'm
like both simultaneously oh I could have
like this life could have been ended and
she wouldn't exist and that seems weird
to me and also oh my god someone would
have to go through this pregnancy
 without like wanting to have a
baby that seems absolutely abhorrent
like that we would require someone to go
through that in their body to carry a
baby pushed or cut a baby out and like
all of the hormones that go with it
afterwards like all of it is like yes
that would be absolutely horrible if we
force that on on people and it's
somewhat not okay like really it just
made me more pro-choice but I did
understand that little bit of pro-life
Oh weird that I would be and it's the
same to me with the like genders lock is
like okay how important it is that
everyone goes through this because our
society's better for people having gone
through this but also some people aren't
ready to go through this like some
people and yet just by the existence of
gender non-conforming people just by the
existence of like them walk
in the world confronting people's
subconscious bias and all like what's
going on here somebody to dress well so
I spatial hair like this is just blown
and it's like what we need is our mind
blown on regular basis but also if
you're you're not in a state to be able
to accept those things like put somebody
on that path seems also not very very in
so like finding the balancing act like
to say no you have to accept me and how
dare you trigger me and use all my right
pronouns at the same time your trick
like by existing your sugar and other
people and having some compassion for
that because there is I don't know like
to say that everyone needs to be as
involved as you but then people like not
above not below like just exactly like
it's like everything I'm awoke to
everyone else should be awake to and
nothing beyond it's like no we're
different have different emotional
capacity at this moment in time we have
different intellectual capacity and all
the different kinds of intelligence we
have we're different we've had different
life experience that have like and in a
very real way like okay just like I mean
I really didn't choose to go through the
gender like it was like I didn't
choose to any part of me but except that
I chose I do believe I chose every part
of me before coming to this planet but I
don't look like there's not conscious
choices to be like okay how many white
I'm gonna write and I would have brain
tumors like there is no choice there's
no choice for them either
like people who are Republican people
who are pro-life people who are it's
like yes and they believe just as
strongly about what they what they
believe and although society needs to
protect people as individuals you're
allowed to believe whatever you want and
yeah I don't even know what I came on
here to discuss
transit transphobia mental illness and
just that like society evolves and then
what we considered mental illness is no
longer mental illness and still thinking
is mental illness becomes its own mental
illness and then but like truthfully
there's no mental
yes it's just diversity and with
complete acknowledgement that like both
you get to accept what you are without
any outside intervention and you get to
not accept who you are and get outside
intervention like all of that at once
like if you don't like how your brain
works and you don't like you're
absolutely allowed to take the
medication and the people the doctors
prescribed and help with that like
that's part of the journey that's part
of all of it but also you can't require
that everyone take that medication
because you're not in their body and
they need autonomy so it's it's it's all
of it at once it's like okay
getting that we should all be happy in
our own skin and love our bodies and
feel comfortable in our own bodies it's
like yes that's awesome and also some
people don't like so it's like you're
both allowed to alter your body and love
your body anyway it is in all of it like
anything you want to do to your own body
yeah you go for it and you're allowed to
love your body exactly as it is you
don't need to okay with society that's
simultaneously and I feel it's the same
thing and so that's enough dealing with
this morning the whole thing the other
at like being yourself is amazing and in
order to be yourself you have to go
through the gender lock because nobody
very few people and you have to go
through it to really know you were that
anyway are like everything in that box
and nothing outside so unless you're
looking like can consciously look at the
box you're just living society's
expectations of you instead of who you
truly are like but also like you don't
know anyone else's the world like I
exist in the world and I'm constantly
like wait the world doesn't work like I
work and also of course the world
doesn't work like I work like at the
same time because the only person you
ever truly know is yourself like and
even that I've constantly uncovering
things it's like I'm like oh my
experience is a unique experience and
everybody else's is too and when you
don't know what other people's Everest
SAR you only know what your own is and
then you can gauge your based on society
right like I'm a failure of a
human being because
I can't do my laundry and I can't keep
my house clean and I don't look what the
hell can I don't it's like oh but that's
because I'm gauging it against all of
society not because I'm like looking in
teary and like yeah I'd like my house to
be clean I'd be great let me awesome
without happening ever my point is
always the Everest the Everest thing its
sight like both what you find easy isn't
easy for other people it can be really
hard you're like what I just I just got
my law degree one that wasn't easy for
everybody like that and I don't think
anyone thinks getting a law degree is
easy it might not be as hard as would be
imagine for some people but there's some
people no matter how hard they worked
we'd never be able to get a law degree
and everyone hasn't ever ever s and even
Everest is different people's Everest
because like the Sherpas who guide
people up or like that Tuesday Wednesday
Thursday they like this is you mean
going on a nice hike like this would be
cool
it's different and get those in there's
all it's like when you have different
Everest like doing laundry or making a
phone call or putting a filling out an
application society is just not going to
celebrate it in the same way but I
actually did my taxes but it's like you
need to feel like you need to celebrate
it like you climbed Everest because you
did and then on the other side how like
just not being able to understand other
people's lives like we're not only my
own brain and body or mine like I'm in
pain all day every day and I'm like I
don't even know what to be like to not
be in pain like how does that even work
how does it feel to not have your body
be in pain but simultaneously then I go
through life and I'm like I'm in pain
and I'm both acting like they are in
pain because I think everyone's in pain
is how I experience life and nobody has
pain but me like look at this thing it's
like I'm in pain so I should get to sit
down right but other people are in pain
too so who gets to decide and it's like
they're not in your body and you're not
in theirs and we judge people constantly
based on like what they look like
whether it's their ability look or their
gender look or the racial look or their
clothes they actually choose to wear
we judge each other and the judgment
itself is what we should probably be
rolling back on I know