[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
it's a great pleasure to meet you sir
I've seen your videos a couple of times
on Facebook I didn't actually connect
the name to the face but I've seen you
have seen you a couple of times you've
been doing this for quite a while you're
an old you know old warrior at this
that's right I haven't had a huge amount
of trying to prepare for this because we
only decided a few days we were going to
do this right so a few of your videos
but I don't actually know anything about
you the man and so yeah start there
because give me a sort of brief history
in particular with reference to your
journey towards becoming an RBE advocate
if you if you know yeah yeah yeah well
you know I was a musician for three or
four decades you know playing music in
bars around here and screaming into the
mic
midnight at all and that's why my voice
I don't quite have the voice I used to
sometimes it sounds pretty harsh but
yeah I played music for a long time then
I got into some video production writing
screenplays you know I sold the
screenplay 15 20 years ago and then and
then I wrote one that I could shoot
myself Wendy's with a video came out and
that's where I did dad you know I
learned how to do some video editing and
then I stumbled on site guys agenda
around 2000 8 or 9 so that's 10 years
ago and when he saw the addendum was it
like was it like a sudden cataclysmic
shift in your thinking or was it like a
seed that grew or how did it work for
you no it was pretty much cataclysmic I
just saw you know how the world worked
yeah I kind of knew a little bit about
the Baker's I didn't really understand
the fractional reserve lending Ponzi
scheme that they're controlling us with
and once you learn that it's hard to
it's hard to stay still anymore once you
really know how we're being controlled
by the bankers and then you know the
John Perkins thing with our foreign
policy yeah yeah you can see that now of
those every country really we're just
going around stealing their resources
and
you know about that and then of course
the resource-based economy at the end of
that yeah I was pretty much hooked into
it and I was moving forward that was
about the time 2011 I think I started
making videos I made the videos but it
was not really serious at all it was
just trying to lay out the train of
thought the system works against us you
know if we want to sell more pesticides
or you know that's good for business
it's horrible for people and more
pharmaceuticals more kills to take
that's horrible for people really is
it's turning out but it's good for
business so I'm going to go through ten
examples of that
you know I built a house here enough
I've had to borrow against it and again
a few times just to keep my head above
and just think of it how these bankers
are just making up the money I don't
know where you want us to pay him back
with interest which is never created
doesn't exist and if you can't do it
they get your house they get your car
but I understood it fairly quickly once
I saw it laid out there of how really
it's just a system to control people to
put people into debt that they can you
know never pay off you know sometimes
you may be lucky enough to pay it off
but mostly it's just continually
creating more debt and you have to
borrow more to stay in the game and they
are just sucking the money out of people
and controlling us like slaves now in
this country that's you know we have
student debt which is a one and a half
trillion dollars which is just so
unconscionable that we're giving this
money to bankers and putting our young
people in debt prison right off the bat
people that have sort of been exposed to
the idea of the central banking fraud do
you think that they appreciate the the
the depth and the complexity of it if I
try to explain it to people you know a
lot of times their eyes kind of glaze
over after me I don't they don't really
want to look into it or think about it
too hard so some people will kind of
understand it a lot of people
just well this is just the way it is
yeah you can't really do anything about
it the reality of this love their
slavery in the face right I mean that's
a hard thing yeah yes there's a terrible
lack of education about the realities of
economics in our society deliberately so
for obvious reasons right but but it's a
real shocking lack yeah you know
Benjamin Franklin when he respect he was
in France a couple decades before the
Revolution and the colonies were doing
great and people were asking about this
newfound prosperity in the colonies how
were you doing it and he said in the
colonies we create our own currency we
make our own money and we made just
enough to society have no interest to
pay to anyone and certainly after that
the King George and the bankers who
really owned him they said no we'll have
none of that you're gonna be on our
money system you're gonna pay US taxes
in gold and silver and he said within a
year the conditions had reversed so
dramatically from the prosperity that
now there were unemployed in the streets
and you know once you get in the system
where they're sucking and wealth out of
him you know and he said the refusal of
King George to allow the colonies to
operate an honest money system which
freed the ordinary man from the clutches
of the manipulators the money was
probably the prime cause of the
revolution so we never learned that in
school that it was the bankers and their
fractional reserve lending system it was
probably the real reason you know we do
it away it's just missed names right
because no taxation without
representation right that was there that
was the that was the slogan right but
what on earth taxation other than
interest payments on central bank loans
to the government I mean that's that's
basically what's kind of the same thing
it's just not called that and that's
what our tattoos you're going
oh you know we're you know we we got rid
of the bankers for a while they came
back over the past couple hundred years
and then in 1913 they got in there with
the Federal Reserve's impact and they
passed it on Christmas Eve right we
thought soon all Senators in the house
and since then and then they set up the
IRS you know it was set up right after
they install the tow reserve that's
basically their collection agency to
collect their interest and so you know
just to see all this interest made the
taxes that were paying now most of it is
going to the central bankers and the
rest I think for bottoms and military
that's where our taxes go so it's such a
horrible system we've got to break free
of it and that's the only way I think we
can truly break free is to do what the
founders wanted to do was get rid of the
central bankers and have our own money
system which was as fair as you can
possibly know yeah yeah so if you don't
mind
sorry you just had to say something that
I didn't to interrupt you I was just
probably getting going on about the
bankers you have been and are going to
be in next year a presidential candidate
during your candidacy do do you have a
right to be on the debates with you know
the Republican and Democrat and whatever
candidates do you have that right oh no
this stuff is really sad in this country
I think we're probably more controlled
than any other country when it comes to
elections because they have got the
two-party system the Democrats and the
Republicans get about 95 percent of the
votes and the other 5% is split up
between the green 1582 purse and
libertarians 2% as he said in one of
your videos I mean I've heard you say
this that you know even if you get
genuinely well-intentioned people
elected they are still stuck with this
apparatus with the inertia are built
into the apparatus is overwhelming you
know and however so it is the apparatus
that needs to change and I know this is
this is one of the leading naturally to
it is one of the angles I wanted to
explore with you was the possibility of
is there any kind of possibility of
institutional driven change ie top-down
change driving us towards RBA or some
kind of more sustainable system we can
fall in a new system sailor 2020 dot-com
and if anybody listening to this I'm
sure they'll be linked to that's you
know in the description sailor like
Taylor with an S saya lor 2020 calm and
on that website it says at the beginning
let's elect a new socio-economic system
let's give science a shot let's put
science at the forefront of
decision-making and look at let's get
rid of all debt that's the number one
thing we're going to do a debt Jubilee
so there's some talk about oh we can
forgive some student debt no we're gonna
forgive all debt your home's your
personal loans student debt a debt you
believe it's nothing new it's been done
throughout history you can find it in
the holy books maybe you know what it
would get too much they were just wiped
off the debt but we're not going to
start over with the same game or will go
like that's where we were we're having a
dent you believe and then we'll start
over with a collaborative system so if
this sounds good to you getting rid of
all debt working a 20-hour week taking
care of our planet if we have science
and scientists futurists in the
forefront war is not gonna be an option
scientist Carl Sagan people like this
you're gonna think you know this big
Jacque fresco let's go to war no war is
not
even an option in this new system so
anyway I'm laying out a few things here
which is the policies the platform of
this lets vote in a new system that's
gonna have the Council of experts that
will nominate there won't have a
president and all the everything getting
rid of debt having a dead do you believe
working at twenty hour work week most
people would be willing to get behind
that absolutely yeah this freedom we're
all slaves so all these policies that I
was talking to you about it would sound
good
to so many people how do I get people to
hear me how do I get that message out
there you know go to the money free
party USA website and on there there's a
page for every where you click on your
state and from then on there are there's
a thing you can feel it and say yeah I
would support this direction and I will
sign a petition to try to get you on the
business on the ballot and so you know
anybody listening to this if you want to
do something to help this go to the
money free party USA website sign up
there spread this message my videos that
are out there my website is really good
just for people to quickly pull up and
see what this is all about so please
send along my website to anybody you
possibly can and other people around the
world you don't needs to be a global
movement and we've got the money free
party in the UK and in New Zealand and
Australia somebody's trying to get one
but I saw a Facebook page for one thing
India but we need if you're listening to
this and you're in another country start
a money free party Facebook page in your
country how hard is that
it's not hard at all you know and and
you know and then you can see how many
likes you get post the kind of topics
we're talking about with the money free
party see
how many people you can get come aboard
because I think if we had the money free
party going in France yeah yeah you know
I mean these people really want change
there and they get out in protest or the
best asset in France didn't they
absolutely when we want to talk about
this new system to people rather than
going right to the point of money free
or no money moving into a moneyless
society no scarcity you know I don't do
that so much now I just say that'll be a
step once we can produce an abundance of
the things we need we can make it three
but we're gonna have to do that maybe
step by step trying to produce an
abundance of one product and then the
next because you know I you don't ask
people to believe you what do you say oh
we can free to produce an abundance of
things and we don't need to charge for
it they're gonna go really well I'm not
sure about that well fine let's not ask
all that in the beginning let's just say
let's work at producing abundance with
very little human labor involved and you
know people working ten hours
re contributing to these projects when
we can make enough you know using
automation we can just take away the
price tag one product after another and
you know within if we switched into a
system like this within a year or two if
we be localizing food food would be
three ninety ninety percent of it
we've already could be little ready
producing enough food for everyone on
the planet we've got a school T percent
of it I'd say to people you know if we
if we had everyone who worked at food
production in any area that housing
construction transportation health care
all these things we need if they stopped
going to work for a week or two I mean
everything would just fall apart until
then you think everybody who works in
the financial sector insurance install
tomorrow yeah if they didn't go to work
and say that's a favor you're not a damn
thing would change we could just keep
going on well not only was nothing not
would nothing changed but actually
things would get better because they
wouldn't be scalping office anymore they
wouldn't be today they wouldn't be
taking their cut office anymore
that's right things would be getting so
much better - free free everyone let's
not look at it we're taking away their
job we're setting you free now that
actually have an opportunity to do
something you wanted you help with your
communities it's gonna be much more
intrinsically valuable to you to you and
everyone mental health issues go down
crime goes down I mean all of this
anyway we're treading the same way it's
reading the same old ground aren't we I
think a key point as well just going
back to what you were saying you would
you would also be by changing the focus
of society so dissolving the
corporations the bank's the the
government's and refocusing society on
the creation of abundance of everything
that we can think of right there that's
your focus all of a sudden because
Richard made this point I think he's
absolutely right the people that many of
the people that enter these professions
accountancy finance the law these are
the best and brightest of us right these
are hardworking ambitious with an
intelligent individuals right we will be
well advised to harness those energies
and you would be freeing them for all
the people working in the financial
industry actually something useful
[Laughter]
meaningful they're like they probably
interested this other stuff they wanted
to do and they're trapped in this light
you everyone who works in accounting and
advertising marketing the IRS all these
people are just pushing numbers around
on paper and these people who are pretty
smart they can get in there and help be
the leaders in these projects but that's
what we're a free everybody from working
at jobs that produce nothing and that's
how you can justify going to a 20-hour
work week because we have twice as many
people now you know we it's moving to a
collaborative society where we can work
together and we can produce such
abundance is such a wonderful trusting
society if we move the collaboration but
when we are forced to stick in this
system work we're forced to fight each
other that's what this is you know it's
cutthroat competition
to gain advantage over each other and it
doesn't allow us to have any trust you
when it comes to business you can't
trust anybody
everybody's trying to get the best of
the deal and it's it's really a system
that goes against our true nature you
know it's a system that produces
selfishness and greed and that's why
people say well this is human nature
just look at us when we are able to
collaborate when we can express our
empathy and our compassion and you know
to want to feel part of the community
and be loved this is really our true
human nature
this is what makes people healthy and so
you know this is simply what we have to
do is move out of this competitive
system move into a collaborative system
where we're allowed to work together and
create an abundance and this is the only
way out I think the charge that would
get leveled at you certainly by the
establishment is that you're unrealistic
you know what I mean this is a utopian
vision you know it's a childlike fantasy
you know there's you know there I'm sure
you've heard it all a million times but
this is what gets levelled at you and
unfortunately because they do control
still a huge amount of the megaphone
that people listen to this is this is in
the minds of many many many good but
conventional and not really that you
know to people this is you get older
you're a crackpot right you're you're a
nutcase back yeah but more and more of
your people are not trusting the news
channels very often you know so people
are getting away from that and so yeah
the people that it's pop they're gonna
try to say this is fantasy you don't
know chaos is gonna be horrible but but
you put these questions in front of
people you want to continue on in debt
or you will free yourselves from dead
you want stop all these
were stopped sending our kids off to
Wars yes from the fighting of them and
then from the reconstruction of the
country afterwards
yeah but the internet is saving us on
that too because before the internet you
know what you mean but 20 years ago
before that when our government told us
we had to go to war and we thought now
everybody is I mean there's so many
channels out there talking about the
real truth what's going on is Venezuela
yeah it's Syria and all these countries
so the internet is gonna be our Savior I
know it's going to downside also but
it's we wouldn't have a chance without
the internet in my opinion no I
completely agree with you the only thing
we can do to get out of this system as I
said dissolve the banking institutions
and dissolve the corporations and this
is also you know I don't talk about how
the founders wanted to get rid of the
bankers they also did not trust
corporations they would do them they
would give them a charter to for some
project build a road or canals
when that was finished they were
dissolved they didn't want corporation
so you know me or us calling for an end
to the bankers and the corporate state
that shouldn't be too radical when
people understand that's what the
founders of this country actually wanted
but it really is to most people right
listen I completely agree with you
islets and we're absolutely on the same
page of course we are those who wouldn't
be here now right but you know how how
does that come about how you know where
does the authority to dissolve because
that's a pretty it's a pretty dramatic
change right to the structure of society
where thority to make that decision and
take that and come okay so we can't
really have any change and dramatic like
that as long as we're working under this
constitution that's the Constitution is
the playbook that's the rules
of the game and you know if people in
this country is that real of our
Constitution its sacrosanct you know but
if people say over the other
Constitution they're really saying we
love the Bill of Rights those things are
put in there later the rest of it
assists the structure of the government
and so if we want the kind of change
we're talking about we have to rewrite
the Constitution we have to have an
update we update everything else they
have a whole while back about the
approval rating for Congress only 8%
approval ratings 92% other people said
no you know this Congress had doesn't
work it is broken
it is dysfunctional and that's the
Constitution that's the part we need to
update again I come back to my question
before where does the authority come to
create and impose that new Constitution
I mean what your what you seem to be
alluding to is revolution that's what I
mean that's basically what you're
talking about right is some form of
popular revolution where we say we we
basically overthrow the gun whether
violently or not but basically we
overthrow the government in some way and
we install a new set of rules a new
constitution that's what you're talking
about
yeah yeah a new manual like Bucky fuller
you know but mr. fuller is like Jacque
fresco and arthur c clarke science you
know what if we let science take the
lead here instead of having a society
run a country run by bankers
corporations military why not scientists
and engineers futuristic nurses like
these people and but mr. fuller did he
call it the manual for spaceship earth
he called that term spaceship earth we
are all in one people on the spaceship
earth and we need a new we need to make
a manual that works for that and we can
call it a constitution but anyway so
what we want to do is have a
constitutional convention come up with
another constitution that will allow us
to put together this society as we
seeded this new bomb
and so there'll be a system that doesn't
need a president that's gonna have a
Council of experts a new playbook or
Constitution yeah oh you know just a
whole new system and it's ready to go
we'll have it all laid out it's not me
that's gonna be president you know I get
if I win I get to go home and work in my
garden and help it he'll helping oh yeah
the community 20 hours a week or
something that's what everybody can do
we'll have a counselor and he's here are
the people look at their background
would you rather have these people at
the forefront of decision making Neil
deGrasse Tyson the scientist you know he
was on Joe Rogan talking about when are
we going to see scientists in our
Congress you know it's nothing but
lawyers
yeah business businessman we need
scientists in there Captain Picard
in which you've probably seen that video
where he's going you know in the future
there is no money particularly the next
generation has a pretty decent
approximation of what the RBA will lower
would look like twenty years down the
road you know what I mean III think it's
not a bad yeah just to learn you know to
better yourself and to enrich yourself
yeah for me this is the grand vision of
RBE right is that all the world becomes
an educational facility for every single
person that lives in it right every
single partner is a teacher a learner a
supervisor a doer you know what I mean
everyone just just I don't know fits on
this tapestry kind of thing is
constantly changing evolving central
street yeah I'm still I'm still I mean I
I agree with everything you say and I
love the way you say it as well your
your your passion is it pulls through
every single word that you say and I'm a
big admirer of people like you and like
Richard who've been doing this for a
long
long time and if somehow managed to find
an antidote to the frustration of you
know banging on a brick wall you know
because and if anything things are
getting worse out there right we're
racing faster and faster and faster
towards that cliff edge it seems like
and I know but still a daily basis when
were so stuck inside this system it's
like what can I do to make it in this
like if I want to start a Tool Library
well there's a guy down in our town that
for a year that he has a business we're
here it's out tools so if we start a
tool library this family and yeah sure
to take a step forward with this when
we're in a system this just got us it's
just holding us back
so correct me if I'm wrong because I am
detecting a little bit of frustration in
you here because on the one hand you
agree the top-down institutional driven
change not possibly happen right because
the institutions are did the other
distillation of the very structures that
trying to overturn and yet at the same
time at a grassroots individual small
group level we are a powerless and be
sometimes doing more harm than good
where does that you know that that seems
to me to be a bit of a Mexican standoff
whatever it is they call it yeah I know
and it's frustrating for everyone all of
us in this movement you know we get
positive you have days where you you
know you just getting input into it you
see positive things that are being
shared stories out there and you feel
we're making our way along here we are
weird people are getting more educated
that we're making our way along and you
know then the movements come along and
occupy and extinction rebound all these
things are coming along and I just see
him as another straw on the back and at
some point it's gonna break I've
listened to Christian hedgers talked a
lot of you
Chris yeah he's a wonderful an amazing
person and a great activist and writer
and you know he more than anybody he
sees the reality of what's happening
with our environment and he has kids and
he's afraid that they're not going to
have much of a world yes I have a couple
of guys in their 20s and I'm kind of
maybe if I didn't have kids maybe I
wouldn't be doing it so much I probably
would but that's one thing that pushes
me over to make change so the next
generation can have a better life and
Chris had just says you know at this
point the court the corporate control
has gotten to a point where they control
every lever of power they have taken
over every branch of government and the
only way we are going to be able to turn
this around he says we just have to
overthrow the corporations and well most
of us do we but we are the corporation's
the people that work doing this in the
corporations the workers they are the
real corporate not these people at the
top they don't do anything but they make
some decisions and sell-off stock and
whatever no the people are the
corporation's so we can get rid of the
the name corporation and the structure
as it is now
but just let people continue with the
same work but the people make the
decisions you know just get rid of this
word through the core corporate and he
says we have to overthrow the
corporation's and it sounds like
revolution it's scary to people that's
my transition a peaceful transition is
better and when overthrow the
corporation's I like dissolve weakens
where it doesn't have to it doesn't have
to be violent right the right we can
dissolve the corporation's and keep the
same structures in place what another
way of saying get rid of corporations be
to say
rid of the profit motive within the
doing of Commerce
yeah the profit mode has to go really
what it's about right I mean the issue
is is that is the need to make primarily
short-term profits at any cost because
now the next quarters balance sheet is
what's gonna determine my bonus this
year you know it's that it's that kind
of thinking that's when when we move
from a competitive economic system to a
collaborative one the profit motive is
gone in a collaborative society there
yeah there is no profit motive and so
that has to be the big change we have to
move from competitive to collaborative
from corporate control to community
control our being has to be at a
community level not to top-down anymore
we control our own money system as long
as we're going to need one so we can
produce enough abundance we can get rid
of it so we move from bankers to
community money from corporations to
community control from competition to of
collaboration and from 40 hours we extol
property to open sourcing and everything
and so yeah that's absolutely my I keep
coming back to where does the pressure
for these changes to occur come from and
put this correct me if I'm putting words
into your mouth but I are you basically
saying that it's a process of Education
and the when sufficient number of people
are educated then this rejection of
corporation and government and central
banking will come about on its own is
that is that basically where you're
coming from
yeah they're gonna have to get a vision
of what it could be like they're gonna
have to be able to see it right that's
our job is to provide them with that
vision yeah I know Carolyn was talking
about you know trying to make a movie
and TV t British project has been
talking about trying to make a movie as
a way to get it in front of the people
that people see what this could look
like and Peter Joseph's project they're
working on forever here is going to try
to do that but it's so much harder to
put together a
a movie project as opposed to a
documentary and I've often thought about
how how could you present it
we've get it getting a story to get
people involved and letting them see
then you need to just have this society
as a backdrop sort of to the story this
is always where I get stuck you know I
mean III the the vision is is is clear
in my head the problems here are clear
in my head but the mechanism by which
you create the demands for the change
that's the only way it comes about right
there is sufficient demand in the
population the thing of that's the only
way it comes about we're going to say to
people how badly do you want to you know
to actually take care of this planet so
that your kids can have a decent world
how badly do you want to get debt-free
and never be fighting about money again
how badly do you want to get out of
sending our you know having a world at
peace if you want to do this then let's
elect a system that will enable that and
so electing a new system and that's if
we're not gonna do it that way it's
going to be a revolution so we really
have to get into localizing all as much
production as we can because you know
depending on corporations then to
produce it in one place and ship it
everywhere around the world you know
that's that's not a model that's going
to work so if we're every community is
growing through around them and every
community is growing hemp in the fields
around them you're making clothes
building materials and energy purifying
their own water absolutely yeah so we
just kind of focus on that let's finish
what we started then and go back to
talking about your campaign what
platforms do you get access to that you
wouldn't otherwise have access to as a
presidential candidate any at all given
that you're a minority candidate or is
it up to you entirely to chisel out your
own media realities this time it's just
getting started and this is the first
interview I've done
you know this is not gonna get too many
views um but I'm you know there's a guy
named Jimmy door and he's got a half a
million subscribers but one of the guys
that's on his show Graham Elwood has got
his own channel and he's got 20,000
subscribers and so I'm gonna be on his
show in the next week or two okay and
I'm hoping that will lead to possibly
get I hitting on Jimmy doors so or that
this is what I have to do now I have to
try to make this a viable enough subject
for internet shows to want to have me on
to talk about the policies we're talking
about here I guess you know how
interesting I can be like I say I'm
gonna be on this one showing and that's
Peter - with Graham Elwood it was a
great guy you know with long Jimmy doors
are just I mean they advocate for a you
know progressive left-wing politics but
you know try to explain it down that
even we get better people elected you
know the structure is not going to allow
very much change but if I can be a good
guest on there and in 15 or 20 minutes
try to get this fish it across then
maybe Jimmy door good well somebody see
me on there one show and go that sounds
that you're seeing let's have him on our
show and if I can start doing much it
shows and reaching more and more people
maybe maybe in get somewhere okay full
of life Bill Maher Jimmy Kimmel I love
all those guys but you know Bill Maher
is really uh he used to be the
anti-establishment guy but now he's
pretty much turned into the
establishment and you know okay you know
he's alter capitalism and he he only
goes so far and he's you know he's on
mainstream channels and they won't let
him they will let him had somebody come
on and talk about yeah yeah getting rid
of the corporation
which means they're all out of a job now
if they can see that it's gonna be a
better world for them too like we talked
about
they can never been a better life too
but still this structure of the
corporate media is not going to allow
somebody was as radical ideas as we have
to come on and talk today you're running
for president even though you are
legitimately a presidential candidate
yeah they still can't have you on I mean
that just in the interest of balance I'm
a special candidate you know I
mean what you'll do I hear voice really
this is America man
yeah yeah I'll be putting that arguing
out there in the mostly head I'll be
saying that we'll see if I didn't
convince no yeah all right
very great talking to you yeah they