hello thanks for tuning in to the third
video of this of our series with myself
and Chris Chris let's see if I can
pronounce this right I'll get this right
Mastro Pietro master Pietro my wife has
been making me practice pronouncing
everybody's last name so hopefully I got
that right we'll check with Chris later
so before I set some context for this
dialogue with Chris some housekeeping so
given the the corona virus epidemic and
that we're all pretty much quarantine
that has that has afforded us bringing
all of the circling Institute's offering
online for the time being and so this is
the first time that we've done this and
I've done one circling event so far and
it was really quite exceptional I was
wasn't sure how that would go online but
I was quite stunned at how much circling
revealed herself on zoom' so I'm I'm
stoked about what this can open up
because I've been hesitant about
bringing it online for a lot of
different reasons so what that affords
is for all of you who have been writing
me or contacting me saying that you
wanted you've been wanting to come out
and do some of the circling events put
on by the circling Institute that I co
teach you but haven't been able to make
it out to the Bay Area
now you can you can come and play and so
I'm hopefully looking forward to meeting
a lot of you that I haven't I haven't
met in person yet so I hope to see you
there the link below if you click on the
one to the Facebook page it'll give me
give you all the current events and how
to sign up and how much it costs and all
that stuff and what to do
that and then the other thing is if
you're if you want to work one-on-one
with me email me the my emails below I
think that's all the housekeeping for
now so I'm really I'm excited about this
this third video so a little so if
you're new if you're new to the series
basically what we're doing is we are
intending on going through the Platonic
dialogues Chris and I always us too and
we may bring on different people to come
in to to reap read through the dialogues
and
under see how deeply we can embed
ourselves inside of them and understand
through them and see the changes that
come out of that endeavor in whatever
way that unfolds so this is probably the
first look like eight billion videos so
if YouTube still exists by the time we
get done with the dialogues and we're
still alive I will be surprised however
that's the the infinite of the infinite
potential of this of the series so very
much it's gonna be about the process and
the process so far has been really
enlightening for me this video was just
it's kind of long I'm thinking about
cutting it into two sections but I think
I'd probably be best just to leave it as
one section but I think it's almost two
hours so this one is where we read we
continue reading the article that John
grab a key and Chris wrote on the
Socratic dialogues and we thought that
it was it would be useful to read that
article first and walk through it and
it's quite an intense endeavor because
it it shows or reveals the possibility
of the Socratic way the Platonic
dialogues and what they unearth is
probably more relevant than they've ever
been and really does a beautiful way of
I'm concealing the musicality of that
and I thought it would be great both
Chris and I thought it would be great to
set context just to to bring the
Platonic dialogues really relevant to
our time and I'm learning a lot from it
the first one is mostly us just kind of
reading and riffing a little bit and
then the second one this is the second
half of the second half of the of the
video we really move into espousing into
dialogue os-- and there is a very like
just a deep I mean I think both Chris
and I both were just having had light
bulbs go off and my life was making
sense and my marriage is making sense
the whole universe is making sense in
ways that I'm sure I'll be living inside
of and walking with that I'll report
back to you the consequences of of that
walk called my life next week when we
start our next video so thank you so
much for participating and
[Music]
much love you know I was we were we were
just talking I can't
it should just start off record and
great
we always start in the middle of a
conversation that yeah that leaves only
suspicions as to where it began well
it's what I think is kind of fun it's
one of the things I really like about
you is we can talk about like we can
start the conversation talking about the
most ordinary thing and then just start
following the thread this time we ended
up we ended up in like why is it the
question of like what is it about what
is the difference between looking at the
sense of spaciousness and instead seeing
absence and void versus spacious and
that that in many many spiritual
traditions like that surrender has a lot
to do with that it's like you kind of
surrender to the void right and then you
kind of leap off you're like all right
if you gotta you exercise some capacity
and then you start free falling and
you're freaked out and then all of a
sudden you're like well it's a lot of
room here in fact that I've been
free-falling my entire oh my god I'm
everything still is dealing with
nothingness right like yes yes that kind
of that that switch and you were talking
about you know that experience of where
you're um you know you you fall into
that mood or that state where of
restlessness right you know if you've
been in a house too long or or your
perspective is become really myopic or
whatever it is that induces that quality
of like um where the the diffuseness of
what you are what you're unsatisfied
with you can't you can't find the object
to satisfy
Hey in that sense of restlessness um and
where you were talking about actually
just starting to this practice that
you've been having which is is rather
than trying to avoid it right or get out
of it just kind of surrendering to it a
bit mmm and that there's something about
that and what that one of the things
that I thought about which is you know
it seems like what you're doing on some
level when you kind of turn toward it
ray and you welcome it um you you you
brought up oh yeah then the dialogue OHS
can start you can start to have like a
dialogic relational scent you can find
yourself and it together um and at some
point I would imagine another way of
saying when you switch over to become
spaciousness its is that point where you
start to you start to indwell it and you
become indwelt by it whereas the other
experience is something like you kind of
you it's opaque to you in some level you
kind of bounce off of it right but
there's no it's not an indwelling
relationship but that sense of
indwelling it because the difference
between you know whole with a W and a
whole without the W right it it's like
the it's very much that I try to play I
try to make that I know there's a really
good joke that I haven't been able to
make funny yet about that but there's a
big difference between hold this and
wholeness yes yeah yeah
yeah and the yeah that the difference is
separated by the thinnest of the
thinnest of lines and it's dependent
upon some some some internal sacrament
of consciousness is what is what
uh sure 'he's a person across that line
yeah we were talking about the sort of
the the feeling of it being inescapable
that kind of restlessness the feeling of
futility that steals upon you that's you
may as well try and outrun your shadow
for all of the good it does to distract
yourself away from it and so yeah that
the sinking into it the indwelling as
you put it very well becomes a way of
knowing it from within then becomes a
way of becomes a becomes a way of
dialectically than working through it
right yeah right suspense I elected you
working through it shall we
you wrote down a few words about
dialectic just a few yeah just a few
yeah to to I think a few too many words
about dialectic right being honest a few
too many words about dialectic but yes
okay so should we pick up where we left
off yeah let me just go ahead
[Music]
yes okay so I put a link below so you
can know the people who are listening
and follow along with us you know one of
the things I actually wanted to comment
because I think I got a couple comments
about like commenting on the on the
robustness of the language hmm and it's
interesting because I think for me it's
the verbose miss is is not a function
doesn't seem like it's a function of
trying to be verbose it's really a
function of kind of putting putting
putting putting your attention on some
place that is a phenomena that doesn't
quite have words yet to it or doesn't
have words in the particular way that
your that's trying to emerge so I think
it's like what um
the language isn't trying to be
highfalutin for its own sake it's more
like that you you're now you know in a
world that's poverty of language MA
and of course you can't just invent
words so you have to take other words
and angle them and reposition them but
if you think about it though is it's is
it's what what I get a sense of in this
article right is this sense of there's
something kind of just at the edges of
intelligibility that you're trying to
disclose right you're trying to it's
closed it's closed in unfamiliarity or
George clothed and not an adequate
language for it yet and so what what
you're doing what part of what's
happening here is you're watching kind
of a wrestling match right in a certain
sense of trying to unbutton existence or
that domain of existence right until it
starts to come starts to come out again
and
to me very much mirrors the process of
the dialo ghosts that we're talking
about right hmm so it's like what it
took I think I'm just imagining you and
John sitting there and talking about all
this stuff right yeah yeah and I mean
and you're right struggling with know
what you what you what you say is is
very considerate and you're right
because you know there's no attempt here
to be garrulous for its own sake and
verbosity is not a virtue unto itself
I get that and I've had you know I've
had that I've had that conversation with
people before where we're you know if
languages if the nomenclature is very
seems very technical or dense then it's
somehow it's somehow somehow trying to
obfuscate something and it's not it's
quite the opposite but the challenge is
that when you're trying to I mean this
the semiosis of language and the way
that we're using it is a container for
things that aren't bounded
linguistically that's just the nature of
the problem you know so when you're
trying to use language to to constrain
and contain that which is not yeah it is
in an arable the you have a very you
have a creative as well as an
intellectual exercise cut out for you
that's very demanding and so no they're
like there's no that this isn't being
loquacious for its own sake and and
there's no attempt to try and be to try
and and and brandish this as as a some
kind of you know rhetorical as some kind
of rhetorical maze
except insofar as it was our maize that
we were finding our way through so if
you're trying to find your way through
it and finding it difficult yeah it's
because we - we're finding our way
through it and finding it difficult and
the idea that such things should be easy
and straightforward or that they should
be digestible it's short order is just a
premise that I reject I read a lot of
things that are that seem that seem that
seem oblique to me and that I have to
struggle and wrestle with I mean my
goodness you're you're a Haida garyun
guy you know this better than most that
sometimes the struggle is what avails
the insight all right that's the whole
point of the dialectical process which
is why there's an attempt there's a both
a voluntary and involuntary attempt to
exemplify the very process of the
dialectic which is to say that it's a
process that fights back
right it's a process that fights back
yeah it's not tamed you know and and the
attempt to tame it the attempt to tame
and contain it as I've said ends up ends
up ends up resulting in something that
that that bears the marks of the
wrestling match that that produced it
yeah right the fingerprints of that rest
the grip marks are all over it because
because that that's reflective of the
exercise it took to conceive of it and
so I I think yeah I want to emphasize
that like the eight when it comes to
pretty when it comes to doing this kind
of work and goodness knows I'm no expert
and incidentally no expert on you know
no I'm no expert on on Plato and
Socrates I'm no expert on ancient Greek
philosophy like I'm an avowed amateur
you know and and I make no bones about
that that's fine by me so I you know
that's hopefully that's that's a that's
a clear admission on my part but the
fact is that
that there's not there's not a there's
not a direct there's there's not a
direct causal relationship between the
will to produce a paper such as this and
then the product of the paper has
produced it's not that you know we're
going to we're going to will this into
being straightforwardly and what is
created as a consequence of our designs
no that's not it at all not at all right
what ends up being is not something that
was that was that was preordained in my
mind or in John's right it is the
outcome of something very fitful yes
come of something very fitful and so
it's in a way in a way I dis identify
from it not as a way of not as a way of
evading or issuing responsibility for it
but I dis identify with it as a way of
admitting to the the super a personal
nature of what happens in the
dialectical process yeah yeah and that
like that has to be understood properly
if you're going to undertake the
exercise of encountering it it's not
about you it's not about me frankly
rights not John would say the same of
himself these are all simply exploratory
exercises and what comes of it are
simply the footprints in the snow of
that exercise that hopefully you can
follow to some to something of value you
know or not basically right and I have
to say to that that for me and I think
that some of this has to do with being
dyslexic and a DD even having different
learning disabilities and stuff than
which I've talked about before is one of
the advantages I'm coming to understand
as I talk to more people about this to
about having a learning disability great
is that I had to on some level be able
to tolerate not understanding the
specimen
the city of a word or being able to read
a word right because because my
tolerance level by necessity wasn't had
to expand whatever word I didn't
understand like I think I ended up
understanding it in some ways deeper
because it would re-emerge
however it would emerge again in a hole
of something that I was kind of it was
gathering in context so when it would
really back door right so one of the
things about these kinds of
conversations is is that it's a
conversation that's different than a lot
of the conversations that we have right
like a lot of the conversations I think
that we have are usually functional
right in other words I'm saying I'm
giving a directive or making a request
or remaining a promise or I'm I'm
strategizing about something that has an
end aim right that's one right which is
more like language or discourse as a
kind of action to get something done in
the world right and then there's another
kind which is which is more like what
Heidegger would call idle talk which is
just kind of you don't think about it
much you're just like how you doing oh
good did you see that and you just kind
of mumbling along right and in idle talk
is what most people are in when when
they're not in the other one right yeah
and also when you're talking to yourself
oftentimes it's idle talk and then in
the idea of idle talk is it it's
actually necessary because what it does
is it keeps you could say the cultural
interpretation and play and idly right
but then there's then there's a lake you
could say the realm of art the realm of
philosophy the the realm of oh it's a
different kind of conversation right
in that you actually yo.hannes
in a video that we did yesterday he said
sometimes it seemed part of it yeah he
said yeah very impossible I really
caught my attention he said it's very
rare that that a philosophers thought is
timely yes and he says he doesn't know
but he suspects but actually his thought
right and being a philosopher actually
has something directly to say to the
times and what that implies it's is
usually philosophy philosophy is a kind
of thinking that that is powerful but
not necessarily immediately useful
writes more like philosophy is is
thinking about things like in what is it
what is intelligibility itself right
what is it what is it that I what are
those presuppositions and those kind of
things that are invisible to me right
that I somehow I stand on to then be
able to gossip and talk and do all these
other things what are those what are
those those things that are often like
transparent to me right yet I stand on
to do everything you could say that by
definition that conversation is not the
process of standing on it's a process of
unearthing what's right concealed right
that's right that's right it up in
furthering it and making it present and
so it's it's a it's a conversation that
isn't useful right yes
but yet determine it very determinate
yeah very determinate yeah I mean
determinate of the ideations that are
going to ultimately become the become
worlds that we then live in and through
right I'm thinking of this some as a
word that Q are used but but the German
equivalent I'm trying to remember it's
like it's a growth it's a great word
Germans have this way of
talk talk about nomenclature the Germans
are just unparalleled I think Lee
leoben's and Chung I think is the word
and it's this idea that it's it's the
life view it's the idea we live in and
through something something like that
right that the ideation becomes becomes
the world in its entirety and I think
that the role of the philosopher which i
think is contiguous with exactly what
you've just described is the person that
peers into the interstices of the world
that we live in and sees the and sees
that the and sees and sees the presence
of absence within that world yeah right
sees the presence of absence that world
yeah yeah yeah like seeing seeing you
know looming the areas where the where
the we know where the where the the
boards of the edifice don't quite touch
together yeah right and and and from
which darkness
you know protrudes yeah or light
protrudes depending on how you want to
spin the metaphor so it's it's it's that
it's the and that's why it's such an
intentional business right the business
of philosophy is trying to notice trying
to notice the gaps in kind of bringing
this home on a personal level of you
know well what you know okay say I'm not
a philosopher right if I say I don't
have any predisposition for caring about
philosophy we'll say I just want to grow
as a person right you know what what
does engaging and this is this is the
thing that John really highlighted that
I've been getting at a deeper level and
I've been noticing myself consolidator
out like something really coheres is
this you know as John talks about he's
been doing a lot of fieldwork where he's
going been going out and he's different
on practices that are responses to what
he's calling the meeting crisis and like
circling and often
relating and different kinds of movement
practices and meditation practice all
those things and what any things he says
is like it seems like it seems like
they're getting the like the
psychological cognitive aspect deeply
and and even to some degree the
existential aspect but the ontological
aspect right it's the part that seems to
seems to get not any attention and what
he put what he said to what he said to
me in the last conversation I had with
them it was that I and I heard it
differently this time he he says I want
to see more philosophy a-- hmm and he
said I didn't hear it is like John wants
to see more nobody saying is from from
his perspective that it may those things
that are trying to respond to the
meaning of crisis may not be able to
respond unless there's a real necessity
of philosophy a-- that it's not just
like something that would be nice this
as a as an added option right but
actually it may not be addressing what
it's attempting to address without that
element at play yeah I think one of them
yeah one of the one of the places one of
the people that really start to that
gets at this in a very beautifully
poetic way is David white when he talks
about levels of attention and its
relationship and how it constitutes
identity right because one of the things
he said is like as his as he would say
as I started to notice my deepening
levels of attention started to develop
my sense of who I was the what was
directly in proportionate to that as if
itself is always in an arena and if Mike
Watt might the quality of my ability to
pay attention right makes the arena more
or less or some qualitative shift starts
to show itself to me then that's yes
wealth is gonna be in a relationship to
that
so if I'm salutely shifting your
identity start to pay attention in new
ways
exactly and this is the way I think I
think the the practice of philosophy ax
for me it's oriented it's it's a it's on
one level there's like understanding the
insight but but the insight is important
but I think the thing that it's the
machinery that you exercise and
coordinated to have that insight starts
to bleed into everything else where all
of a sudden you can start to notice the
negative shape and what your mom just
said where you never saw that gap before
and then you're able to go and then he
because you could see it right then you
can and it's not just seeing it then you
can respond to you go hey mom what what
about that like black thing that's kind
of I never noticed before we used to say
that thing that's right
that's right up knowing your mother in
ways that you'll like that you've never
had or that has you exercised ways of
communicating that lead to new things
and so this is in one level it doesn't
have immediate practical value in some
one-to-one relationship it's even more
primarily it's it's it starts to operate
on what occurs as practical at all it's
like whatever that background that has
the world show up to you in the way that
it does if there was a if there if there
was a place where you could put your
attention where that lies is I think
where philosophy continually addresses
right so yeah that's kind of the
exercise I think ya know well said guy
well said sweet all right shall we read
we shall read okay so I think I remember
where we left off okay it's on page 4
because I think the last thing I read
was the line that culminated in the
divine double understands divine double
okay so we're the last
the beginning of the last paragraph on
the fourth page okay all right should I
should I go ahead or yeah yeah I like
are you reading it better we'll have to
deal with my disability okay
we interrupt you interrupt me whenever
you like we might tidy our understanding
of dialectic with the following metaphor
to be reprised throughout the chapter
imagine the organizing self as a musical
Orchestra just like Plato's partite soul
in this analogy the signifying logos is
the sounding of the instruments Socratic
symbol conducts a melody to invoke a
trans J and the melody coheres the locus
to harmonize the orchestral sections
meanwhile this analogy can transfer in
both directions between intrapersonal
and interpersonal levels of play the
dialogue is also an orchestral
arrangement and Dia logos is the playing
together that gathers the instruments of
self in the sounding of other selves in
both scenarios the flowing melody is the
dialectic presence that harmonizes the
instruments within the south between the
cells and between the intra and Inter
psychic orchestras dialectic aspiration
and Callard x' proleptic rationality is
the conduction of novel melodies to
complexify orchestral rhythms evolving
our capacity to play involute measures
until the intra and interpersonal
cording becomes a tuning for
transpersonal concerts in both
individual and collective orchestral
models dialectic transmutes intelligence
the aptitude for music alright this is
simply extending the same metaphor into
rationality the aptitude for harmony and
rationality into wisdom the harmony that
seeks concert the relational presence of
this melody binds the instruments into a
shared identity of Accession much like
the crew accrue rather mobilizes in the
anatomy of a moving vessel a chariot for
instance and arranges to face the
frontier the team spirit of dialectic is
of the players and beyond the players
like the diamond
it enchants the participant NORs with
its symbolizing vitality the melodic
motion possesses the cadence of each
individual performer explaining the
common phenomenon of a collective being
quote more than the sum of his parts
unquote
like how four good musicians can gather
into genius for example the Beatles be
with that so I that really what just
struck me here is with where the three
things are listed both scenaries the
flowing melody is the dialectical
presence that harmonizes the instrument
himself between the self between the
selves and between the intra and Inter
psychic orchestras and then there is
that part where okay oh no it's actually
this part in both individual and
collective orchestral models a
dielectric transmutes intelligence the
aptitude for music okay so the dialectic
itself right the back and forth is
transmuting so it's that is transmuting
intelligence so this back and forth
that's going on right is it's it's it's
it's like transmitting the sound in a
certain sense right so in acts
intelligence mm-hmm I just wanted to
make sure and get this then the aptitude
for music right transmutes intelligence
you have to shoot for music so dialectic
is transmitting the intelligence that's
the aptitude for music into rationality
the aptitude for harmony interesting so
there's the aptitude for music itself so
to be able to hear and the tune to
intelligibility and then into
rationality the aptitude for harmony
okay harmony and rationality into wisdom
the harmony that seeks concert god damn
that's so fucked that's gorgeous
so gorgeous oh thank you so gorgeous I
mean it really like strikes home into
rationally the attitude for harmony so
there's a way in which I can actually
have an aptitude for concert right so
that aptitude brings brings us together
that it Tunes me in to rationality the
aptitude for harmony so I can now tend
to how harmonious are the the flowing of
intelligibility is the music that's
playing right and respond to it and then
and rationality into wisdom the harmony
that seeks concert so this is some it's
interesting the rationality into wisdom
so when when the rationality starts to
seek harmony as it seeks harmony it
starts to the harmony starts to really
the harmony itself starts to reveal that
the harmony is seeking concert right
there's something about that I like
about it like where it's like the wisdom
is the thing that is in some way the
music itself the harmony itself is
actually within the music itself is
starting to see concert hmm that's the
wisdom its inherent within the movement
of relations and the intelligibility and
the rationality I really like I just
wanted to make sure and sink into that
mm no no that's a great elaboration okay
yeah okay great
the dialectic current is an aspiring
rationality a view from above that ID
AIT's a cosmic chorus when we catch it
as it catches us it inspires new
arrangements for our Orchestra that
changed the way we play by playing
together dia logos disposes a character
of on to dramatic irony the novel melody
cultivates aspiration by dialoguing the
participant Noah through a play of
different motifs for example stories
myths and games then returns the knower
by rephrasing those motifs reflexing her
attention to her own transformation
revealing her potential to be a new kind
of self dialectic is the melody of
transformation that scores over the
scenes ionizing each moment of play with
for knowing ignorant for example the
young man plays classical music knowing
he may someday appreciate it plays the
uncle knowing he may someday be father
sounds out a language knowing he may
someday be fluent the view from above
aspires our logos to expand from its
current frame that is it trans frames
perspective and in so doing guides the
gathering soul to seek itself in mystery
quote for just this reason it is fair
that only philosophers mind grows wings
since its memory always keeps it as
close as possible to those realities by
being close to which the gods are divine
close quote from the Phaedrus anamnesis
of this meta attentional rationality is
analogized by the charioteer in Plato's
Phaedrus quote the souls steersman
unquote the uses the unseen presence of
quote the place beyond heaven unquote to
gather his horses instruments in gnosis
concert with the forms it is tempting to
contrast this famous journey with an
antipodal myth that of Phaeton the brash
son of Apollo who presumed to pilot his
father's chariot with no such view from
above was unable to muster the horses
and scorched the earth in flame his myth
brings character to the noxious
consequence of unguided conversations
and the ungass cells they conduce
adducing fresh stakes to the Socratic
match
that the unexamined life a nun aspiring
flight so defined it is not worth living
yeah just kind of feeling a lot of this
is gonna be is gonna be start to blossom
out as it goes on okay
shall I should I keep going what do you
think okay yeah unless there's anything
you want to say about that nope nope no
I'm gonna try not to annotate it
wherever possible too because if it's
not if it doesn't if it doesn't explain
itself then then you know what I mean
okay all right the four ways so this is
on to a new section now the four ways of
knowing proposition procedure
perspective and participation this won't
be new to anyone who has followed John's
series awakening from the meeting crisis
or who has seen any number of his videos
in which he discusses this and so this
is a this is a this is a component a
sort of a theoretical this is a
theoretical apparatus that he has had in
his in his tool though for some time and
anyway okay so before ways knowing
proposition procedure perspective and
participation to better understand the
dialectic of an examined life and its
impact on our knowing we must first
understand more expressly what we mean
by knowing for this we offer four
categories or ways of sorry ways of
parceling the epistemic definition
typology czar not essential of course
but useful in so far as they lend
intelligibility or Pascal's spirit of
geometry to darkling patterns allowing
us to gain understanding of our
cognition and intervene in its processes
aspiring lee then the provision of these
types will with continual reference to
socrates advance the epistemic project
by describing its constituents more
closely the versus propositional knowing
gold as a mineral the equator crosses
columbia the normal human body is 37
degrees celsius propositions set
constraining criteria that is rules that
help us to realize relevant implications
of information
prepositional knowing is a linguistic
knowing that marked by apathetic and
inferential reasoning it provides
sexuality yet the constraint of
propositions can become idolatrous and
when unyielding they freeze-frame our
perspective see ahead for this reason
Socrates uses propositions as dialogic
rudders indexical II to steer the vessel
ahead to steer the vessel of attention
to epistemic significance and now just
think I just I assumed back to the
beginning where it talks about you know
the loss of the second person hmm right
and if you if he if you lose the second
person like you lose so many ways of
knowing and all you have are these kinds
of compositional statements to situate
yourself in because you have no access
to process exactly yeah exactly
right which brings us to the city the
the the issues of cradle irrigation that
we often refer to as being the sort of
the things that that that that
concentrate and freeze our our
philosophy and our theology into into
idolatry yeah right yeah okay procedural
knowing catching a ball driving a car
changing a diaper procedure is a non
linguistic knowing how to combined of
conscious and pre conscious actions that
realize relevant interactions and affect
a power to impact on the world while
propositions condition rules procedure
conditions routine for instance Socrates
uses the technique of a Lanka's to
entrain discussion within a routine of
socialized exchanges observable in
Plato's dialogues if the proposition is
the single note of knowing the procedure
is undoubtedly its rhythm perspectival
knowing do you want to jump in guide no
okay
respect I will knowing suspicious
maternal desirous regretful perspective
is the knowing what it is like to be a
situational awareness that realizes
relevant states of consciousness and
cognition a presence of hereness and
being in the world
an agent arena relationship
that gives off a sense of presence and
placement imagine visiting the house
where you grew up as a child almost
certainly the presence of home has
changed as your role as the child has
shifted the house seems smaller the
bedroom doesn't invite you to play
proposition and procedure are grounded
in the presence of relationships and so
we invoke this presence to inform these
ways of knowing for example a teacher
might situate a math problem the
proposition in a grocery store
perspective for the students to practice
solving the procedure Nietzsche
of course made this point famously there
is only a perspective seeing only a
perspective knowing and the more effects
we allow to speak about one thing the
more eyes different eyes we can use to
observe one thing the more complete our
comp will our concept of this thing our
objectivity be close quote in Plato's
dialogue Socrates situates perspective
within dramaturgy the multi locality of
characters allows for the casting of
eyes and adoption of different
propositions if proposition is the note
and procedure the rhythm perspective is
this signature rule sounded by the body
of each instrument participatory knowing
participation is the most difficult way
of knowing to explain because it is also
the most ineffable it realizes the
relevant forms of life the existential
moding of our being proposition is not
the subjective character of perspective
which seems personal
or the objective Lex Akala T of
propositions which seems impersonal but
belongs in the transgender / tissa
Puteri knowing leads the gathering logos
to a state of religio a sacral
experience of connectedness and
transpersonal relating to reality it is
therefore mediated mediated by symbol ax
connecting tissues of enculturation self
to world ecological coupling agent to
arena emission organism to environment
in our metaphoric orchestra
participatory knowing is the embodiment
of resonant vibrations wherein the
identity of a player becomes the
identity of the concert in play aren
culturing coupling and niching are the
participants of existential attitudes
that mode the character of our
experience we are as hi
observed the only beings whose being is
in question and the open question of our
being participates our existence into
presence is design the roles of lover
mother father friend teacher student
elder enemy these cognitive structures
are characters of perspective gathered
by air existential moding to take a
shared perspective we must share the
query of being to join our empty
grasping hands where the locus of
million begins yeah so it's been a pause
on that one so I think I think
participatory knowing of the four ways
right I think the most part people can
can definitely grasp you know um you
know procedural knowing they definitely
people can get you know the I'm sorry my
computer's getting a little bit from
time propositional knowing and then
people can definitely get having a
perspective right um but the
participatory one is I think the one I
think is the lends itself to the
greatest contribution right that's
probably the least understood um yet you
know constitutive of everything that is
present for you
literally right yeah yeah well he's
hardest to understand precisely because
it's it's precisely because it
constitutes a so much else like it's
it's the one that's always kind of one
yeah I mean I didn't unone another level
I really you know I really like the way
he brought in height over here um we are
as Heidegger observe the only beings
whose being is in question and the open
question of our being that we're in
participates how our existence into
presence so it's like kinda so that's so
impregnated through and through it's
like
[Music]
that the roles of lover in again the
roles of lover
mother father friend teacher student
elder it I would say that like yeah I
really you know it's interesting if I
think about it like this like I've
talked a lot about like how tripped-out
I am about how affected how affected
deeply I am in being married mmm-hmm and
it's like and I think I could almost say
that it's through participating in the
fully participating in the role of
husband right has brought my life to
presence in a way that's difficult to
describe but is all-encompassing insight
right right right
and that even even like I you could have
laid all this out intellectually for me
and I could have really cropped it but
the experience of being a husband so
dedicated and the wife that has come to
presence through that dedication in that
role that I do really do feel this sense
of that we're playing a role but that
role is transforming the guy playing it
at the same time yeah you're no well a
sense of tour surrounded this like it's
a it's encompassed my whole life in the
feel and texture yeah the way the things
are present for me
mmm-hmm I never quite thought about it
in terms of participatory knowing but I
think that's really kind of it yeah yeah
exactly right well because it because
the that you're the way in which you are
participated in which you participate in
them like deliberately playing with the
transitivity of the verb right again an
instance of the kind of creative license
required to wrap ourselves around the
texture of the experience also changes
the way your attention is directed to
write the details that become salient to
you become relevant to you John will
like be using that word changes right
what's what presents to you changes what
you read in to changes right there's
that there's that there's a there's a
textual difference
what is read and read into in any given
detail of your phenomenology and because
of that the world changes quite uh
turley quite fundamentally right
it changed funnel it changes
phenomenally and and that's a very
difficult thing to to understand except
as a gnosis as a conformed experience as
a living out and living through as
opposed to a knowing that or knowing of
in a place where this kind of goes South
a lot right there's something about
participatory knowing that I've thought
about this before is is there's this
quality about being human right and I
think even Wincott would say that it's
you know the sense of participating in
something is like a womb or a holding
environment and what what Wincott and if
actually if you look at it I think when
we say it's some way right when I refer
to it's in general right on some level
there's this quality of a surrounded
Ness right that which is holding that's
that's greater than the sum of all of
its parts that I'm inside of so for an
example of this would be you know one
way to look at it is your first womb is
in the mother's belly right and and that
usually goes pretty well except for you
almost died right at the end but then
you pop out and given that human beings
and this is fascinating to me given that
were so instinct pour right in that an
evolutionary scientist who's a client of
mine who's funny when he would talk
about this because he were just called
crazy it's like human infants make no
sense right by any other standard
weed by any other mammal that we know
about we'd we'd come out at about four
or five years old
right oh right right yeah you mean like
the long the the protracted and the
protracted developmental gestation
period yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
imagine the mood your mother would be in
[Laughter]
but the sense of that human beings are
the most helpless most dependent futile
like living things that we know about in
the known universe
right right right and what's interesting
about that is that that being the case
how we start off you know who are the
ones that like in feet can kind of
almost see back to the Big Bang
there's a mixed there's a mixed
experience of that vulnerability and
what that vulnerability makes possible
right right right
huge but you could say that like so
Wincott would say so the second holding
environment the second womb is your
childhood right and and it's interesting
with this because this is getting into
this participatory knowing to whatever
degree that holding environment held you
right and in places where it didn't
there was ruptures somewhere right and
you could say that that it grows you up
and where there was ruptures right is
the third holding environment which is
usually people called their life and
what what the third holding environment
would be is something like in a perk
like I think in a participatory way
indexing reality in terms of the old
holding environment so that I can like
marry my mother and then try really hard
to fix that problem but the problem is
right is that although it looks like
you're really trying to get that to not
be there anymore
the holding environment the way you're
participating constitutes the
environment itself so it it's a
self-fulfilling prophecy right that's
right so in organs I've noticed in this
kind of witness distinction has like
helped me in terms of being with people
and understanding people and having
things more available so I would often
notice and circling where somebody would
start talking and then they start going
on a rant
started addressing concerns that no one
brought up right but then you watch it
then he watched were people who don't
have those concerns now have those
concerns in just the right way that like
justify that person having the concerns
and then they keep enacting this this
environment over and over and over again
right yeah yeah it becomes it becomes a
kind of collective projection that that
that suffuses like suffuses the
conditions of your actuality with those
of your of your of your sort of
intrapsychic life yeah yeah totally
yeah you know yeah that's well that's
why you
sorry gone yeah and what's interesting
is when I explored that with people
before oftentimes they'll be like wait a
minute
what I don't think you were concerned
about that before how come here could
you know and we start to react oh I'm
doing that and the person being you know
at the center of the circle or who has
their attention on right is at first is
like oh thank god
yeah but it really like okay let's all
kind of refrain from the elicitation and
then guess what happens for that person
that person starts to quiver and Shake
and they don't know who they are
yeah without people getting in there
folding chairs it's the Invisibles
folding chairs that they set up around
them because the self oftentimes is
constituted by that object relation
right so if you don't hate me in that
way or if you if you don't if you don't
if you already approve of me let's say
but I am identified with trying to get
your approval and you keep approving
that I don't know who I am and if you
hold that for a while and you kind of
tolerate the shakes something starts to
crack open right other right a different
kind of intelligibility stricter compass
right what that is is in a certain sense
it's like the way that participated or
knowing can bind itself yep into really
it procedures that don't work I guess
like a procedural knowing that's
habitual yeah and then you make
conclusions about reality
and you can get that thing and get that
thing in an auto poetic like a dyslexic
autopoietic process right that becomes a
kind of reciprocal narrowing yeah in
that in mark Lewis's term yes
interesting yes yes yes that's right
that's right because the because the
same because the front the fundamental
mode of participation it's so
constitutive of the other ways of
knowing quite pre consciously that to
get to the source of the of the
participatory moding requires a kind of
intervention that we're often
ill-equipped for right it's the kind of
intervention that depth psychology right
for people like you and was was targeted
to right to try like how do you get a
person to to prescind projections that
are a consequence of the way that they
are a consequence of the participles of
their existential moding right how do
you get to the source of those modes and
effect shifts in those modes right
obviously for someone like Jung it was
the process was the individuating
process of the dialectic with one's own
unconscious with the contents and formal
context of one's own personal and
transpersonal experience of the
unconscious and that's so interesting
because that process I'm thinking more
about that right now and John and I are
doing some work on that right now about
how how the interior ization of the
dialectical dynamic that's otherwise
described in this chapter and that we're
talking about right now is applicable to
those very therapeutic methods of depth
psych psychology right at least certain
certain strains of it that if you can
take that dynamic that is fundamentally
dr2 opening that opening the reciprocity
of the personal and the transpersonal
right that second person that seems to
issue to you from without and then the
sort of more egoic the more egoic
form of self that seeks to manage and
contrive that the that the paired
dialogue between those two dimensions of
being and participation is precisely
what can shift and open that revolving
circle that you've just described yeah
right and changed the way that it cycles
change the direction in which it cycles
right right but it's a difficult thing
to access precisely because it has to be
accessed at the level of fundamental
participation and that's why and that's
why and this is what the whole next
section is going to be about in the
paper right that's why it involves the
espousal and enactment of analogies
that's why it's a symbolising process
because it has to be it's that it's a
circum it's a circum ambulatory process
it actually has to be active through
it's not something that you can
proposition your way out of it's
something that has to be embodied and
known analogically and that's why mytho
police's is the native language - that
kind of participating transformations
because it's a language that speaks to
the enactment of patterns that we that
we fundamentally know in the vesture of
myth in the Wester of storytelling right
and that's why like from Plato through
to Jung one inter-personal intrapsychic
one fundamentally intrapersonal and
intrapsychic they are they are they they
resound with the same dynamics precisely
because to get to the source of your
fundal existential modal requires a kind
of enactment that can be only realized
properly mythopoetic lee and that's why
all of this ratiocination ultimately
needs to be grounded out in that kind of
semiosis and feedback to it right so
there's not only the dialectic
interpersonally and interpersonally but
there's also a dielectric revolving
between what we might call the logos the
gathering and the mythos right
is essentially the the the the
protrusion and profusion of that more
imagistic or rather imaginal creation of
of the spontaneous flow that changes the
phenomenology of how we experience the
world and experience one another right
that that and that and then that the
cycle between the disillusion of that
descent into sort of the mythopoetic
chaos of acting through and being
unconstrained by your propositional
knowing and then re gathering it to
something that coheres and maintains a
kind of totnes or attention is precise
like that's its own dimension of the
dialectic process right so the same it's
like radially the same the same
fundamental praxis is operating along
different axes simultaneously and it's
precisely the convergence of those axes
that that that that powers and makes the
process fundamentally efficacious right
but it's a difficult it's a difficult
thing to it's a difficult thing to
explain because its efficacy is owed to
its distribution to its diffuseness
right so to source it is a difficult
thing precisely for that reason to so to
source both the both the both the the
the kind of knowing of participatory
knowing and its interventions and so so
it's almost like in here is kind of
bringing it back to dialectic if per se
like someone's like Socrates right who's
got zeroed in on all these different
dimensions at once right he asks a
question and the person who's answering
it assumes that he's looking for the
answer that question yeah but actually
he's looking for him to answer that
question and realize he just tied
himself into a knot right yeah yeah
though that the knot reveals the
constraint that he's in that reveals the
thing that he wasn't seeing before so
there's exactly where he was one of the
things I've liked about I like about
working with
oops a lot is that you can kind of see
these dynamics play out right in in kind
of the distribution of exists there's
some anxiety that's assumed and it's
taking place and somebody's weaving
their web and they're recreating their
holding imperfect and then some like it
if somebody can kind of notice that the
moment you notice that boom it something
goes meta and it drops away for a second
right yeah and then you can go then you
have this choice where you can go fully
into and drop like fully or you can
consciously refrain from it and see who
you are in the face the lot
participatory so there is this way in
where we kind of hold ourselves up like
clone ourselves to each other right in a
certain exactly like you say something
like maybe it's 80% mother issues and
20% relevant to what we're talking about
and then I like I maybe frustrate that
and I just bring attention to that and
then and so there's that kind of way
where we can have that kind of auto that
yeah the musicality can begin to that
well exactly I was just gonna say that's
where the music that that's where the
the musicality metaphor then comes in
right because it's the tuning leave the
tuning of one's self is commensurate
with the tuning between individuals
between your ear instruments as it were
and yeah and then the ontology of the
discourse has to be your attention our
attention to the ontology of discourse
and dialectic also has to be directed to
the right level because then the the set
like the semiosis of the discourse its
meaning is not to be found in the
content of each proposition it's to be
found in the in the it's to be found in
the role that the proposition takes in
the overall discourse in the body of the
overall discourse right so the meaning
of this proposition isn't simply at
semantic meaning the meaning of the
proposition is its contribution to the
overall process in play just like you
were talking before about idle talk
right the Heidegger's definition of idle
talk and
and the better question to ask I think
to properly understand the semiosis of
any given interaction is not what is
being or for the for the purpose of a
sort of a for the purpose of reframing
attention at least just as a little
thought experiment the better question
to ask in many cases is not what is
meant but what is lived and I'm I'm I'm
I'm borrowing from your way of speaking
precisely because it's so so remarkably
useful in cases like this guy what is
being lived in this speech not what is
being meant in this speech that's why
intimation that the term intimation is
so useful precisely because it's it's
it's listing to intimacy and meaning at
the same time what's what's lived in
idle chatter is the reaffirmation and
reinforcement of contact the continuity
of that contact right the meaning of the
conversation I have with my neighbor who
lives down the hall when we're in the
elevator coming up with our groceries is
not you know how are you good how are
you you know rainy day today isn't it it
because the content of it could not
possibly be more banal but what is lived
in the discourse
what is intimated by that discourse then
the right way to understand the semi
OSIS of that discourse is the is the
reattachment of the relation or perhaps
the the reinforcement or the or the the
the contributions that we're both making
in concert to to to tend to the binding
of the relationship in the rapport that
we have with one another right yeah it's
pretty like it's precisely the tending
to the relationship itself that is the
meaning of that of that discourse right
rather than its contents and so then the
Socratic the the Socratic dialogues I
think are very much that just on a
different scale right the trading of the
trading of propositions signifies beyond
the propositions that is that seems very
clear it's almost like I just get this
sense it's constantly honing your
attention on what is most
the discernment between what's what is
the it seems like it I asked this
question of Facebook the other day and
then I thought about it I'm like kind of
what is my answer this question which is
like if if you if you could have if you
could answer one question
right what would what would the question
be such that would make the biggest
difference in your life if you could ask
or answer the question if you could if
you what is the one question that if if
it were answered right or even
articulated right right it would make
the biggest difference to what's most
important to you in your life right
that's a good question my answer was um
the wisdom of knowing where to put my
attention yes it's far as I can tell
everything is downstream from that right
yes yes yes and I think this is this is
kind of what what the process the
content right all the different modes
all the different ways of knowing that
are you're lifting you're lifting into
relief in this in this exposing on what
Socrates was getting at in Plato on some
level I think is probably in service of
that right of like God if we can come
out of this conversation and I have a
sense of what is like what calls my
attention and knowing to put my
attention here versus here because it's
connected to the most amount of things
at the perfect amount of level that
seems to be the most valuable thing in
the world
yep I think I yeah yeah I think that's
an excellent answer to the question and
in a way like the entire tradition I'm
being a bit simplistic here but in a way
all mindfulness traditions presuppose
the very answer you've just given yeah
that's where we put our attention yeah
yeah that's that's determinative of what
is real yeah is where we put our
attention if we say if attention is the
thing that connects the agent in the
arena right hmm
it's also what's gonna transform the
arena right it's the thing that's most
it's that play it's my it's where I
connect to the world the most right yep
yeah I'm also kind of I'm also just
appreciating I'm just echoing many
conversations with my friend Mike Mark
Michael Lewis who I like had a
conversation with I've known him three
years I love that guy um he always
emphasizes like look you know you could
add intimacy and you can have amazing
conversations however if they're not
connected to a reality right you can
have shared delusions that are euphoric
what is that does it move back in and
get us a deeper connection to that which
you you can't think it actually it bucks
right that's right down that's right
right that's right yeah cuz shared
psychosis can be remarkably compelling
yeah yeah yeah so do you do you between
you triangulate do you do you
triangulate to an ontology that is that
is fundamentally oriented - yeah -
realness and and then the function of
the dialectic process is precisely that
process of triangulation yeah yeah now
I'm thinking about marriage again I
think the marriage is kind of oriented I
love hearing you talk about I love
hearing you talk about marriage in this
way because it's well aside from just
being refreshing it it it when you bring
that role and bring it into the center
of all of this sort of the the orbit
bring it put it at the center of the
these sort of orbiting theories it's
suddenly it it it plugs in so well and
it gives like it gives proper
it's so exemplary of what it means to
live through a role and be known by that
role and be changed as a consequence of
that role role as a role as a terribly
unfortunate term because it applies
something very very very trivial and and
and and pure Isle and of course I don't
mean it in that way but but it when you
like all of this all of this machinery
and abstraction suddenly animates in a
very very beautiful way when you put
marriage at the center of it and watch
it interact right right and they think I
find it very beautiful thank you I I
always let me know I had infinity on my
finger and that's exactly what I'm
talking about like infinity in the sense
cuz when I got married is I think you're
supposed to when you get married like
traditional anyways is like you're
basically you're signing a contract that
I mean you you're just not it's not an
option to get out of right
closing that door right and having the
sense of significance or length of time
yeah to be where my attention or the
marriage draws both of our attention
towards hasn't adjusted the
micro-movements with each other right
imagines that we're making choices and
saying things in ways in responding in
ways that are given by that sense of the
whole coming through right right he's if
you use if you if you like close the
scape hatch right which was not boy it
took me I don't know over 40 years to
even know that I had an escape hatch let
alone to be able to close it right but
but really doing that consolidated every
moment to be a little bit like oh yeah
it's like living this moment as if it
were going to happen over and over and
over and over again yeah it's the yeah
yeah yeah because right because then to
Wed because what you're doing by the
sounds of it what you're doing in in in
the traditional meaning of your wedding
you're you
marriage what you're also doing is your
again comes back to the dialectical
dynamic your wedding possibility to
actuality in a covenant away because
because to subsist to subsist
predominantly in a realm of sort of
undulated possibility is precisely to be
to be to be like like you cook are talks
about that and lived it as well live to
this idea that that that dwelling in
dwelling and sort of a phantom realm of
excessive possibility is a kind of
infection that prevents that prevents
the assumption a person's assumption of
reality in a way that will consummate
their being in in totality and and so
and and so that then to make that
wedding between what-what possibility in
actuality seems to require as far as I
can tell for closing in on almost
sacrament well lift yes not in in an
actual sacramental way for closing
possibility yeah in order to harmonize
it to what is to what is actual and
concrete right that there's I'm yeah I'm
I'm scrambling around in this a little
bit but there's there's a sense in which
you have to you have to somehow you have
to you have to pair them and the pairing
of those two things requires yeah
requires a certain a certain that
process of equilibrating you're sort of
interior life of sort of of endless of
endless potential and your your in
concrete life that that foists very very
specific demands on you
necessitates the the it is it's like
it's there's another there's another leg
to the stool it's like there's the
possibility actuality and necessity it's
like where it's in it's interesting I've
never I've never really thought about
marriage and the eternal return of the
same prey of Nietzsche quite together
guess cuz I just can't imagine Nietzsche
being married um huh I don't take any I
can imagine nature being married and
that's some sense of that that that way
in which if this moment was the moment
that I would live for the rest of my
life right it one - it's a an embedded
trance transcendence right I'm gonna
that to be aware of that right yes the
way I am right now is the way in the kid
will create the conditions upon which
I'll live every single second right yes
interesting possibility in actuality
becomes so bound together their success
it AIT's the optimal the most optimal
grip right right so so clean exempt to
put some flesh that would be just
something like oh I I could be honest
and say this thing in this way which if
I do boy is that gonna create a great
response right and then like she'll be
anxious and I'll feel bad and then I'll
be angry - yeah yeah so instead I'll be
honest but in a way that is more
vulnerable on my behalf and self
discretion right right right and it's
not like I feel like doing that yeah
somehow the horizon of forever right
yeah yeah yeah of forever
yeah right now this simply creates a a
will right yeah the third person that is
the relationship right yeah the bility
actuality feedback loop is so close
right right right right right now I gave
the dial oh go Sarah yeah yeah yeah hold
and just they
like that's why that's why it requires
this that like in the in the in the
Augustinian says the sacrament ah the
sacrament the symbolizing sacrament to
actually consummate the union between
those that that sort of those three
dimensions precisely because the
translucent property of the sacrament of
the symbolizing sacrament permeates the
membranes of those those those levels of
being right what is possible and what is
actual can can be Koken can be can be
reciprocally permeated by something that
by something that in dwells both
dimensions of being right because the
symbolic does that the symbolic the
symbolic it's the bridge the symbol on
it can joins it can joins what is what
is what is concrete in ostensibly of
matter and what is what is of
and what is what is unseen right what is
what is formerly unseen what is formerly
what is formerly not present to us and
the the formality of the sacrament the
formality of the symbolic bridge can
joins those into a shared ontology and
so then it makes sense that it that the
that the wedding of those dimensions of
being requires a sacrament to encircle
them good interesting see just right
here so this is just kind of took
there's that sense of where we're
talking about something a one-level very
abstract what like that but then when
you play it through something really
concrete like I don't know more concrete
my life's in my marriage right yeah and
then it it it just animates the whole
thing and it reveals what the what the
organ or the organization of that which
is most concrete kind of shine forth
that's when took a way that has you
abstractly more appreciative of it that
has me see it more concretely in more
verses this inner penetration that's
right a meaningfulness of being right
that's right that's right because it's
also for you the recollect direction of
having lived to the dynamic that it
doesn't need not be abstractive it can
be something properly embodied so then
the realization of its embodiment
resurfaces the memory of all of its
attendant experiences that that return
to inform the idea itself and that's
yeah that well I just as I was saying
it's part of why I love hearing you talk
about about marriage because both in and
of itself but also especially in the way
in the way that you relate to it it's so
exemplary it's so exemplary of all of
this and you referring to it also and
this is also something that will be
discussed in the paper we'll get to
eventually
but the idea that yeah I think you're
thinking just your discussion with Paul
last time you talk to Paul you were
described because you were both talking
about this I absolutely loved it and you
were talking about that the relationship
as a third person itch as a third
individual and you know when you were
just a moment ago and you were too and
that third person the personality of
your relationship has its own there is a
there is an honesty you were talking
about you know I might not be honest at
that moment because somehow being
straightforwardly honest in the in the
Frank and common sense of the term
common sense meaning of the term sudden
doesn't seem to suit the personality of
the relationship because the personality
of the relationship of we are to
envision it for a moment as a person
that person understands a different
there is a the ontology of truth that
that third entity attends to is
superordinate to the one that each of
you individually are attending to that
is why the emergent dynamic of the
relationship is ontologically informing
precisely because the emergent
personality between you has a view has
an has a has a view to truth that
exceeds the two of you together yes
right and so what you're doing is
attending to the greater truth of the
relationship the truth that I might not
you know tell you know I might not I
might not tell I might not tell my wife
that I I don't know I don't I don't like
something about her at this specific
moment because more fundamentally the
truth of the relationship is that that
is irrelevant to to to to thee that is
better
comparably irrelevant next to the
importance of maintaining a kind of well
a kind of sensitive attention to what is
more important in this situation yeah it
came out that came out in a garbled but
uh but yeah you know what I mean though
you know what I mean the truth you went
like that attended yeah yeah yeah I keep
just pointing it's all I have I just but
just just indexing it yeah I keep
thinking about I keep thinking about
right a chronological time or
temporality and characterological
temporarily and I I'm like oh this is
that sense of the personality of the
relationship or the character of the
relationship right is on some level or
like presenting me with more time
whereas the atomistic chronological this
now moment right that's is to say that
thing but if you include the hole in the
character of the hole yes yes and that
really my marriage is more like a an
ecstatic temporality right that
constantly is granting the moment as it
is and in fact even getting this is what
arresting even granting me the will to
refrain from what I most want to do yep
right in service of this other thing but
here's the thing is not like I have to
think about it that's what's interesting
is that's where I think it's
characterological or purchase
it's not like I stop and go oh right if
I did I'm not that smart right okay if
you did it chronologically I'd have to
stop and go wait a minute
self yeah okay think about this the next
moment at guy yeah yeah yeah Europe your
your your intuition your intuition as a
husband for instance your intuition as a
husband is for owed from the third
person and and I and I might suggest
actually that it's that it's not an
alternate temporality it's it's a
temporal all together but the third
person actually is is not yet
poorly bounded in the way that you two
as individuals are bounded which is
precisely why it can retrieve you from
the constraints of your temporal
predicaments and situations right that's
that's precisely why the relationship is
unto eternity right it's because that is
because of the emergent character of the
relationship is not of time in the same
way that we are yeah
Toland ken rich and can therefore
retrieve your perspective from time when
it becomes trapped within it thus which
is why there is why Mike which is why
these relationships are sacramental eyes
as being like you know the the theology
around this starts to make a lot of
sense when conceived in this way because
like you know it becomes a way of
understanding symbolically what is meant
when when when it is said that marriages
are of God right hmm oh interesting of
God interesting right because because
suddenly I mean for all of the reasons
we've just done describing right what is
poeta sized by the by the by the body of
your relationship the one you're
describing right is is if it's something
that triangulates us beyond the temporal
and and to an end to a and and it's kind
of there's a there's something there's
there's a there's a trend is a
transcendent ontogenesis that happens as
a consequence of that relationship then
suddenly you know the language like that
the the scriptural language and
philosophic language that that
attributes deep deep properties of
sacredness to these kinds of
relationships becomes much much more
intelligible when we understand truly
what is happening in the course of these
relationships when cultivated properly
yeah yeah it kind of going back to the
God actually does that
you just said that Oh marriages of God
I'm like like things just like saturated
with presidency now in that sense yeah
a-and I can't qualify it but you just
know you just know what I mean yeah yeah
totally this thing you brought up the
conversation with Paul that conversation
still Reverb eing with me right because
even I found myself kind of apprehending
right what it is to be a pasture a bit
right and what I really got about Paul
is that what you know for him imagine
this imagine basically the central thing
in your life is is is ontological
accounts constituted in such a way that
you stand very close to the center of it
and whoever happens to walk in you're
married - yeah like like it doesn't
matter their race creed class if they
smell if they're saying or unsane that
you are wedded to them for life and I
really got how deeply true that was for
him
oh yeah like yeah I was I was just kind
of this set so one of the things that
like out of that conversation I found
myself in running a circling group that
night and I was sitting down and
everyone was doing this check-in and I
thought to myself I'm like okay wait a
minute there's a way right that Paul has
whoever comes in there's a there's a way
that he his life gives the significance
of that right so when someone comes into
my life what do I do
right I just started in just and I think
what was interesting about that was just
this sense of realizing I'm not saying
that I should do what Paul does it's
more like something about that
conversation made a distinction that
like
wait a minute there's a way that I when
somebody a stranger comes into my life
there is something that I do in
relationship to that
that Paul does as a pastor in that in
which he is completely saturated through
and through with right yeah but just
having that sense of that that that that
that that is a that's a like I just
don't see it's just not just given that
somebody comes into my life who's a
stranger and that that that's neutral or
something no there's a way that I relate
to that and how do I do that I didn't
really have an answer in that question
right yeah but I tried on Paul's version
and I was like oh I don't know if I
could do it all this Virgin's heart did
I have some references that were a lot
more senior to like it's it's
interesting that you say that because I
mean well so I think that there there is
a there's a very very valid point in a
very clear point of comparison to mean
between the two of you if I can take the
Liberty Paulus like what a singular
person Paul is I kept Paul so endlessly
impressive to me because he he I mean he
holds he holds a sacred office but he
holds it he like he strikes this
combination of i dint like that what we
were talking about I think last time
that the combination of identification
and dis identification from the persona
of the role that he occupies and he
seems to play it like right on the edge
of its of its most like he but something
about the way he has assumed the vesture
of his position yeah is is it's the it's
it's he does it so with such reverent
seriousness and yet there is also a
playfulness at the same time to what he
does and he strikes that balance like
prodigiously and and and that like that
constantly improving there are many
things about him that are that are
impressive but but that that that being
one of them but
but see to me you were your comparable
in that you like Paul in in my eyes at
least have a sense not in the not Anna
formally he does but you and your way
have a sense of vocation and you hold an
office that is affiliated with that
chosen vocation and the choice of
affiliation to that vocation strikes me
as a decision that you make in every
waking moment of a new encounter that
it's something that possesses you but
that you also possess right that it and
and and so there's something both
there's something now both both both
implicit and also volitional about the
move you make when you encounter
somebody new and and I think for for
Paul something very similar is happening
but because because the offices that you
each hold respectively and the practices
and the liturgies if I can use that term
and the rituals associated with each of
those offices are different
you're also accustomed to using those in
in your approach and because the manners
are very different the approaches are
very different but but fundamentally the
way in which you identify with your your
position with encircling for instance
strikes me as as as favorably favorably
[Music]
comparable to to the way that Paul
identifies with his interesting having
me you actually remember a number of
years ago I think it's two thousand
thirteen or fourteen I did a student of
mine who was going through I think
seminary school is it no part of his
education was he he he created a
curriculum for a class and he had me
come and basically lead a six months
circling training for ministers oh that
must have been interesting yeah and it
was really interesting because I I think
the thing I remember I
what one as I walked away from that
going God beam him I was so impressed
with what it was to be a minister yeah
right because you're hot you're almost
like this mediation point between the
community and their relationship with
God right on some level like you're
you're the translator probably for both
both both ends right the the and that's
what how Paul's like when he's doing
everything that he's doing he's actually
doing it as a minister because he's
getting associated with all of the
different arguments and the points and
the things going on in the culture so
that he can be able to hear like
somebody speak a particular thing and
then connect it the theology and liturgy
and leave it together I mean it's just I
just thought about that this is a really
cool like is such a like an awesome an
awesome position to be in
um one that apparently is easily easy to
burn out oh I can imagine because it's
not obvious what level of participation
do you engage in that conversation right
no and a parent will accommodate over
stress logistically because they're
constantly responding to the - to
concrete of a level right there's
optimal so they spreadsheet and then
they end up just they lose touch with
their own reasons why they're doing it
so much I get it I guess it's a that's a
that's a moment-by-moment like a problem
that every human being has really um but
yeah but yet the economy of it I think
what you're describing in some ways is
like the the economy of the role isn't
must be incredibly it the risk of being
depleted very very quickly would always
always linger over you which is why it
strikes me that would require the right
combination of what you would need to
have the right temperament and you would
also need to be very like you would need
to be a very judicious person you would
need to know well again where to direct
your attention how to direct your
attention how intensively how X
sensibly right to direct your attention
and that I mean of course I imagine that
would be something you would you would
learn by the training of your your you
by training the intuition of your office
you would learn it over the course of
time but it strikes me as I think you
would probably also need to step in
there with predisposed with a certain
kind of temperament and a certain you
know you would need to really have your
have your have your have the right
combination of your wits a stalwart
sense of responsibility resilience and
just be and and they're just a really
well honed insight and and it like
having that combination of traits is
exceedingly rare so that's why when you
encounter someone who holds the office
and then and holds it with great
integrity as polarity does and as you do
in your domain it's a rare thing and it
and it galvanizes people implicitly
people are drawn to people like that
precisely because they see they they
know they see the light that gathers
around them and so they flock they it's
like there's there's no more Christian
metaphor I could possibly use to than
that one right they flock to the person
yeah yeah so you want to do one more
paragraph and just well okay yeah well
why don't I just finish the section I
think there's one more paragraph left in
the section and then that works well is
it just a paragraph
I hope so hang on I gotta bring this up
right oh god no it's not just one more
paragraph left in the section okay yeah
let's just do one more paragraph finish
the section alright you want me to
finish the section okay I'll just I'll
keep I'll keep reading to you tell me to
shut up because that Alright the query
okay
so we've just finished talking about
participatory knowing two examples may
companion this typology typology being a
three without knowing three examples
sorry three examples may companion this
I thank you the first follows Vidkun
Stein who
quipped that if lions could talk we
wouldn't understand them this turns out
to be a provocative test for our
typology we can appreciate Alliance
features propositional e observe their
features their behaviors rather
procedurally and share some awareness
that prospectively situates the relation
to survival for example states that
compel them to hunt seek shade or
socialize ultimately though the
subjective character of the Lions
experience that is what is like for a
lion to be a lion that's riffing off of
a famous essay that Nagel wrote what
it's like to be back remains unavailable
to us because our self to world
relations are existentially
incommensurable yet while we do not
fully share lions form of life there is
a partial conformity of situations such
that we can characterize a lion in ways
that expand our situational situational
awareness and deepen the query of logos
the early shaman prototyped this mimetic
potential to increase his cognitive
flexibility he played the lion to
lionize himself and in so doing
personified the lion by imitation the
shaman confirmed himself to the Lions
perspective to induce a knowing ik
stasis in other words he played his self
deeper into Antos with a lion's share of
being the personification lion ization
loop elastisized the shaman sense of
presence and modal participation
reciprocally opening him his culturing
niching and ecology to development by
realizing his relation to alternate
forms of life millennia later recent
robotic explorations on mars have
inspired similarly mimetic exercises
within the modern scientific enterprise
remote operators of the Mars exploration
Rovers use a combination of gestures
speech and sociability to
anthropomorphize the rover and techno
morph eyes their bodies to presence its
ambulation these embodied imaginations
nitch the machine they conform the
operators knowing to the rover's by
conjoining proposition procedure and
perspective into a participatory
enactment such that the drivers being
Mary's to the rover and she comes to see
with the rover's eye view we find a
third Morken
farming example in the relation of a
mother to her child someone may have
correct beliefs about motherhood the
know-how for mothering awareness to take
motherly roles all without knowing as a
mother when a person becomes a
participating mother her development
becomes too coextensive with her child's
development to grow the child she goes
with the child and shares in its growing
identity in so doing the mother's
knowing becomes a conforming
participation a mutual selfing with her
child that passes beyond understanding
it becomes loving her maternity is
gathered as her being is remoted and by
knowing and by being known as mother her
knowing becomes motherly the mothers
participatory knowing emerges from
within the second person perspective the
vow of her know and child the
perspective that knows her as mother she
plays through the presence of her child
to realize his maternity to Rosario to
realize her maternity just as the shaman
lionized himself to realize his humanity
vow of the child is a mother's form of
life her existential mode of being in
participation as the shaman to the lion
scientist or / or mother to her child we
to ourselves become thou India logos the
second person in whose knowing we find a
serious form of play that commits a self
to a new form of life we will expose it
the symbolic trans jetting in a later
section in the dialectic of philosophy
a' Socrates is the vow in whose knowing
we remote whose midwifery delves and
delivers us the child toward our Antos
deeply knowingly to the groundless
ground of being dialectic well just for
this one more paragraph here dialectic
is the appreciation of our knowing
presented in these fourfold types
through a form of cultivated reciprocal
relating that plays the logos of our
identity through discursive exercises
inter subjective and intra subjective to
soundly deepen its gnosis in order to
understand the efficacy of this
discursive rationality the same embodied
imagination that allows scientists to
summit eyes the presence of Technology
and characterize
snowing we must first understand its
signaling mechanism the notations of the
melody that tune each instrument to
prepare its intimate death and concert
that is the vessel of the enacted
analogy and that is the topic of the
next section I just wanted to read this
last paragraph this last sentence again
we will expect of the last one that you
ready we will expose it the symbolic
transductive 'ti of vowing will depart
we will Ex
posit the symbolic transient transit
captivity of vowing in a later section
in the dialectic of the less afiyah
Socrates is the thou in whose knowing we
remote so it's like in other words so so
in well as we read the dialogues
Socrates is the thou in who who's
knowing we re mode whose wig with reefs
delves and delivers us the child toward
our Antos of being deeply knowing to the
groundless ground of being interesting
so so ok what you're saying what do you
mean by by making Socrates let's see
Socrates is the thou and who's knowing
we remote okay so we know Socrates is a
vow in which weary mode and what do we
remote it to if he's a though I'm
imagining it Socrates talking and he's
thou and I'm listening to him to remote
what is that what is that again
well what so well he's changing he's
changing the way in which we participate
in our own identity and know through our
own identity thank God okay the
relationship of gnosis we have with
ourselves and our identity is bundled
significantly with the knowing
relationship we have writ large with the
objects of our experience right so our
encounter are thou encounter with
Socrates is the experience of being
known through Socrates is knowing and
conforming to the knowing of Socrates as
thou huh to whom I identify and through
whom I now identify right so the
identification with and through Socrates
ramones the way in which our
participatory knowing attends
during our attention to our experience
and that's also reflexive right it also
affects the way in which we deport
ourselves as Miller's so Socrates
affects a change fundamental change in
identity and and gnosis is such that the
fundamental change and the identity of
the knower is the change in the process
of knowing right they are there they are
consistent the change that's effected is
consistent in both the subjects and
objects of knowing precisely because it
is trans jet
the domains yeah
okay got it okay guy and so there's a
way in which there's a way in which
Socrates vows right where his his tea
gets a lot bigger such that ya going vow
the I that knows thou it retrofits it in
a certain sense that like to knows the
grandness at say of Socrates or Jesus or
or whoever or your mentor or your
teacher that to really dispose an eigth
our relationship the I that I must
become
and I worthy of knowing as thou so it's
like this it's this sum that if
the reflexivity so I walk away from that
although I may describe it like how
Socrates is so great I don't notice I'm
taller and I'm I'm in fluxing my voice
in a way that I've never done it before
and it's something I mean I don't even
notice it until somebody goes
you sound like Socrates you're like
right right right yeah my I mean my my
reflection grows in proportion to to the
Socratic estimation of my knowing right
so imagine it's it's like so I guess in
a more of a an it phrased as more of a
classic Platonism or classic
neoplatonism socrates sees i mean
Socrates view to Eternity right his his
demonic disposition as such that
Socrates sees and pronounces the eternal
in the individual right he knows he can
know and realize your your you know the
the soul that the soul that that both
both by art and by nature conforms to to
to to to sort of the Higher Being of the
good the higher forms of intelligibility
that that that are in likeness to the
soul of the individual Socrates is in
effect the one who mediates the
conformity the one who can recognize and
recollect the resemblance who can
recollect to the affinity that the
individual soul has with the
intelligible forms totally now that now
you know I now I hesitate to drift into
that domain because it starts to it
starts to it starts to more concretely
theorize the discussions of Socrates
within the dialogues and and that's
precisely what we want to avoid because
we want to avoid the the propositional
or the prioritization of the
propositional over that of the procedure
in the participatory in the perspectival
but the point being that even even the
theoretical even the theoretical the the
articulation of the theory of Plato's
forms can also serve analogically as a
way of understanding understanding the
kind of recognition that Socrates brings
to bear in the discourage so it's kind
of like that so this is the the Matt
this is the mythos that my mind formed
in understanding what you said I saw you
just got this vision of like okay I thou
spoken is one word right like it's not
like yeah right so there's that kind
which thou that Socrates is right that
if I'm Socrates in your you're the eye
that vows and something about the way I
thou is given by because Socrates is in
relationship to a greater though right
who is I to a greater though right that
so it's almost like Socrates is like an
eval I yeah yeah yeah yeah I know
exactly what you mean and that's exactly
it I think yes i al sandwich yes yes yes
that that that well it's the Janus face
there thus instruct eases Janus face
right he's his eye sees in both
directions right and then and that's why
and that's why in Socrates the by
directionality of the Socratic knowing
is such that it couples the identities
knower and known right in the concisely
in the way gnosis precisely because it's
bi-directional in that in that manner
huh wow this is really great
I feel exercised I I feel exercise too
great way I feel just very full full of
presents the colors filled seem brighter
well you know guide the run with all all
the gyms and fitness centers in the
world are closed right now so this is
what we have to say so many cheesy
things in my mind
[Laughter]
socratis I'm sure it's been done sure
it's been said yes all right so this is
really great I really you know what's
interesting is is just in reading this
it so the horizon of the dialogues right
are be it is it's espousing a kind of
desire to don't jump into them so it's
like I think it's like I'm noticing I'm
noticing if so much of Socrates there's
a lot about Socrates that people write
about him is like a lover like he's
invoking an erotic like an erotic desire
for wisdom great and again that goes
through all these phases right but like
that's its initial thing that he he
evokes in one is the is the mad the
maddening love to want to love what is
most wise yeah and I'm noticing that as
we're going through this paper I'm just
like the the the dialogues the desire to
read them is just becoming more tick
youlet and more intense yeah if what's
really interesting to about Socrates and
eros is that in the dialogues you know
Socrates is both the subject and the
object of eros again Socrates despises
trans Jack tivity in more ways than one
Socrates is both the object of erotic
desire at points in the dialogues and
and then all the while the the envía
bellowing and erotic desire right so we
want to want the way socrates wants but
we also want socrates yeah right and so
that that like that particular
combination I think yeah I think maybe
I'll leave the comment there that goes a
long way to explaining how the role of
saw how operative the role of Socrates
is in this process yeah and what it
means for us yes as as we partake of his
lot it's not self-evident or obvious
what Socrates is
like no no well the the process of
trying to understand what Socrates is is
precisely that the the process of that
trips us along this path in the first
place so good yeah yeah so good awesome
all right so that's another one okay
great to talk to you guy and until the
next one then yeah all right dr. Soong