[Applause]
everybody thank you very much thanks for
having me off Republican seat at the
University Virginia it's really a
pleasure to be here and speaking to you
guys I like to see the energy you guys
have going that's really good we were
driving down from DC we saw all the
signs coming down I know that's for sure
so it's really good it's good to be here
again my name is Jack Murphy I did write
a book called Democrats at horrible I'm
also pleased to find me on Twitter if
you don't already I appreciate it it's
like the best way that I can get out
information to everybody that's at Jack
Murphy live on Twitter and you know I'm
just I'm happy to be in Charlottesville
Charlottesville has a special place in
the National narrative right now for a
couple of reasons the most obvious being
the you know tragedy that took place
last year
and the fallout from that and today I'm
gonna explain some how I got involved in
all this stuff but today as I was sowing
into the hotel room I saw that Richard
Spencer who was he was in the news again
today and you know he is going through
some serious personal drama where he is
getting divorced and there's all these
terrible things in the alleging that
he's like a wife yusor and then alcohol
like getting all these terrible things
and you know I don't usually take any
Glee and anybody's personal you know
traumas or situations but it did strike
me as sort of ironic because I have a
personal history of rhetoric Spencer but
he and I have had a couple of
confrontations publicly and he's also
made his way into my personal life sort
of indirectly and for me to be coming
down to Charlottesville at University of
Virginia to speak to you guys all the
same time Richard Spencer stars as you
know I can explain a little bit actually
what happened with Richard Richard
Spencer and all right people thought
that they were sort of a large
components
the Trump election in 2015 and 2016 and
there were times at which people who
became advocates for Donald Trump got
smeared this all right name myself and
my friends through this party called the
deplorable a January after the
inauguration and it was a time that we
sort of decided that we really wanted to
make a definitive statement at all right
was not a part of this new movement we
were calling it sort of like the new
right there was a separation all right
he and all of his buddies were banned
from coming to the party and there was
like a thousand people this was an
incredible event it was a time when all
these guys online who had been working
so hard and sort of memeing Donald Trump
into existence all finally came together
and to purposely excluded Richard
Spencer him all right from that event as
a real statement that we wanted to make
but Richard showed up to the after party
crash the after party and I wasn't going
to have anything to do with that so as a
democratic former Democrat rather who
voted for Obama and voted for Clinton
you know I was there's no way I was
going to get affiliated with
these guys were a part of it and so I
had a chance to confront Richard Spencer
at this after-party and he and I almost
came to blows at this party in front of
everybody and I got broken up at the
last minute and my point was I wanted to
inject into the narrative here that all
right is not welcome this Coalition is
changing again it's morphing and it's
even not really finished being
determined who's an athlete in this
coalition at this point they knew for
sure that I didn't want that and luckily
the Atlantic was there the New Yorker
was there Business Insider CNN they all
wrote about it afterwards they say big a
big bearded man named Jack Murphy and
they said you know it's a month it was
like a joyous evening but it was ended
in a fractious confrontation at the
after-party which was perfect for me and
I was about that because again it began
this narrative and then the narrative
also sort of continued on when my
friends Jack sobic and my son of its did
an event in in DC and it was a counter
rally a counter protest to Richard
Spencer and all right guys who are doing
their
Jefferson or at the Lincoln Memorial
rather and sort of close the loop on
this you know there we were having a
rally against violence not only did we
find the override you Zipporah and I
think we want to be a part of but we
also knew that these knuckleheads were
gonna do something stupid and so we've
been working and working and working to
try to separate ourselves from from that
group and frankly I think I think now by
this point that's actually the textures
are starting to work although for me
personally that shows that you know just
that there's still this desire out there
on the left
Emeritus so that's just a little context
for me in charlottesville here and I
should have proper starting with
introduction of myself but I'm from
Virginia with the high school in Laurel
Virginia and I wanted to get into
finance and international investment
banking in particular because at that
time at the end of the 90s at the end of
the nineties you know the Cold War was
over and the geopolitical orientation
had shifted away from chasing the
Soviets around the globe and people
began to dust off the Monroe Doctrine
and they started to look worse South and
Central America and George Bush was
later began to talk about free trade
area of the agree free trade agreement
of the Americas looking to create a
trade bloc you know like to eat you but
from Antarctica to the Arctic and Latin
America was sort of the exciting place
to be and it was a new sort of regional
orientation rather than a global
orientation and so I wanted to get into
international Investment Banking with
the focus on Latin America so I go to
Georgetown
- and international political economy
and international affairs and then 9/11
happens like in my last semester
obviously a huge tragedy but the way it
impacted me personally was that one all
the jobs on Wall Street were over so I
have to look for something new and to
reoriented the world the way we're on
this path so I needed to find something
new I get into real estate because at
the time in DC real estate was really
was popping and I got into charter
schools charter schools are an
independently operated privately owned
public school that are open to any kid
in the District of Columbia and in doing
that I began to work with inner-city
kids and I started became an executive
director of a number of charter schools
in DC where I worked to turn around some
of the worst performing schools in the
city and work towards building new
institutions to help these are 99%
african-american schools
so you could say in some ways as I was
working for equity and student outcomes
that I was social justice warriors
before that term became what it meant
today you know I was an actual actually
working to find a way to improve
education outcomes now I tell you all
this because something happened which is
really pertinent to this idea of
becoming Democrats in the country
around that time in 2015 I began writing
and I was writing under a pending and
Jeff Murphy is my pen name my real name
is John Goldman everybody knows it now
but I stuck with Jack Murphy because
began I think I began writing about sex
and relationships to be honest it was
sort of like a hobby I was you know
why people getting married why is it
hard to find the right partner etc and
in that process I began to understand
that the forces that disrupted the
bedroom also disrupted the country and
user ideas like radical feminism and as
I'm learning about all this stuff and
starting to get tuned into the way the
media has control your minds and the
media's control narratives something
else very relevant happen repost so I
guess it was about 2014 or so 2015 and
immediately when that happened me and my
friend see you guys online we all sort
of we saw that it was and we could tell
that it was but it had such huge impact
on the school had huge impact on the
nation had huge impact on me personally
and seeing that the media narratives
sort of take over and these lies and to
control us right so like it was all
about promoting rape culture it's all
about promoting you know misogyny and
how all these things are the terrible
worst horrible things that are happening
in the universe and they need to be they
need to be taken care of they need to be
fixed as I'm you know you should
actually come to call that part of my
radicalization process that's what some
people
you know the part of the bread killing
process part of the process where you
begin to see sort of the writing on the
wall this is like a transformative
experience for somebody with a Democrat
we're starting to see how universities
which are increasingly in this the idea
that I had taken it over you know I'm
living in Washington DC all this was
just sort of what I had taken to be as
as gospel and even just challenging some
of those ideas amongst my friends and
family caused me to
my friends my target to be with me at
least stop talking to me I had to come
up with I got like a whole new social
group and luckily I did and I met a lot
of people online through the you know
during the election we went to a party
eventually in New York called a night
for freedom people market people from
all over the country comes and at that
party
this woman Chelsea Manning was there and
if you're familiar with her story she
was depending on your viewpoint she was
either the trainer or the muscle blower
who was in the military who was thrown
in jail
and while she was in I think while she
was in solitary confinement she decided
to transition from male to female and
she showed up at this party and she was
a progressive and we had actually met
her and hung out with her a little bit
just totally casually but we were
hanging out and I first met her and
somebody took a picture and that picture
is going to become her home
this party she was there everybody on
the progressive side decided that this
was a horrible thing that Chelsea
Manning was at this event that was for
market people and so the next day that
picture I'm talking about surface it was
me with a number of sort of new right
media personalities and Chelsea Manning
and they the Antipa folks and the
progressive for radicals knew everybody
in the picture with me and I was still
riding under a pen name at that time and
I was still some anonymous and someday
we go back from New York and then by
Monday my personal name personal
information everything about me has been
sent out into the universe and it's
specifically targeted towards my
employer and so I had stopped working
for individual schools I was working for
a regulator at that time and they the
teeth of people just bombarded my work
with Jack Murphy is a racist Jack Murphy
is a Nazi Jack Murphy is alright reap
apologists you know all kinds of
terrible things and they they use a
picture of me from I went to a rally and
alright rally and an aunt Eva protests I
just went it like documented right and
with that phone right there I'm like
live streaming and just sort of in the
mix and I brought a photographer friend
with me and he took pictures of me in
the crowd I wrote an article and I used
his photos and they used a picture of me
standing next to Richard Spencer and
Jason Kessler the guys who organized the
right thing here travel and they used
that picture to say that I was an
alright guy and I was a Nazi they told
my work my work suspends me and a month
later I got fired and I got fired
because they thought I was a racist Nazi
guy they went through my entire all my
writing my blog everything when they saw
me writing about sanctuary cities like
just asking the question does it make
sense that our local jurisdictions
refused to cooperate with their federal
immigration authorities and I did a big
analysis on what the cost was and I read
some articles sort of bludgeoning
feminism and whatnot and they did a huge
investigation and in the investigation
I'm being deposed and with lawyers and
court reporters and the whole thing and
actually have a say
right and if so eerily like he wanted to
destroy my life and so they did not only
did they fire me
from the job but in the process of the
investigations they sent the police to
my house and in the middle of the night
hanging out my door like 130 over a
tweet
cops showed up in my house holding the
tweet and my picture and they're like
did you and and then to make things even
worse somehow the antifa people got in
touch with my little league because I
coached my son's for many years so I got
fired I got doxxed I got swatted banned
from coaching Lilly all because I
started to challenge the narratives and
democratic narratives and I started to
challenge the progressive narratives and
I started to ask questions and I start
to wake up I started to wake up and they
can't have it
character assassination you know they'd
have me exiled
I'm a fighter so I decided to fight back
and double down at that same time and
some as all that's going on I'm actually
writing this book and I decided right
then I was going to finish the book I
was gonna get the book out take what
happened to me I'm going to take that
and I'm gonna get out there and I'm
gonna start spreading this message and
so ironically they tried to strike me
down but I've come back even stronger
than I was before because my platform
and all the while that I'm working I'm
working on this book I'm getting up
early 3:45 in the morning right and to
study and to get this thing done this is
a really important project the book is
important because nine million people
had the same experience that I had an
awakening from the old days of being a
Democrat and just accepting the media's
narrative and not challenging what was
being pushed upon them and in an
election where you know Trump got
something like sixty million votes nine
million is like 50% of his tool so
fifteen percent of the people that are
part of the Trump coalition
and that's something that doesn't get
talked about very and these nine million
people are perhaps one of the most
important voting blocks in the country
the election was determined by three
states 77,000 folks across Michigan
those regret states I'm sorry this was
blue states that turn red and these
Democrat to deplorable voters were from
all over in those regions and 77,000
people are determined so the Democrats
of the pourable voting bar is in my mind
the most important voting bloc in
America because these are people that
are open to change these are people that
are open to new messages and these are
people that are willing to take risks
take risk to be alienated from their
friends and family you know supporting
Donald Trump isn't always the easiest
thing to do you know supporting him was
something that became very important to
me and it was important to these nine
million people so in the book the first
section is a little bit of a memoir and
then I conducted a national survey so I
did original research for this fifteen
hundred people responded to my survey
and there were 67 questions 15 of which
were open-ended responses which means I
was only like 10 or 12,000 like
paragraphs and essays from people
the year and I got a whole treasure
trove of statistics that no one else was
asking the same questions everybody
bases their electoral analysis so I came
up with my own and I reached some people
all over the country and then I also
realized that I needed to get out and
talk to people so I got my car I just
started driving around just started
talking to people in shops from street
corners and I set up interviews with
people from all over the country
and I recorded you know probably 50
hours and there's a whole number of
results in this book but I want to talk
about one thing in particular that would
be of relevance to you guys and this is
a whole section on colleges and
something like 92% of people who went
Democrat to the plural are very very
concerned with the affairs state of
affairs on college campuses and the way
people see it is that college campuses
have become indoctrination camps for the
progressive sort of mindset
it's it's easy to sort of dismiss that
as being crazy except would you really
take a look at what's happening and it's
a top-to-bottom process that starts with
an ideology that I'm gonna explain a
philosophy that I'll explain the way
that that made it into our federal
government our federal policies which
regional to campus which changed the
administration and changed the dynamics
and the narratives on campus and this
was one of the out of all the questions
that I asked ninety two percent was the
highest rate of affirmative insane
American University is raped on my house
in American universities also American
University as case study to begin to
understand how how and why
institutionally speaking colleges are
creating
a Democrat and I used the orientation
process that they have there because
people are concerned that this is an
indoctrination process and I wanted to
confirm that myself so I went not only
talked to people at American but I
studied all of their orientation
materials that they use my money then
they have it all and the first thing
that they do on day one the first thing
is when you introduce yourself to
somebody you say my name is and my
pronouns are I don't know if you guys
have that experience here but in
American University it's like the very
first slide it's the very first thing
that they tell you and what's what's
important to note about this is what I I
believe in liberty and freedom and if
you want to call yourself whatever you
want to call yourself that's totally
fine with me but when it's sanctioned by
the University and then sanctioned by
the administration and they're saying
there are more than one gender it's not
just male and female and it's like 50
other things out there what they're
saying is that they're injecting a
radical notion into your brain at 18
years old as a freshman as subtle
science as something that is complete
but it's not this is obviously a highly
contentious issue that isn't and by any
means so probably we agree here that you
know a prosperous notion now what's
important about this also is that you
know it sets up a science denial
perspective it's also a way and that
notion has become popularized I know
Jordan Peterson got really famous over
protesting that you know it's actually
making its way into law in California
it's very specific it has to do with
senior citizen homes or something but if
you like refer to somebody in a home by
the wrong gender it's actually it's
actually a criminal offense so that's
the first thing they started denying
science they start language control and
they start manipulating your brain right
out of the bath the second thing that
they do is they tell you that you're all
biased and that you all have an inherent
predisposition to racism and there is
it's all based on this testimony
Association test and that test has been
debunked 50 times million times
in fact even even the people that
created the test now say that the test
doesn't say what they thought but that
doesn't stop the multi-billion dollar
industry that it was born out of this
test that has infiltrated every human
resources department every corporate
environment every academic institution
every professional organization every
element of the government telling
everybody that walks in the door you
have them usually no matter what you've
done in your life no matter how overt
your actions have been otherwise inside
you know discriminatory the third thing
that they do but Jonathan he wrote a
book and it's about how and why people
have different views on politics and
morality and one of the base one of the
basis for his thesis and it's a great
book and I highly recommend it was this
implicit association test and I actually
had a chance to ask him about that
directly just a few weeks ago a lot of
in-person and I said you know hey now
that this is implicit association test
has been debunked you have any second
thoughts about your thesis and he said
no because it was just one of like 50
things he cited but he also noted that
there's a replication crisis in
psychology and so a lot of these tests
that built these industries literally
billion-dollar industries around how to
correct you
lissa bias basically what they want to
do is like rewire your brain through
trainings and manipulation and
brainwashing there's multi-billion
dollar businesses based on something
flawed that can't be able to be created
but nobody's stopping that bus right
it's everywhere and it's easy to dismiss
only things as crazy ideas but when you
look at but like I said it's in every
corporate HR department every
institution every academic institution
colleges trickling down to your high
schools everywhere that everyone has a
racist inside them that needs to be
fixed the third thing that they do is
they teach you that your emotions are
more important in fact the reason and at
American there's a whole there's a whole
section in their orientation that says
that you're responsible for the
emotional response of the listener to
your statements and it's irrespective of
your intentions irrespective of fact
it's irrespective of what you actually
said whatever that person's emotional
reaction is is the most important
element in that engagement and what's
that it's actually teaching people is
something that psychologists call
emotional reasoning which is actually
will lead you down and so not only are
they teaching you the science doesn't
matter that language can be controlled
that you're all racist but they're also
teaching you that your emotions are more
important than fact and more important
than reason any more important
and objectivity and so when you combine
them all together you know it's not it's
not a difficult thing to see how it
feels like an indoctrination process
rather than like hey when I when I went
to college way back in the 90s
orientation was like where's the library
how to get online and I think blackboard
like that just started back then and
like that's what orientation was now
orientation is about injecting this
ideology and then I don't know about you
guys at UVA and imagine this is accurate
and your whole life all you thought was
that you're going to college there is
never a minute where you saw a future
vision of yourself though did once in
the college graduate you spent your high
school years busting your tail in order
to get into a school like UVA and so
when you get to get to college in your
freshman and you thinking this is some
idealized place that I've been dreaming
about my whole life and everybody told
me is the greatest thing in the whole
wide world and the first thing they do
is start rewiring your brain you know
you're open to that type of manipulation
I know that I would be and then the
kicker
and as if all this and by the way this
is all publicly available on Americans
website all these slides it's a whole
presentation put together by the office
of as if all this wasn't a lot to digest
in one day then the title nine office
comes out to share the sexual assault
policy the presenters explain among many
other things quote a student who has
experienced sexual violence will never
be required to participate in an
investigation process at American
University and a you know one who
accuses a person of sexual violence will
have to answer even the most basic
questions about the alleged event the
cues are assumed to be honest in all
cases but they somehow were born without
the ability to lie the most basic civil
liberties we have in America such as the
right to face an accuser abandon it to
campus gates in their place neutronium
procedures are inserted which appear to
assume this accused persons guilt the
students first afternoon to college they
are introduced to several key components
of the new leftist platform one you're a
racist two words make the victims three
feelings Trump science four victims are
beyond scrutiny and basically all of you
are rapists that's quite a lot to digest
in your first week also there seems to
be a lot of bad things happening at
school where it's pronouns unconscious
biases and sexual assault all rain
terror on campus and almost everyone is
a potential victim now we totally saw
how this played out
just a few weeks ago with the cabin on
confirmation and I can you know when I
first started looking at this stuff I
thought some of it was crazy
I never thought people actually got the
docs I never thought a team for actually
track people down to try to ruin their
lives I never thought any of this stuff
really happened then it started
happening to me and then I started
digging into this and I start seeing
these facts and then the Cavanaugh thing
happened and the Cavanaugh thing is
basically like all the things I'm
talking about bubbling all the way up
all the way from colleges all went to
our institutions all the way up to the
highest court in the land when the most
important political things that we have
in our country name a Supreme Court
justices and here that guy was being you
know dragged through drug through the
mud because a woman made a wild
accusation uncorroborated and every
single person she named as a witness
refuted exactly what she said however
her emotions took precedence over her
you know over objectivity and everybody
is a sexual assault victim and every guy
is a sexual you know assault her and it
really like culminated in in this very
dramatic scene you know if you guys
watched testimonies I mean i sat there
watched every minute
from both of them and what really hit
home for me with Kavanagh was when he
got emotional talking about how he was
no longer gonna be able to coach kids
absolutely because that is exactly what
happened to me false accusations public
shaming authorization and exile and they
take you away from even like helping
your children and helping the community
so how did how did all this stuff happen
how did how did our colleges become
places where our minds
and there's it's multivariable obviously
but one of the things that I really
focused in the book is title not
entitlement is a law that was created in
the 70s which was meant to protect women
from being sexually harassed to the
point where they are unable to get an
education it was used to create equity
in athletic programs and scholarships
all great stuff but as time went on it
became mutated and twisted and as the
rape culture statistics started to grow
first it was it's now 1 into 1 in 3 of
women on campus violence every year and
this idea has worked this way into our
institutions and then through law and in
2011 Barack Obama's Education Department
wrote what was called a Dear Colleague
change and if the schools didn't adhere
to the new policies and they're gonna
lose their money and all these schools
will depend on federal funds and there
is an ideology that sort of wormed its
way into our institutions it's a
combination of radical feminism and the
cincone intersectionality and I don't
know
basically there's a woman named kimberlé
crenshaw who was a feminist who don't
understand
additional avenues oppression and
everybody can have their own sense of
oppression except for people so this new
coalition on the left is has at its
fundamental core and has worked its way
into our institutions money and on to
college campuses this oppressor
oppression dynamic and ideology on the
left and the progressivism has
infiltrated infiltrated institutions
across the country and again sometimes
even as I'm saying these words out loud
they sound kind of crazy and far-fetched
but people here at UVA have experienced
that it creates a hysteria where people
will believe something that's completely
completely unbelievable you know the
facts from that
da-rae bollocks stop the rolling stone
stuff or just just last night everybody
ate it up because they're looking for
this type of thing and so again in the
book that's so much more get into
geopolitics and economics and foreign
policy trade issues immigration and and
how globalism without open borders
doesn't work and all kinds of stuff but
I wanted you know only have a few
minutes and so I wanted you know zero
and entity colleges here and give you a
sense of that if you're feeling any of
these feelings on campus with thinking
any of this stuff is crazy and what is
impact on all of us on Democrats at the
portable voters so like I said ninety
two percent of people are worried about
the state of affairs on college campuses
we have to change the stuff the
Department of Education currently is in
the process of trying to walk back some
of these new title nine things the new
title nine procedures and they're going
through the public process which
involves comments and feedback which is
not so they're going through the process
and hopefully this based on false
information and it's changing do you
guys have bias response teams here no so
across the country is two hundred and
fifty some colleges right now you have
to like report your friends if they say
something that's offensive because if
you don't stamp out harassment and all
its forms you'll lose your title nine
money yeah
biased response team so people are
worried about this they're worried about
colleges they're worried about radical
feminism they're worried about political
violence they're worried about mobs over
jobs and they're starting to see that
this there's a portion and it's not
everyone on the Democrats but there's a
portion of their coalition which is
basically a coalition of hate and they
hate me so there's no way I'm gonna be
and there were a lot of changes that
happened over the last ten years it
allowed me to even consider becoming
Republican social changes the Supreme
Court decision to legalize gay marriage
is one of them
the Inman a decriminalization of
marijuana is no and these are like
social issues that people really
believed in
say I'm socially open-minded a fiscally
conservative and so now you take those
two issues on the table you inject this
coalition of hate on the left and now
we're in a period of shifting
coalition's and re-creation of the
Republican Party and Donald Trump this
is the kind of like bust down the door I
made all this happen it made it all
possible so if you guys want to know how
you can use this in your efforts to try
to recruit people or try to spend you
know they spend your energy and trying
to get people to change parties I think
it's important that you talk about how
this is not your grandfather's
Republican Party and social issues that
people thought were really important
because I believe in liberty and freedom
for everybody and that includes marrying
whoever you want smoking whatever kind
of drugs you want and also whatever
games guns and drugs and that and that's
a you can see it's a unified
philosophical position right and so
those are my underlying you know first
principles and that's I think the
Republican Party today is where people
that have those unifying first
principles are going to coalesce so I
think it's important that you can tell
people that it's not your grandfather's
Republican Party these important social
issues have been taken off the table and
there's a focus on America first and I
can't for the life
or a floor or anything at all that's
like a focus on all the people that live
in this country rather than the focus
some people don't live outside the
country
like that's it seems like the craziest
thing to me but again it goes back to
the media narratives and then of course
like there's the increasing diversity
within the Republican Party Donald Trump
got more votes of both black and Latino
and Asian voters than Mitt Romney and
depending on what polls II follow I mean
Rasmussen in particular is showing that
this is not your grandfather's
Republican Party social issues when
Donald Trump appeared at the GOP
convention with the rainbow flag right
like social issues are changing pop
decriminalization is coming and a focus
on America first and these are ways that
I think that you can use this
information to help you know spread your
message and recruit more people I think
that's all I got for now and you got
about ten minutes left so if anybody has
any questions
[Applause]
like that and your experience is that
truly the demographic that makes up an
seat though or I you know I've had
interactions with in teen films like a
group level so when my girlfriend and I
here we went to the deplore law I mean
we didn't even have any idea what spec
we got there and there was like hundreds
of people out far screaming yelling
writhing on the ground burning stuff
throwing things screaming in her face
racist Nazi KKK it was crazy but on a
personal level there's only one in
person that I know their intimate
personal details the person who stalks
me and she's exactly that she no no
fixed address she's sort of a backer
bond you know maybe she's got a trust
fund or something but clearly doesn't
have any money
otherwise I would have sued her ass you
know I'm out here doing like political
activism you know at great expense to
myself I think one of those antique
people are doing it partly because they
anything to lose but nevertheless you
know what we need to see is like a
paralleling my actions and my friends
actions of my guy friends of the new
media world like trying to push all
right now like we had a very specific PR
campaign like move these people out of
our coalition and I would like to see
that just as a matter of good faith from
the people on the left but as we saw Ted
Cruz getting hassled out other than that
restaurant and Panna camera doesn't make
the speaker oh god got rats at some
restaurant again recently and they're
just Chico and Huckabee got like chase
that was not like you know it's only
ratcheting up it so you can see me only
getting worse on their side and on our
side we're trying to like chill things
out it's like bizarro world
like have stuff like that well
intentioned like originally end up being
twisted like we agree that rate where
racism is bad but there's that push from
the left over do what's the best way for
us to get it across the people that like
rock tonight racism I'm denying
but we see this problem
right there's a lot to that question so
the foundation of that is that radical
feminism believes that all societies
throughout history have been patriarchal
and all patriarchal societies are
oppressive and the only way to change an
oppressive society is to eliminate who's
doing the oppression so there's no
talking them out of that position okay
so you know you know if you're using
rhetoric you know you want to like come
at them and inflame them and get them
you know rounded up and call them names
and what how stupid they are but I think
it goes back to what I said originally
about saying this is not your
grandfather's Republican Party right
like this isn't necessarily Southern
Strategy you know this is a new
coalition and I'd really like it I think
for us to focus on that this is a new
coalition I think we're in a dynamic
changing period of coalition's it's
going to take 10 or 15 or even 20 years
to like settle up because so many of the
clear dividing issues are coming off the
table now you know just sit there and
say all the Democrats are the real
racists that's never worked or it hasn't
been working at all right
work in this you know PR stuff will say
you know that's a losing losing
rhetorical position I think for us it's
mostly about stay focused on the
positive demonstrating the diversity
demonstrating goodwill and good faith
and let get out there and do something
like volunteer have you guys get
together and like do something that is
beneficial for not white upper-middle
class people like I don't know like like
demonstrate through action and then the
words you know it's a new kind of party
it's a new coalition so but you know
trying to talk to college kid who is
everybody is broke and nobody has in
fiscal were these Republican we believe
the same social issues but we don't want
to be taxed right but they think oh we
don't have any ways everything I
remember my like my macro and short of
macro class and we're talk about a flat
tax and the professor's like okay so
everybody under 35 K no taxes everybody
over at 35 K like 20 percent or
something and this is a huge lecture
halls like 101 Hills who is in favor and
the flat taxes and I was a little person
to raise my hand and he goes why are you
in favor flat taxes I'm cool I don't
make 35 K I think that's perfect I don't
want to pay the taxes um I don't know I
mean I think at UVA especially you know
you guys are planning to be broke
forever right
no definitely not so you gotta you gotta
get people thinking about the future and
thinking about what what taxation
and I remember a story a professor told
me at George Mason about the origins of
taxation you know tribes used to just
like Mourad and kill each other and take
all their stuff but then one day the
guys like I don't kill these describe I
can come back next year and take half
their setup again
and that's where taxation came from
right it's just a way of extracting
resources so if you think about personal
property and you think about the it's
your money I think that that's an easy
ideological case to make
of course we're having trouble
convincing people on the left of that
right now so not the best answer for you
but I think keeping people future future
oriented especially what you're talking
about taxation and it's interesting that
you say that the social issues aren't
what's dividing us down its fiscal
fiscal policy
what you're saying on the front lines
you see the front coalition expanding
2020 yes I think that the nine million
people that were stood being called
racist are being called whatever getting
ostracized from their family in their
community for exciting to embrace Donald
Trump not going back so that nine
million is gonna grow I mean at this
point I can't see a single candidate
that the Democrats before the 2020 that
offers any competition irrespective of
what happens in the gubernatorial races
or in the House races or Senate I mean
on a presidential level idea I can't see
any competition but you never know what
will happen at this point in the 2016
election Donald Trump wasn't on
anybody's radar self
you know I haven't I haven't seen any
stuff up close and personal so what I do
know for a fact is that the media spins
everything any which way they want to so
what really happened on the ground is
probably hard to figure out but I will
say that I know for sure that the proud
boys aren't white nationalists they
consider themselves sort of Western
chauvinist which I totally get they
believe in Western culture and Western
society the privacy and that's what
their that's what they're about as far
as as far as I know I'm not a member but
I also do know that like groups coming
together for like street battles this is
part of American culture as anything
else i mean the socialism the greasers
Jets and the Sharks and like it's in our
literature it's like everywhere like
people get together and they fight I
mean it's kind of part of human nature
no for real but you know I don't endorse
it I completely disavow any political
violence of any kind and but I don't
know what's driving those people on an
individual level of course unless you're
there you don't know what happened
there's no
you know and that and feet guys take
anything away from what I'm telling you
is that don't trust the media at all
because as if they haven't been a victim
of media lies like Think Progress and
other organizations just swooped in when
I got docks and just made up all these
lies about me and like you googled my
name and they're still right up there at
the top of the search and so my friend
Mike service just came out with a movie
called hosts and it's all about how
people how the media lies about
individuals in order to push their
agenda and until you've been a victim of
it until you see like people in the
media talking about you personally but
lying and they never even talk to you
about it like man how many times is that
happening over and over and over it's
mind-boggling and terrifying
yeah
[Applause]