hmm okay Anderson it's really lovely to
have you here thank you so much for
joining me we stand to me in what feels
like a clearing at the moment
collectively I've heard it described
also as an eye of the storm a sort of
place wherein we're identity is less
stable than previous and there's a sense
that it would be quite a good thing if
we managed to draw together what
knowledge and understanding we do
collectively possess into something that
was Integris and available for
participation in for as many people as
possible and there's a sort of an
imagistic element to all of this for me
a friend of mine mentioned in an audio
message that he was interested in what
doesn't an arc look like in this time
the development of an arc given this
sort of swirling maelstrom of
possibility around us and I've been
looking forward to this conversation for
some time and I hope that with your with
your knowledge of some subjects that are
deeply close to my heart and interest we
might present some things that are
valuable educational but also take on
some questions that might emerge between
us I certainly am resonating with a few
relate to the nature of the self and the
ego and transformation and how we can
come to know ourselves and each other
and the world in a way that is healthy
you know how can we enter into
relationships that don't inappropriately
end our lives
the
in some strange way so yes I am very
interested to have this conversation and
I think it would be nice to you know
give you the opportunity to introduce
yourself just briefly some of what your
deepest abiding passions are I suppose
as they might apply to this exploration
we're going on it would be lovely to to
hear you introduce yourself okay sure so
first off thank you for having me I'm
actually super enthused I've been quite
looking forward to it as well so I
appreciate it a great deal
so I'm Anderson Todd I'm a university
lecturer at the University in Toronto
where I have taught in cognitive science
I taught the first half of the big sort
of cognitive science intro course which
is normally what's developed and run by
John for Vicki who I understand what's
on your your show is a close friend of
mine and I taught the upper year course
in consciousness cognitive science of
consciousness and then I also teach the
sort of depth psychology suite of
courses at U of T so these of course is
about young and some of the post unions
and they had policies to be unconscious
and thus by extension in that course I
also get to deal with you know a whole
suite of things that are near and dear
to my heart so lucid dreaming
psychedelics magic ritual altered states
you name it so yeah that's been sort of
a wonderful opportunity to teach
material that frankly doesn't often get
a lot of attention in my experience at
the University and I think can be
treated with you know with and with an
academic eye that maintains openness but
nevertheless you know subjects things to
the kind of standards that we expect in
sort of you know formal knowledge
creation whatever that means
so yeah that's my my teaching side and
then in addition to that I'm a I'm a
private practice psychotherapist so I
maintain an in-person private practice
and I also do the online plants we have
sort of an international quiet base
and then in addition to that I have
unexpectedly been thrust into the world
of YouTube etc so mmm the need to
convert some of my lectures for online
consumption has suddenly thrown me into
this this whole scene which has been
amazing it's a swirling whirling-pool a
dough like Wizard of Oz so I'm sort of
getting up to speed on video production
and the potentials of those of those
sort of modes of expression and it's all
very exciting so I've been doing lots of
sort of recording and stuff around that
but yeah in the main I suppose my you
know whenever my bio tag for these
purposes is university lecturer and
private practice psychotherapist and
with depth psychology sprinkled all over
mm-hmm yeah beautiful you know I hear
throughout all of that if I was to just
put put it into a word and we were like
four hundred years ago it probably would
just be wizard fundamentally but we did
that that that is the goal and yeah
actually it's funny I I was there's a
story that I sometimes tell in my class
I used to run a conference at U of T
which was a kind of collaboration
between the Jungian Society and the the
Buddhist psychology group and it was
pretty good we had at the time John for
fakey spoke for us but often Jordan
Peterson was a very frequent speaker and
sort of Watts around local rock stars in
Toronto as it were and this being a
number of years ago but at one point we
were driving one of our Buddhist
speakers back to the airport and I was
in a car of course full of Buddhists and
I am I am NOT Buddhist although I you
know respected borrow from Buddhism but
there was sort of a big roundtable
discussion that broke a round round car
discussion when we were driving the
airport about you know the desire to
become a saint and you know there was
this kind of like enlightenment emphasis
that that went around the car people
were like yeah you know when I got into
Buddhism or I got into meditation I was
really driven with this desire to attain
a kind of sanctity of the Spirit and and
sainthood and Buddhahood and right that
the Bodhisattva vow and it got around to
me and I said well
I think that's a good goal don't get me
wrong but I have to admit that is not
and has it that's never been my guiding
ethos you know and they were like what
do you mean I said I always would rather
have been a wizard than a saint and
they're not the same thing they're not
the same thing they can both be bearers
of wisdom but they are subtly different
figures with sort of different levels of
cultural impact so being called dinkle
the wizard is more or less I think the
highest compliment I could get beautiful
beautiful
yeah the union frame gives it opens a
world of archetypes obviously that we
have seen permeate throughout culture
and popular culture in various ways and
continue to serve as important maps for
development for so many people yet the
sort of integration between a union
frame and what are taken to be the
hallowed halls of knowledge in many of
our universities today is is kind of a
fraught one right and well I'm hoping
that in this conversation we might lay
down a bit of a base track first of all
sort of an explication an introduction
that we can grapple onto for the rest of
our discussion in pursuing some
questions so when people encounter the
work of young at least in my experience
the most nebulous initial concept which
is more than a concept in some important
sense to get one's head and body and
heart sort of in and around is this
notion of the archetypes I don't think
it's by any means the most nebulous but
it is a sort of it's a early stuff like
that yeah so how can we relate to this
notion of archetype what's a good sort
of introduction point handle
introduction point sure so you know
archetypes within young are in a sense
the sort of
organizing structures of the of the
psyche okay so if you think about you
know Freud's model of the psyche which
everybody knows we have the super ego
and the ego and the it right and in many
ways right this is a kind of hydraulic
structure where the the super-ego right
your inner nag is operating on one side
and the it'd is attempting to drag you
from the other side and you're caught in
this kind of tug-of-war between them
where the ego is dragged back and forth
it's kind of hydraulic system with with
a few parts and it elaborates a bit over
time Yeol's model on the other hand is
very sort of multipolar or you know you
could think of it as being a bit
polytheistic so you know there are sort
of multiple centers within the psyche
that are operating and importantly and
this was part of where his big breakup
from Freud happened you know it's not
all just sort of entrained to and
dominated by the erotic drive so it's
not just all about sex or later sex and
death you know sort of late-stage Freud
but rather there are a bunch of sort of
centers within the psyche that are
structures that organize the way the
people's minds work and above and beyond
their sort of particular and individual
you know constitution of their psyche
they also organize the collective
unconscious which is also a huge
stumbling block for people so part of
the problem in thinking about these
things is and one of the problems that
often speak on is that Jung is you know
writing his work and he was a quite
prolific author but he's writing it's
working his theory over the span of you
know 50 years so from sort of the teens
there to his death in the early sixties
you know he has this volume of writings
and necessarily his ideas about these
things shift over that period right he
tends to favor a kind of completeness
over consistency and so you know he gets
these ships and so depending on where
you come in to the timeline on the idea
of archetype you're going to get a very
different sort of explanation of version
of the archetype now he is quite
insistent that none of these
descriptions lists or maps are sort of
the thing in itself right that's
important so the map isn't the
territory we can talk about this stuff
but at the end of the day it's a set of
handles that we're using to to
understand something that in some
fundamental sense is going to exceed
whatever our description the model are
so you can't just come up with this neat
list of archetypes right shadow
persona right that stuff it's handy but
ultimately speaking it's it's something
of a shorthand for what's really going
on but what is the archetype if I say an
organizing principle so we're used to
thinking about archetypes I think when
we encounter them casually in pop
culture as being sort of the the core
set of iconic figures that you might see
in a myth or in a fairy tale so you know
the king the dragon the warrior right
you know the the damsel in distress to
some extent that's a way to think about
them when we're thinking about the
collective unconscious but I think an
easier way to get at these is just to
consider the kinds of shared psychic
structures that all of us invariably
have so to give you an example
necessarily because of biology everybody
alive on earth has a mother right
automatically it's a given right they
may not know their mother but the point
is right they are going to have a
relationship with the mother they will
have just stated inside of somebody as
such right and mammals being what they
are in humans in particular we have a
really long developmental period right
we have this bonding thing and so there
is a natural kind of relationship that
that it's formed with a mother or a
caretaker it can be a substitute
caretaker but the point is right in sort
of most involved standard conditions
there's going to be this bonding event
that occurs between a child and a mother
right that is going to be pivotal to the
child's sort of success and survival and
so evolution in a sense if you want to
think about this naturalistically
preloads right the sort of infant
version a little bit in order to
facilitate this so an example that I
like to use here is geese so geese when
they hatch out of an egg go through a
phase called a short phase it's called
imprinting so what happens is you know
the egg cracks open and the little
Gosling
fixes its eyes on right whatever is
nearby and and imprints on it as the
mother now 99% of the time of course
that's going to be an adult goose that
is looking after the eggs and so the
Gosling imprints on the goose and then
it it behaves towards the goose in the
ways that are adapted for it so if the
goose walks on place right the Gosling's
were all talking along after it a little
line and these are the behaviors that
were used to seeing in nature but if you
intervene experimentally right which I
wouldn't want to do because it sounds
cruel but it was done before we invented
ethics in 1995 so if you intervene
experimenting you right you can get a
Gosling to imprint on a surprisingly
wide range of persons and objects you
can get them to imprint on you the
experimenter you can get them to imprint
on a stuffed animal you can get them to
them print on a ping-pong ball if you
present it in the right way in the right
time at the window and if you do that
you know take a ping-pong ball you
imprint the Gosling's and then you roll
that ping-pong ball on the table the
Gosling's will all toddle after it right
so they have a set of behaviors towards
the word right which is sort of in some
sense kind of pre-built in to them and
they have a kind of time-sensitive you
know hole in their psyche which is ready
to receive material and then behave
towards that material in a certain way
if you want to think about this in young
in terms you know there there's sort of
three phases to an archetype so the
archetype stands outside your knowledge
completely right it's it's the content
thing in itself
so you can't ever get at the archetype
that's sort of necessarily invisible to
you
you can only sense it by its effects so
what you get is some layers get the
archetype which you have to sort of
infer the existence of whatever you get
the archetypal image which is typically
the cultural material which which builds
up in general around this whole and then
you have people's particular material
which we would call their complex so
everybody has complexes and we talk
about somebody having an e to post
complex or superiority complex or right
and complex is the material that that
people have specifically sort of in that
archetypal gap right
so you can think about it and it's like
most Gosling's are going to have a
complex which is their mother their
specific mother and you know most
animals can have variations and their
personality so the specifics of what
they end up with in their complex is
going to be dependent on who they
imprint on who the mother is
and I suppose if they have a really
irritable doose mother and they're gonna
have specific ideas about what how geese
behaves and if they right end up with a
really friendly goose mother I don't
know what the range is a personality
Araki's but you know to end up with real
mother goose then they're gonna end up
with right but if they end up and
printing on a ping-pong ball then the
material that they have is going to be
problematic for them probably in some
way or another right it's going to cause
them issues because the information that
they're then taking through this sort of
this prime system ready to receive
information about the world is going to
be sort of mucked up with a slightly
inappropriate set of contents or a
problematic set of contents humans have
this stuff too right
but we have it too so we can think about
yes we have sort of you know slots where
mother and father go or you know primary
caregivers we have the slots where our
early romantic interest start to slot in
right so it's not uncommon to talk to
people clinically and personally where
they will tell you that you know their
romantic interests have heavily
patterned after somebody they had a
crush on when they were 11 right and
siblings will tend to imprint this
material and then we also develop both
sort of culturally relevant but also
family culture and personally relevant
images around all of the other things
that are you know human universals every
human culture has a concept of war right
a concept of war and so the warrior is
sort of a universal type among humans
there are no human groups on earth that
don't have some idea of you know the the
wise woman or the wise man right
somebody who has sort of special
knowledge in some sense humans
universally have certain kinds of you
know sort of spiritual ideas right so
it's a cultural universal culture so far
as I know it's a cultural universal that
up is associated with good and to down
is associated with that and you find
that everywhere and you can sort of
think about this and think there are all
sorts of reasons why those associations
in play and their genetic and their
functional and right some of them are an
outgrowth of culture but the point is
that these patterns in our thinking are
sort of universal and to some extent
programmed in right you can also look at
for instance cases where human infants
have responses to certain kinds of
patterns for things that they have not
actually income
once it's it's there has been a bunch of
experimental work that shows that
infants will fear show a fear response
to the patterns of a spider or a snake
even if they have never mounted a spider
or snake so on one level you know if
provided that sort of finding holds up
you can say well that makes sense right
evolution probably predisposed babies
not to reach for spiders right when we
were you know coming up in during the
evolutionary sort of arc but above and
beyond that what it means is that you
can imagine how that filters down what
it means then in turn is that that's
going to pick up all this additional
cultural material if you have something
that is a fearful concept and and a
human Universal you're gonna get all
kinds of additional symbolism and stuff
building up from it right so that's kind
of the that's the gist of it there are
some other archetypes within the system
but I suppose the shorthand way to think
about it is this and this is sort of I
think the central insight of most of the
psychodynamic systems from Freud onwards
you're not one thing you're a dynamic
system of interrelated parts and those
parts are not I'm sort of contra Freud
those parts are not mechanical
subsystems they're not hydraulic you are
a living thing made of living things
right which should sort of be obvious
right we're made of living cells and
living tissues we have bacteria in us
we've got skin mites on us right but the
same thing applies to you if you want to
get purely naturalistic our brain our
brain is a living thing made out of
individual living things which exist in
a competitive structure resources and
the fact is that you know yes we have
this consciousness that we associate
with sort of our whole body and whole
brain that we call Anderson or Tim right
but then the individual subsystems don't
suddenly stop having any measure of
agency consciousness or any of those
other things just because they're
slightly smaller in fact what you have
instead is a whole bunch of these
systems interacting together in a
communal fashion to produce the psychic
thing that you typically apply the high
level to that is you so
you have a bunch of these parts in your
psyche and they sort of all answer to
the same name and live at the same
address but that doesn't necessarily
mean that they're all communicating with
each other and it doesn't necessarily
mean that they all see things the same
way or have the same goals beautiful
does that does that make sense
very high level description yeah yeah
yeah most certainly thank you very much
for laying that down so let's see how to
take this on then you mentioned if we
want to get really naturalistic about
this or to speak from a frame of
naturalism and I am very much open to
the frame of naturalism but I've often
distinguished of course from
supernaturalism so I I resonate with a
kind of metaphysical naturalism in that
I am NOT interested in kind of some
black box that I am secretly hiding from
how we coherently seek to describe and
relate to our world as the thing to
reach for to then give that secret
source of explanation or reason for the
whole thing yet that that term I've seen
often described in ways that I actually
think can be at least at face value
unhelpful for actually really feeling
into and integrating some of the ways of
thinking that the union frame and you
know concordant our chemical frames
might suggest we take seriously for
instance it can often be argued that
there the mind plays a reduced role in
the naturalist framework you know some
people sometimes define away the mind
the existence of mind somehow in
ontology
before we even begin the kind of
conversation and it's in the middle of
this being caught between a rock and a
hard place of kind of realism and
idealism from a philosophy of mind
perspective that I think people have
been perhaps
without the the toolkit to really look
to integrate some of the Jungian stuff
with a frame that's both palatable to
the West but that also speaks in a way
that does a kind of feeling tone justice
to the dynamics and qualitative
experience of our lives of the of the
richness of the psyche and of the
mystery of meaning and and I hope we can
turn into these kind of domains now I'm
not seeking to sort of quibble about
definitions of these kind of terms like
naturalism and what-have-you I I really
am open to these things but the patterns
hey the patterns are where it's at and
what strikes me is that just as there
are kind of the metaphor that that is
helpful is that just as there are organs
of the body there are organs and of the
psyche there are organs kind of like an
inner organization of the psyche latent
battles or patterns in potential that
realized themselves in accordance with
what is presented in the world
so this imprinting and that also
function together if they do so well in
a kind of developmental direction that
we can become more of who we are that we
can realize ourselves by having or
realizing how this inner what might
begin as an inner potential or cacophony
perhaps if we're not doing so well how
this can be brought into a kind of inner
harmony how this community can realize
itself in a kind of self making
relationship and then of course well if
there is a self like an inner harmony
within me and I realize myself in part
through imprinting on things in the
world and coming into relation with
others then how do these patterns then
flow and work at a collective level and
then perhaps we get to a little bit of a
grasp on what the collective
unconsciously looks like but but that's
a really beautiful
sort of baseline you've laid down there
now oh can I on the point of naturalism
I actually should probably frame that
because it's I'm so used to talking to
people who are all already operating
sort of within this framework right it's
it's hard not to sometimes get a bit
insular in the university environment
but yeah so the question of naturalism
when most people are thinking of
naturalism just a reference I think that
people still have a kind of a
mechanistic hangover right so there is a
like there's like a post-newtonian drag
they sort of post-newtonian with a touch
of the bleakest form of darwin that
people have gotten I've cottoned on -
right and for we can come back around to
this I actually think that that
particular exceedingly bleak and
mechanistic view still has utility
provided that you're not using by itself
so the general position that I have is I
think that and this applies to sort of
all you know knowledge creation and I
try to apply it everywhere but I'm as a
militant agnostic and I have a
particular kind of extreme emphasis on
epistemological humility so I believe
that certainty is that both the search
for a certainty and the sense of
certainty are more often than not the
problem rather than the solution that
people think they are and also I have a
very strong maybe even a radical kind of
approach to maintaining flexibility and
one's models so I don't think that
looking for the certain answer and and
striving towards perfect consistency is
necessarily the best way to approach
knowledge especially in these domains
and so I take my notes from good ol
tarski properly but and I favour
completeness over consistency and the
idea is you can do that provided that
you aren't hung up on making everything
lock together in a totally airtight way
all the time
provided that you maintain a state of
play where you can adopt a perspective
and play with it and see how it works
and adopt another perspective and play
with it and she
around you can shape-shift essentially
speaking if you can shape-shift you can
actually do quite a bit so that's the
first thing the reason I bring up that
that sort of the naturalistic point is I
do believe in in the utility of
naturalism I think that you know finding
sort of formal scientific things is a
really powerful tool to get acknowledged
albeit not the only one but I think that
that that Newtonian hangover I mean okay
I remember being at the pub this was
maybe I don't know 10 years ago and I
was waiting for somebody and I was
having two or three pints and two or
three pints and I'm listening to the
conversation behind me and I'm listening
to a very well-meaning but extremely
earnest young man sort of hold forth
about how science was draining all the
mystery and magic from the world right
it was this this is like the
disenchantment hypothesis I'm listening
to this and i'ma listen to this and he
quit but I'm thinking wrong really wrong
in my opinion right or in my experience
and so finally I turned around and said
like why are you talking about like
science does not make the world a pinned
down well established solid place it
makes the world radically more bizarre
into mysterious everything science
touches gets weirder and and in my
experience more wonderful right and so
and if you get into the habit of talking
to people in scientific fields the the
question I was like to go for a
straightaway is like what in the field
is unsolved and does it make sense where
are the deep mysteries and they're
always there and every field people
whilst we have no idea how anything
works right to me I mean you know that's
wonderful right it's like so much open
grounds for exploration but but there is
to this idea of a certain amount of sort
of mechanism in science that people get
hung up on that's I think we're the most
current generation of cognitive science
really excels that's the kind of
bridging language to start to bring some
of this more esoteric material back into
dialogue so that it's not sort of off in
a off in a weird you know corner by
itself right being shunned by the rest
of
so for instance you said for instance we
can think about the archetypes as being
like organs right mm-hmm and I think
that's true
but the trick is if it's naturalistic
and if you think that this stuff is
mostly occurring from the brain then the
brain is this amazing little machine
that it turns out is a machine made of
other machines that can turn itself into
new machines right and so it's not just
a set of organs it's a set of evolving
organs with relationships to each other
that are shifting around so like I
sometimes into my students people solve
this idea that the brain is like you
know a mass of wires and circuits and if
you cut into it it'll spark and it's
much more like a bucket of worms right
the neurons are squirming around in
there and replicating and connecting and
like it's a much more organic kind of
thing and as cognitive science has
incorporated things like dynamical
systems theory and so on and so forth
right and and adopted these ideas of
neuroplasticity we start to get into a
much more living and far more
philosophically kind of expansive and
and deeply mysterious ground through
which we can start to explore this stuff
but without sort of breaking the rules
if that makes sense
no absolutely and I'm you know I
resonate with that very strongly and I'm
glad we we make this we can gladly make
this link so you know I'm the worst at
this because I start by victory so can I
ask you a question I'm cause I'm curious
so how did you come by like where does
your interest in young and deaf psyche
and alchemy where does all that emerge
from who often in those questions I go
quite developmental but let's that's
fine everything's development inherently
development well yeah my experience
currently is there's about 20 things
that I feel I wish to kind of Orient and
limbs and bring together and seek to lay
some ground for really ripe inquiry and
I'm also partly I sort of want to
apologize to any audience members who
might be looking for something a bit
more of a formal introduction to some of
these concepts I don't think I'm going
to be able to contain
myself and I kind of just want to get
right in there because um okay so why
okay you're gonna leave them you're
gonna leave delicious I'll work on the
table you want to go find stuff at
anyway but if it's all if that's all
implication that can be fun too anyway
okay sorry okay okay so who the you know
a long story very short was the breakup
of the world parents let's say a divorce
my parents divorce and moving from
England to Australia very much a kind of
Garden of Eden type environment where I
was afforded such wonderful educational
opportunities until I was about sort of
you know ten and a half eleven and the
last few years in England were pretty
pretty rough years yeah and moving to
Australia and having a very opposite
experience in terms of schooling so and
by the time high school sort of ended I
didn't attend a bunch of my final exams
and was altogether completely
disillusioned by life fundamentally then
yeah I'm a high school dropout so I
totally hear you yeah beautiful
beautiful you know so disillusioned with
with teacherly Authority fundamentally
but having this kind of sort of a deep
embodied sense of there being other
possibilities and a deep recess of love
there that was that was broken and hurt
but it was a sort of a driving force
which which is important because we're
gonna skip a bunch of years now and
we're gonna skip into a particularly
powerful psychedelic experience
mm-hm you know I had already cultivated
an interest in philosophy and fantasy
and you know what have you and I
travelled a bit and had been practicing
meditation had other psychedelic
experiences but this particular one you
know was a real climactic wouldn't say
break but one mode of response would be
break to it
and the the experience was one that I've
spent many years sort of writing about
privately and seeking to sort of mind
the gold from and I feel it's very much
relevant because I was sort of taken
into a what feels like a kind of
timeless domain where the same kind of
opportunity or spiral or circle or
recursion was presented to me and so you
know it was like a hyper meditation on
the fundamental modes of orientation
available in consciousness in response
to what was overwhelming appearance of
absolute chaos just that a maelstrom of
dissolution that a deep part of me was
seeking to hold off and resist and
reject and one feels very quickly as one
Orient's in relation to this dynamic
whether accepting it or rejecting it or
what the effect of that kind of thing is
there can be a relief and there can be
you know a deep kind of existential pain
so so skipping ahead from that a little
appear I had become interested in young
through interests in what meaning
fundamentally you know as a response to
a sort of depression and many elements
of the meaning crisis trying to find
people to talk to to learn from like
there's something else it's being missed
here by a particularly kind of reductive
approach to to either doing philosophy
or relating to the world that there's
something about the orientation that the
quality of my experience itself like the
the the beauty in expression itself
being on the pulse of that that there's
an inherent 'no stew the meaning of
being that I was not wanting to
forestall I didn't want to cut that away
from
like an integration with a understanding
of reality itself so you might think
like how fundamental are we are our
experiences to the universe like how
much do we matter really because some
views are like our we're all kind of
just contingent on sort of like a base
alloy if we think in mechanistically
it's like well one thing kind of you
know all of a sudden something pops up
at another level and you know the
consciousness we experience is just kind
of contingent on stuff that's holy
maybe non conscious this was the
language I used at the time and this was
kind of deeply dissatisfying because
it's kind of like oh well so there's a
whole bunch of determined kind of
patterns or they're indeterminate or
whatever but what's happening up here is
kind of it is one of whatever right like
it's a but it's a bunch of Eddie's that
some hydrogen atoms are having on their
way to heat death right exactly exactly
sure Anna and I was not too pleased with
this as I think many people are so so
I'm not pleased with but you know you
can take different different views on
things and this was you know is still at
a kind of historical point in time where
I was searching for you know more fuller
perspectives and and I remain deeply
deeply interested in how it is we can in
fact realize ourselves become who we are
realize what is ours to do in
relationship with each other in such a
way that involves us deeply in the
emergence in the creation in the
co-creation of reality of being now how
we want to technically make sense of
that is a beautiful inquiry that we can
well have but why am i interested in
this stuff because god damn that seems
like a pretty good reason yeah wanting
wanting to escape existential entropy in
favor of co-creating the universe seems
like a pretty good reason yeah yeah do
something with your time right yeah
exactly exactly yeah yeah that's
interesting I there are a bunch of touch
points for that my parents are likewise
divorce although in a very a and a
typically amicable fashion I'll say
which has its own drawbacks because it
gave me unusual ideas about how amico
brick how amicable breakups are and
should be but but likewise you know is
it am I allowed to ask what what
psychedelic in question was the
experience that you have this was
psilocybin it's about five and a half
grams of evoke even to the heroic heroic
dose so you shot yourself as a cannon I
did indeed yeah I mean it's interesting
on that on that front alone just not
even getting to the the depth psyche
thing it's as I've said it I've spoken
on psychedelics at quite a few
conferences and talks and things and you
know when I was sort of first interested
in doing stuff around this at the
university I got no no no no you'll
destroy your career right
and I grew up reading you know Timothy
Leary and these people and you know
Scientific American that was all
starry-eyed reading accounts of Albert
Hoffman and stuff and everyone was like
you can't touch this and then you know
there was a short period of time and
suddenly I started to find the you know
the psychedelic Renaissance picking up
steam and as I said maybe first about
five years ago the thing that's most
jarring again is it's wonderful to see
so much good new work being done right
but it's weird for me because I'm not
used to being on the winning side of a
cultural argument range to now have
positions that were considered quite
cranky ten or fifteen years ago but you
know it seems like there's a lot more
cultural receptivity and there always
was right at the fringe on the
underground and the progressive edge
people always recognized that
psychedelic experiences could be these
pivotal breakthrough moments that really
altered your sense of the world and
yourself and what the potentials of
those things could be like that's why
that's why kids continue to drop
mushrooms from time out of mind like
yeah they're kind of fun at a party but
that's not really what's happening most
of the time because equally they're
sometimes not that fun to party and
instead you you know whatever have to
make confrontation with universe
devouring Kelly or something yeah and
like so why have those remains currents
and I think
yeah you really put your finger on it
it's it's about opening up this access
you don't himself was anti psychedelic
which is actually one of the points
where he and I diverge I think that
that's a remarkably culturally blinkered
kind of view given everything we know
but the anthropological role of these
things but I can understand why he he
was wary of them right because coming up
in the in the 50s during the early
sixties you know this is the period
right before Tim Leary becomes
completely unhinged and God bless Leary
he was very handsome and he did a lot of
good promotion but ultimately speaking
he's the one that got Nixon to clamp
down on everything and really gave that
kind of an out of control vibe yeah so
the experience that you detail I mean it
does it sounds really familiar to me
likewise right there's a kind of
disenchantment and I was a high school
dropout for a reason like I wanted
nothing to do with official instructors
for a long time and it took me a long
time to come back around to the idea
that there was something to be done
there and that actually the system was
shockingly more receptive to my weird
ideas than I thought it would be and
give me more degrees of freedom than I
expected so I have to say actually the
University of them quite kind to me not
that I have no beefs with them of course
I do
and I think that there are things that
they do that are silly and need to be
overhauled but um but on the main point
that you're getting at I think that
actually speaks to what I think is maybe
kind of one of the central pillars in
Jungian work right and trying to do the
work so people talk a lot about like the
three stages if you mean work right
loosely construed so you get like the
shadow stage and so that's like you're
grappling with your shadow material
right and then you get a slightly more
difficult stage where you're
encountering your your enema or enema so
your days of basically dealing with
issues of relationship right with other
people and specifically use sexual and
romantic relationship but to some extent
parental relationship and then there's
this nebulous masterwork at the top
which is the relationship between your
ego your regular conscious self and this
less self and this causes a lot of horny
confusion for people and I'm not sure
that you know we're not gonna be able to
encapsulate it but it's a very mystical
space and that throws off relatively
conventional psychology people are used
to right because it's like what are we
dealing with here this sounds like
schizophrenic psychosis right and it
throws off people who have a more
naturalistic view because the idea of
essences right that we have a
fundamental self smells a little bit
like the eternal soul and some people
get weirded out by that but I once said
to a Freudian I had a Freudian professor
in my undergrad who has since become a
friend and I went it was office hours
one time he was a Buddhist and in a
clinical psychologist but also was
training as a Freudian and like
old-school Freudian lying on the couch
four days a week kind of right now and
so I went it was office and I said I
gotta ask why Freud like wife boy like I
was just so puzzled by Freud and I
didn't know him that well then he was
very deft and he turned it around he
said well why young you knew I was young
in and I was sort of thrown by that and
the answer that I came up with on the
spot remains I think in some ways you
know it was one of those answers that
came through me in a sense and I said
more that
or of the sort of original psychodynamic
theorists yo understands the realities
of the soul and when I say that
sometimes it first people off because
they think I mean something woowoo and
I'm not ruling that out because you know
Lord knows we flipped our scientific
models into a relevancy every 50 years
for the past 500 so let's not rule
anything out yet folks if you think we
have our model of reality nailed down
you're sorely wrong and you know there
all kinds of issues the very first piece
of work to ever did the John's or fakey
work with was we co-authored a paper on
our theory of consciousness and like you
know there's a reason that the theory of
consciousness proposed by the issues
with the theories of consciousness
proposed by Chalmers are called the hard
problem it's like the hard problem you
know so there are some big gaps but when
I say that you know understands the
reality is a soul what I mean is that
he's a very careful and nuanced observer
of the phenomenology of of being across
sort of multiple dimensions of
consciousness so he's not just concerned
with regular everyday consciousness but
he's concerned with all these subtle
strange events that happen at the edge
of our usual consciousness or outside
our usual consciousness but that gesture
at some kind of deeper and larger
reality within the mind right and you
know when you're looking at the three
levels and you're looking at sort of
shadow work and then a relationship work
in itself it's like well what are we
talking about and the grand scheme of
that whole thing I think is best
summarized by just saying that you know
the real goal of union work is to
gradually get the ego to understand that
it's not the center of the gel it's just
the center of it's just where
consciousness is that's it
right so the ego can be kind of a little
narcissistic tyrant it makes the
assumption that it's sort of running
everything because that's where you can
see it's like the old joke right the
drunk loses his keys on the way home
from the bar and then goes back and he's
searching for them underneath
the streetlamp and somebody says is this
where you lost them and he's like no but
this is where the light is good that's
the way that we tend to approach the ego
we do all of our work there because the
light is good we can see we can see
what's happening but this leads us in
all kinds of bizarre existential errors
because by thinking that we the ego
right are the center of the show and
everything else is orbiting around us
right we can't understand why things
won't conform to our will we get thrown
land you know sort of alien presences
seem to intrude on us or we behave in
ways that are contrary to our own self
image and the idea is that gradually
loosening up right your ego not
destroying it in sort of the traditional
sense in which you know you have to
obliterate the ego in you know some
systems it's not bad it's just about
putting the ego into proper relation so
that you understand that you're not the
boss of everything right and that that
doesn't lessen or negate the very
special role that you as the witnessing
consciousness and place of integration
have but that ultimately speaking you're
not the center of gravity of the system
there is something in the psyche and
possibly in the world if you want to get
metaphysical about it that is
orchestrating this broader movement and
dynamic right and you know when we get
closer to that center right we tend to
perceive things as being more richly
meaningful and more organized we get
this kind of big-picture
Gestalt integrative view right and when
that really starts to spike we get sort
of like suffused with mystical levels of
integration and symbolism because that's
the only language dense enough to convey
any of the information that's coming at
us right which is also why if you want
to develop a relationship with the self
Jung says it's sort of indistinguishable
from God and so you don't have to be
convinced
existence or non-existence of God is not
you know what what evidence could we get
you know you can always apply skepticism
to any evidence and you could always say
that lack of evidence doesn't imply
right evidence their absence of evidence
isn't evidence of absence
so that's not resolvable but the point
is that you do definitely have this sort
of center within your psyche of a
functioning and it transmits in
symbolism and feeling and meaning and to
organization but that is also language
then it is most effectively spoken to if
you want to develop a relationship with
this then you need to learn to speak and
symbol you need to learn to speak in
ritual you need to learn to speak in
myth that's why every human group
everywhere for all of history and
prehistory you know I mean I'm about to
say something really definite but that
that would be the idea within this
system would be that those things
develop because it facilitates this kind
of communication and then that's that's
come on kind of communication and puts
you into an appropriate relationship if
that makes sense no I I differ I think
from lots of unions and lots of
cognitive scientists because I think
that you should leave everything on the
table
so like the hellish chaos space that you
describe right the like unanswerable
whoa and meaningless and mechanism and
like the the brutal meaningless struggle
of Darwinian organisms and bright jewel
Wars all that right all of that people
want to throw that away and they want to
throw away nihilism and they want to
throw away sadness and I actually think
you keep it off because those things are
useful so like it's just it's just the
question and this is my this is my
wizard talk coming through but the
question is just how you befriend them
how you make of them an ally so you know
consider for instance this this slider
right sometimes we feel like if you're
predisposed to believe that there's such
a thing as free will whatever the hell
that means right you know there's free
will and there's determinism so free
will is like yeah I really get to decide
what I'm doing in the world and
determinism is no I actually
don't even if there's an illusion that I
do and this rages back and forth in
psychology and cognitive science and
philosophy and it's not really
answerable how would we answer it but
there is a difference in terms of how
our narrative that our current emotional
spin so on convey our feeling of free
will right our sense of agency and some
of that is reflecting how effective we
are right how much fluency we have and
things like that flow States the sort of
stuff but some of it it's just sort of
the mindset that we work ourselves into
a little narrative and we're used to
thinking good like free will agency good
mechanistic determinism bad but that's
not true they can each from useful and
it depends on the circumstances so if
you're experiencing a whole set of
psychological issues okay and you know
you're experiencing serious depression
you know what is the first thing you
should do and I would recommend this to
all of my clients the first thing you
should do is go get a thyroid test right
because if your thyroid function is
disrupted you can have all kinds of mood
things and if people get their thyroid
test and it turns out that they're you
know they're deficient and whatever and
then they start taking thyroid
medication they feel better well they
just got a mechanistic explanation
that's um that's a deterministic
explanation sometimes a deterministic
explanation is exactly what you want
because it removes responsibility right
if you find out that your grandma is
yelling at you but she doesn't really
hate your she has a brain tumor it's
tragic but also it's relieving because
she doesn't mean it
right likewise sometimes we have high
agency and that's great I feel really
uncharged on your life but sometimes
what that provokes is a crushing sense
of responsibility and failure and guilt
oh no I free will why can't I get my
laundry done
right why can't I you know get on top of
my shirt why can't I sort out my
relationships free will and agency can
create this really crushing sense and so
sometimes the answer is to say like to
run yourself through the narrative that
it's like well how could I have done
things differently right and the facts
are exactly the same but you're running
a different kind of philosophical are
you dragging yourself the words just
deterministic to give yourself a bit of
a break before you then move back into
agency and move forward
so you see have a slider it's not that
one of the other is is intrinsically
always you want to set the setting here
and that's that it's that you have a set
of sliders and you want to be able move
them around contextually to be able to
shape-shift yourself to be the most
effective configuration for a situation
it's like evolution right
there's no apex predator if you throw a
shark into the desert it does not do
well if your tiger in the ocean did oh
right yeah and it's adaptation is sort
of structural anyway sorry okay okay
yeah beautiful okay so so what's
interesting is in the decision then to
go get a thyroid checked there is
already inherent obviously in that
decision that health would be valuable
right I want to change it become
something else and then it's sort of
about well what tools are available for
us and how can we sort when utilize them
effectively how can we make effective
choices and it's so complex of course
because at one level we can understand
aspects of ourselves as having this
machine-like function or at least we
have these sort of ready-made kind of
solutions and then there are other types
of issues that are much more nebulous
and we friend ourselves as agents
seeking to sort of chart our path
through all of these waters towards
something I should say in the direction
of growth or it just just just just to
put a pin in that then we can still take
the frame of what is it we ought move
toward right there still that the
question of art what odd we do and are
sort of always already present
involvement in action even in action as
an action because the world is changing
and it's having an having effects and so
the one of the challenges of this moment
is that we are as a collective unsure
about I think the future fundamentally
and there are people who have got ideas
right
yeah and I'm so glad for that for the
record I actually think it's a good
thing but people have boned the
obviously right
look this is not what anybody thought
they were gonna be doing with their
summer sure that's fair to say right and
but that's in my opinion that's good
because again on the note of certainty
people have a tendency to project ahead
a model and a prediction about the way
that the world is going to be in and it
works in turn almost never matches that
model right but nevertheless they steer
according to it we get a normalcy bias
at work right so like whatever the
current circumstances are we assume
that's gonna be the way that it is and
people begin to think that you know
contingent structures in the status quo
are necessary structures of reality but
all the sudden when the brakes get hit
hard and people realize holy crap like
things are not what I thought that they
were right things are not rolling out
according to regular summer fun and holy
 like a collective Oh am I allowed
to swear I didn't even ask I'm sorry
that's rude please okay you complete me
if you want sound of Gus Gosling or yeah
you know having that disrupted it's
terrifying and it's anxiety provoking
for people right we don't know we don't
know what we're gonna do we don't know
what our plans are we've disappointed
all of those things but at the same time
what it does is it shakes up this
tightly bound
sense of where things are going and in
that sense right it suddenly opens up
the possibility I don't think it's
coincidental that the social uprising is
that are happening are happening in the
wake of such a large disruption a
disruption that large does all the
things that people politically point out
right has showed the ineptness of
certain governments and the sort of
crass to face it nests and self-interest
of some parties and I'm not going to get
too political maybe I did you know and
on top of that it shows a certain kind
of precarity it's like oh wow
like things could things fall apart
right and right but also it's like wait
if things do not have to be the way that
they were yesterday if indeed they are
already not that what can they be and
once people start to get over their
initial anxiety right and then there you
know stir crazy and bored right I can't
think of worse things for stir crazy
bored I'm going to be poured into then
writing injustice and so I think that in
some ways it's it's kind of a wake-up
call to have a global event of the scale
and although it's freaked everybody out
and everybody has lingered on the sort
of negative qualities emotional and
speaking of it I think that actually the
net is probably positive in the same way
that a bad trip can be good for you
yes yes well we are
sorry I'm straying off off-script no no
no no well there one script so the issue
is of course is that the script has been
broken and that's a good thing yeah we
are in the process of built making the
script and a bunch of things a bunch of
things are coming to me so one is that
it's kind of like if we find ourselves
in an addiction certain ways of thinking
patterns of behavior it's often the case
that reaching a certain kind of rock
bottom is very very useful in an
enabling this reorientation right
there's been sort of breaking apart and
an opportunity for a full enough
dissolution so as to reorient and to
reintegrate in a way that's more aligned
with something that's genuinely healthy
but but an issue is that well what if
that moment of hitting the rock bottom
actually wasn't quite sufficient enough
and we've clasped back on and maybe re
embed part of the issue or take
ourselves to have finally solved it but
actually haven't but we've become only
more ardent in our commitment to that
new pattern of action there's there's
there's an importance in reaching a
ground that is open enough to be
appropriately seeded and so sure if you
if you allow me understand I want to try
and put quite a few more pieces together
here there's I sense this potential and
I there's a question that's like three
or four pieces away from me that wants
to come out and and I I really sense you
have you have something to to deepen of
it so
so when we when we undergo these
processes of development these these
juncture points in life where we they
have the opportunity to reorient that's
helpful but we want to it's like but
when we do that we also need the context
itself to be enabling of continued
growth 'fl continued of that new
behavior so you know if someone comes to
an understanding that they really have
to kick this particular habit but then
re-enters the same social group there
might be something that draws them back
so the context itself has to be enabling
in some sense it's a reciprocal
relationship there between sort of an
agent and a reader and John's language
is cell phone contact self and world
self and other and in this moment it
seems the integration we seek we're
getting a lot of opportunity for
differentiation although it's clear in
many parts of society to me there's been
actually us that that differentiation
it's kind of like people are so desk
they're so terrified actually of the
ground groundlessness beneath that
there's already too hard an attachment
to various kind of identity structures
which are not actually capable of coming
into right relationship with reality so
if we take the human organism as a as a
body as part of that thing that house is
still divided hey the house is still is
still very much divided um so there's
there's a part of an issue with the the
fullness let's say of the or
appropriateness of the dissolution or
fullness of it but then if we look at
this this reintegration there's this
necessity of doing that together of
relating together and we are absent it
seems to me so many of the structures
that would be really helpful in this so
we talk about an ecology of practices
that's important and that might be to
help bring the different parts of us our
psyche into a certain kind of alignment
to be afforded the develop
mental opportunity to become more of a
sort of a whole and together and
Integris human being but at the same
time this question grips me it's like
well what if I actually cannot become
Who I am without for example the place
to be in so you know how come
how can someone become a become a priest
or a saint without a church or a temple
you know how can we become sort of
loving members of community without
genuine community and the other pieces
kind of bring in is that I I'm very
interested in this question of what is
it how can we consider what an emergence
of kind of novel archetypal patterns
might be novel archetypal forms and and
my sense is that an area of real
possibility is to consider the kind of
emergence possible if a certain group of
people are able to be together in
relationship and involve themselves in
certain kinds of differentiating and
integrating processes in touch with the
world what kind of arrangements kind of
appropriate relation of patterns is then
possible in the context which perhaps
can enable not only the becoming of self
as we might understand it from a union
framework but is there something is
there something ready and waiting in us
beyond that I I'm not saying that I'm
not saying we're right here yet there's
still other pieces the presence but as a
sort of broad direction of where I would
love to turn this acquire inquiry
eventually it's like how can we come
together to realize that which is an arc
you know it is something of sustenance
and fructifying possibility that can
have us become who we are and live well
and prosper throughout the coming time
yeah okay so there's a lot of material
on the table but I think I couldn't
leave it so so
I mean you know one thing is you
mentioned this you know the kind of
trying to get ourselves into a social
relatedness and I would say that
certainly one of the central points in
my own work is about attempting to
explore the implications and mechanics
of all the stuff that I've talked about
relative to trans Jack tivity so the
fact that psychic events are
simultaneously pointing inwards and
outwards so that that means some
important things right and so among
other things that means that you know
our usual cartesian idea of our mind is
a closed-off little thing is basically
horseshit and it's just wrong in a lot
of ways because there's a sense of which
are imitative patterns and relationships
all of our culture and language and
stuff high us together into kind of
distributed cognition right and that's
just natural to humans it's what we do
right
literacy is acquired but speech speech
is just like we just pick up languages
because we are talkers we're not the
only talkers there are other animals
that communicate but but nobody else
maybe whales once we cracked the code
but I get it I think we're the only ones
on this particular ball that are talking
at this level in machine elves on DMT
not standing so we're the only ones who
are employing this particular kind of
networking so like is there something
that's built into us yeah our capacity
for distributed cognition but in a sense
right that's it's really if you look at
the perspective this way that's an
outgrowth of what we already are so
we're used to thinking of ourselves as
these single individuals and then we
network the individuals together but
really we're not individual we're very
dividual right there there is a unifying
principle in the same way as there's a
unifying principle in the solar system
but that doesn't mean that everything
that's or system is one few solid mass
there are dynamics and orbits right
there's a lot going on right comets
shooting through and stuff nevertheless
the Sun is in the center that's the
power source and it's the gravity that's
binding the system together into a
sensible whole and everything is is
going through it's cosmic you know a
ballet around that but in turn right the
way that we are relating to each other
you know is also its built-in or
do not distinguish closely between
internal events and external events and
so we're already networked together so
that's the capacity it's it's that
capacity and it's the adaptivity right
it's the adaptiveness that comes with
that so even something like when we're
talking about simultaneously
differentiating and integrating right so
you know you differentiate you pull
things apart you integrate you knit them
together and if you simultaneously right
integrate and differentiate you
complexify right literally that's what
happens when you're talking about organs
you know you get a single cell right as
well - I guess sperm and egg and then
the single cell becomes a little
blastocyte and when that starts to stem
cell itself into separate organs it
differentiates it organizes right they
take on special functions they're
simultaneously separating out becoming
different but also maintaining deads
connections we've done that that's
civilization right I mean specialist
roles the fact that we do not all do the
same tasks in the village every day
right is an indication already that
we've done that now I don't think that
complexity is an inherent goal right so
complexity is a gain of fitness
condition something could be too complex
right something can be too complex
civilizations can be too complex
Homer Dixon has a good analysis of this
Thomas Homer Dixon where he basically
says you know once once the civilization
gets to a point where of certain
complexity to much of its energy budget
gets eaten up just in maintaining those
structures and then it collapses in on
itself right and it's possible that
we're quite close to steering in that
direction that we need to be less
complex right but at the same time and
you sort of alluded to this we're kind
of an unmapped territory and I mean in a
very important realistic way and in a
way that I think barring the extinction
of our species there are certain aspects
of where we've gotten to now that aren't
about to ratchet down so young talks
about this a bit in his book ion he
talks I mean it's a very unusual
fascinating
weird frightening delicious book it's
it's a great book it's very difficult
but it's good
he talks about a lot about astrology and
so he's using sort of metaphors of the
procession of the the astrological types
and he's like two thousand year long for
2500 year long cycles and so you know he
talks about how the Age of Pisces is the
two fish it's the Christian era and it's
dominated by the fish myths of the
Christian era right and then
theoretically we're now state easing
into the Age of Aquarius right cue
musical and his point is that the
transition into the Age of Aquarius is
going to be marked that is change in
collective and personal unconscious
right that it's going to be marked by
new structures of civilization on the
scale and complexity and degree of
integrated meaning as the church had in
Europe and its heyday right well we're
talking about something that is binding
together the efforts and experience so
that's watts of people and what they
think is meaningful and I sometimes say
it's like there are people who kind of
think that your average peasant in the
Middle Ages thought Christianity was
Buncombe but there are also towns in
France where three generations of people
would work to build a cathedral that's
what they did the last shared cultural
project that we've had that's even
remotely like that it's maybe the moon
live right which you know say what you
will about solving the problems on earth
as opposed to squandering money on
rocket toys the moon landing in my
opinion if you don't just think it's us
trashing our next-door neighbor's lawn
by leaving garbage and probes all over
it is this resounding astounding
achievement of the human spirit and
about our capacities when I don't really
have anything going like that right now
like what's her goal ours is going there
so we don't have a cathedral and young
basically said as we move into the Age
of Aquarius and he's using this all
metaphorically I think we would see the
emergence of a new social structure that
would sort of that would take these new
psychic factors and new scientific facts
into consideration and then he sort of
drops and he's like and we should see
that about 600 years down the road and
when I read that and I'm
my numbers might not be exact I should
pick up the quote but when I read that
the first time it smacked me because of
course obviously I'm thinking it's gonna
have them like now because I'm here now
like yeah where's the new civilization
and he's like oh that should happen like
six hundred years down the road it's
like write that properly situates uh
somewhat it's a process now I don't
think that it's inevitable that that I
don't think it's inevitable necessarily
that like the new and perfect society
will emerge you know the the Mirage of
utopianism was what caused the worst
most horrific excesses of the pseudo
religious ideologies of the 20th century
because if you're Stalin and you you're
with if Heaven is within your grasp any
sacrifice of human life is is justified
to obtain paradise right that's how
things get monster as quickly so I'm
wary of utopian thinking I think they're
going to be flaws and whatever the new
configuration of being is to this flaws
are interesting and my suspicion to be
perfectly honest is like we're in for a
rocky stretch like if we think we're
gonna dodge what's coming and I don't
like to I don't want to freak people out
too much because sometimes I get on this
care and then I look and my students all
have a bleak middle-distance staring off
into whatever but like there are some
things coming we're about to get some
come up ents and learn a few things
about thermodynamics we're gonna learn a
few things about you know monkeying
around with nature for short-term goals
like we're about to learn some hard
lessons when I say learn hard lessons I
mean a lot of people are gonna die like
it's possibly going to be quite bad yeah
or ability to handle consciously
collective action problems I don't think
maybe we're gonna turn the boat around
on the whole climate change issue before
effect start really piling up and that's
scares me deeply it you know sometimes
really freaks me out but when I think
about it it's like okay but or is it
gonna wipe us out right that's a way to
think about it the
the scale on which Jian was talking when
he's talking anion is about we're
talking about the movements of cultures
and civilizations it's not something
we're gonna do right now at least maybe
maybe not I don't know it's an ongoing
experiment and some of the aspects of
that experiment even as our cultural
complexity drops will remain so for
instance I think I think that even if
our even if we got hit with an enormous
disaster right you know 80% of the
population of the planet dies off
something horrific and unimaginable
there are certain things that we've
achieved in the last well that aren't
going anywhere like the radio once you
know how to build a radio radios aren't
hard to build if local civilization
falls apart I can build a radio with a
few pieces of spare metal and some
lemons that means that radio
communications in my opinion unless we
you know if we drop down to total like
caveman cannibalistic savagery or
something then that's a different story
but like even if these sort of
large-scale tightly specialized you know
right if we enter something that's
really scary prospect for a lot of
people there are certain things you just
aren't doing away and so I suspect that
probably we're going to see a certain
amount of return to the natural bounds
of balance of what the planet can handle
in terms of our activities but also
we're going to go back to that level of
integration having carried with us the
fruits of having made this excursion in
this weird experiment into our current
thing if that if that makes sense
and so and so what we're gonna get I
don't think he is written I don't think
it's written I don't think it's
pre-programmed I think it's a grand
experiment because that's what life is
you know the evolutionarily speaking and
you know what's the what's the guiding
thing I don't know flourishing but that
can mean a lot of different things like
it can in our own lives
you know sometimes flourishing is you
know building building up all of our
resources and sometimes it's shedding
them and sometimes it's activity and
sometimes it proposed and there isn't a
single answer it's situational and
similar
our civilization is I think about to
start making the reconfiguration and and
who knows you know we're an adaptable
species we might pivot really fast you
know get fusion you know nanotech scale
technology and AI that doesn't decide to
eat us
and then Institute a wisdom program you
know put psychedelics in the drinking
water and we're good
who knows it's not it's not outside the
realm of possibility and probably some
combination of these quite hopeful
things and the relatively dark things
that people don't want to confront is
what's really gonna happen I've ever
read them hermann hesse's the glass bead
game yes yeah it's I've finished it but
I have been reading yeah yeah so that's
one of my favorite novels and one of the
things I really like to get about it
again is it has this three steps back
with you of historical progress it's
like what do they call our era the age
of food eat all like like distraction
and frippery
right hilarious yeah the age of Twitter
might have been an app yeah it's is it
was a non-stop like hairs on the back of
your neck experience reading Hesse
writing that back before before world
war ii or at before it was earlier 20th
century right and he sort of basically
commenting on our civilization right now
it's some truly remarkable thing and I
really encourage you know everyone to
check this book out because it's for
those people following along with this
project the glass bead game is it's
going to be very close to its heart but
please Andersen mm-hmm so just it's got
this long it's got this long view I mean
it's the future and it's the deep future
but it's a deep future that isn't Star
Trek and it isn't unrecognizably sort of
post singularity or something it's a
future where things are a bit less
mechanized and yet there are machines
and technology governments and stuff
still exist but there's been a return to
a certain version of
culture and science we're like the
sciences and academics and culture and
sort of almost a church thing have
blended together into a kind of you know
almost a Vatican desk state called
castelia up in Switzerland and like
obviously this speaks to my heart
because all I want to do is be a you
know a futuristic techno monk or
something I don't want to be a monk but
it's already discussed but if I could be
a techno lizard I'm on board
um so it has a vision of things that
struck me as very human and yet showing
like real changes in the cultural
landscape and that's if you think about
it often what science fiction even when
it sort of gets things right misses you
know we transport into the thirty
seventh century with robots and ray guns
and miniskirts it's like really
miniskirts is that that's still a thing
and HESA instead captures something
about this sort of the humanistic
speculative future yeah right so and
actually okay so one more thing that
I'll say and then I'll stop but the
other thing that has gets and I think
this is why it does send chills up your
spine when you read it I mean he's he's
a very depth psychologically oriented
very archetypal right big fan of young
men through analysis right and he wrote
that book as a response after people
didn't understand Steppenwolf
right and so Steppenwolf was meant to be
this kind of archetypal confrontation as
a novel again good book but people just
misread it right they they read it
because they weren't ready quite have
that encounter it was sort of a gain
before its time and he writes the glass
bead game as a response to try to like
get this idea through to people
and yet it's remarkably prescient right
it has that predictive capacity and
that's because the flip side of this
we're in an open experiment and what
what life is doing and culture is doing
in the species is doing its
experimenting with the space to figure
out where it can get itself to right
what can we do right and how can we
measure ourselves and whatever the flip
side of that is again we have these deep
intrinsic patterns in what it means to
be us and because those patterns don't
go away and to some extent may be
grounded in sort of the rules the
mathematical rules to constitute reality
in some ways right because those
fundamentals are there
history doesn't repeat but it does rhyme
right you get that quality where it's
like you know it's not the same thing
you know but and yet things are started
recognizable so you read big history
like um you know the decline and fall of
the Roman Empire or twin be something
and they have this idea of the cyclical
nature of history and when you start to
read that stuff structuralist history is
out of fashion and yet of course for the
past few years called five everybody has
been nervously tenting their fingers and
looking back to the mass psychology and
rise of fascism in the thirties and
going um like maybe we should be paying
attention for this why because it rhymes
now I mean the current droplets the
current crop of autocrats are a bunch of
tin pot cosplayers if ever there were
any but nevertheless you know that they
would enact as much malevolence I'm sure
as they were capable of given the chance
yeah oh yeah no I hear you that's such a
such a beautiful answer so what strikes
me is that the the you mentioned you
know if we have this this event say
eighty percent of people don't make it
but we can reconstruct radio that
affords us a lot of a lot of
potentiality there's something about the
medium of that communication its
capacity to network and thereby
communicate things has been established
already we have that knowledge structure
and so we can do a lot with that medium
of communication and of course what
we're experiencing now is the continued
emergence the rapid emergence of novel
mediums of communication and as yet we I
think are still adapting too well of
course we are still adapting as to how
to like adaptively use through here
we're currently destroying ourselves
with these mediums of communication in
terms of social media and what have you
but yeah but such a beautiful thing we
can talk to each other and what would it
be like to and of course this is
something I'm very interested in to have
six eight ten 20 50 100 more people
networked together in conversation you
know we don't have to limit it to
language actually we can use all four
different forms of representation making
this is the this is the aim this is the
vision and if we take this glass bead
game example we have a fusion of a kind
of maths and music and but nevertheless
a commitment to playing the game in such
a way as to enable something to be
birthed from that collective
participation right that there's there's
something beyond there kind of wealthy
Union frame that you go it kind of
identification with whatever's around
the particular spotlight or that the
lamppost of the ego but that we can
subtly avail ourselves to the
appropriate ingression with and
relationships you and orbits of these
these more nebulous more subtle features
of ourselves and how what's the kind of
process what's the protocol
for optimal collaboration in new mediums
of communication it's in that landscape
where I am most excited yeah that's so
that kind of I think crystallizes a very
real opportunity that's in adjacent
possible to us right now and although
you know and and I and I would like
obviously I mean I would love to talk to
you many more times but I so much of
what you're saying is just firing off
triggers in me of this person I know and
this person I know who share a certain
resonance would here be able to make a
point and have something to add here
that I can articulate but coming from
them it would be that much crisper that
much more immediate more that's home the
rhythm it's like how can we show up
bearing and with the what is ours to
give to contribute to to this evolving
harmony and the kind of ideas the
insight the understanding what can be
afforded through this such a beautiful
thing yeah so I mean to call back a
little bit you know you made mention a
while ago to this you know the concern
that people have when they're dealing
with self development but also when
they're dealing with sort of
interpersonal self development right
which is almost paradoxical except it
isn't because we're connected to other
people deeply and that's integral to
self development and self development is
integral to relation and right you know
and you expressed with no small concern
I think some justification that's like
well what if what if you know we
dissolve this thing down and we break it
down and we build something back up but
there's something left over of the old
thing there's kind of an impurity that
remains and it's like yeah that's an
understandable concern but also that's
the work the problem often is that we
have this mindset of sort of end-stage
perfectionism and now we have achieved
the perfect jewel right but that's not
how it works it's it's it's refinement
very often in fact this will
that we crashed in our being at one
phase of our life become the obstacles
of another phase that's so common that
it's the it's the bread and butter of
the therapeutic practice in a way right
you figure out solutions to problems and
then later you have to dismantle them
except they don't want to be dismantled
and maybe you don't want to dismantle
them but they're the things causing you
the problem it's like fixation and an
insight problem you know you figured out
how to connect the dots as a kid and now
you can't solve the nine dot you know so
so and that's a feature partly I think
of what you're talking about
you know John for Venky his close friend
and colleague you know and collaborator
of mine you know when he talks about
cognitive science as a discipline he
talks about it as being an
interdisciplinary work which is existing
at the intersection of a bunch of
cognate disciplines philosophy and
psychology and mathematics and
anthropology and computer science and
artificial intelligence and right which
you know it draws all these things in
and it attempts to find a formula any
language that bridges those things and
he talks about sort of some visions of
cognitive science right and the weak
version right is generic nominalism the
cognitive sciences right so that just
means all of those things are under an
umbrella but they have nothing to add to
each other when talking about
understanding the mind and then he talks
about the middle ground in the middle
ground is oh bugger am I going to
remember what this is called I don't
remember the middle ground we'll come
back to that but it doesn't matter
because it doesn't stick around in
either decays into generic nominalism or
if it's lucky it bumps up a notch
that becomes synoptic integration so
what's then optic integration well you
can imagine a conference it's an
interfaith dialogue you know you get
some Buddhists and you get some
Christians and you have them start
talking like so what are you talking
about and maybe they'll just you know
talk over the lunch bar but never
discuss deep realities in which case
they're at this end and it's you know
never the twain shall meet or maybe they
have some interesting exchange and
insights but it doesn't current connect
and they walk away and right but maybe
what happens is that they connect so
deeply that they begin to form an
analogical metaphorical language
that's the bridge insights back and
forth and they start to turn into
something new
synoptic integration is the growth of
this syncretic synthetic thing that
emerges the possessive strengths known
abilities from the two things to
composed it and yet transcends them in
important respects that's a really
interesting way of thinking about
bringing together disparate fields and
cognitive sciences one of the most
interdisciplinary things out there
that's what that's one of the reasons I
love it
so you talk about anything and every
discipline thinks it's the master
discipline but cognitive science it's
the master disk unless the master
discipline this alchemy but also as I
argued recently cognitive science is
Alchemy's yes oh but here's a thing
that's all very abstract and it's hard
to grasp so here's something that's
easier to grasp but that I often use the
trick to getting this communication and
symbolic exchange and all this cultural
material and fun are ways forward is a
good house party and I mean that a non
glib way think about what it takes to
throw a good house party you can throw a
house party and it can decay into
generic to nominalism your one group of
friends are over there dominating the
kitchen they've got the right the other
there's enough
there's another group out here about
stereo and they're not interacting at
each other and the point of a good house
party of course is to bring together
often to curate some disparate social
streams of your friends and right or you
might get a few meaningful jokes and
maybe two of your friends to home with
each other and you didn't expect that
and you get some good conversations or
whatever but then the groups fall back
and you interact with them but then
there's the house party where you
succeed in setting the groundwork for
any kind of group of friends new friend
start to talk excitedly and aware that
were in a way where they realize what
the mutual contributions that they have
right those are the kinds of house
parties where you walk out and say that
was one for the ages right
does everybody you can't let the energy
go everybody stays up till 6 a.m. and
the last two people you know you get
like I don't know you know a lawyer and
a monk nursing a bottle of bourbon at
the end of the night while everybody
else sleeps in the floor and that's how
you know right everybody walks out the
next morning there is the magic below
and you all know something has been
created there's been this right and so
many things that occur in the fringe and
the social experimental realm seek to
create those conditions I mean you know
that's Burning Man in a nutshell right
Burning Man in the temporary autonomous
zone and hacking Bay or all this
attempts to create the conditions
whereby we remove ourselves from the
conventions of reality and social
consensus long enough that we can have
one of these shared collective
interchanges right now if you ask me
the xotic ism of being out in the desert
and not having enough water and in the
commercial interests and whatever like
it got decayed think about things that
happen I've never been to Burning Man I
should add I keep getting invited but I
write a novel over Labor Day weekend
every year and so I can never go I guess
they don't have it this year or I
haven't looked think about the the
original idea before it was 30,000
people out on the playa and the original
idea is like a highly ritual action it's
a space and a time that are apart from
space and time it's a desert which is a
traditional space that you go into to
confront the deeper and legal realities
it's not conventionally life-sustaining
it's hard to deal with it's empty for
the West particularly the God of the
book is the god of the desert and the
three great monotheistic religions are
religions in the book the desert
religions
if you've ever been in the deep desert I
imagine you have or right because you
really there's a giant desert right in
the middle of your continent you should
get in there
you