[Music]
hello you found the portal
I'm your host Eric Weinstein and today
we're here with a fabulous author who
many of you will know Bret Easton Ellis
famous from less than zero in American
Psycho and now the book white welcome
thank you for having me Eric so I don't
know exactly how to approach this but
one of the one of the frames that I have
is that we're sitting here in a very
unusual city that many people don't
understand how important it is and what
makes it so unusual and one way I might
frame that is that because Los Angeles
is the home of the entertainment
industry there's a weird way in which
this is the only city in the world in
which I could make the argument that
everyone some somehow partially lives
here whether they know it or not they've
consumed the street scenes which are
used as backdrops for movies and TV and
they have an idea of what the ethos of
the place is which sort of seeps into
the screenwriters mindsets no matter who
they are and in any way that la is
different it does broadcast itself to
the world does that resonate with you
and can you add anything well I think it
it maybe resonated that way for me maybe
10 or 15 years ago a lot more I think
the entertainment industry is not
centralized just to Los Angeles anymore
or at least that's the way we look at
entertainment it seems to be this kind
of global thing and not wholly
concentrated in Los Angeles where it
used to be though now you might have to
say that it is because Disney is the
entertainment business Disney now owns
everything that's the conglomerate that
is going to produce an inordinately it
actually has come back here and is
centered here but you know it's strange
there are some the the entertainment
business or the notion of the
entertainment business is now this
global thing whether
it's China whether it's India has a
massive has the biggest entertainment
complex in the world the the
highest-grossing movies I mean the
biggest you know utter but that's a
different the consumer base for
Bollywood when he's very different so if
you're in Indonesia for example or if
you're in East Africa you'd be much more
likely to run into somebody I mean
famously Raj Kapoor and you know some of
his songs are known to by all Russians
right but that hasn't had the same
impact I think I mean I think you could
take the biggest films like a Sholay and
people in the US have never even heard
of they haven't that's correct but I
think it's because la has been so
central in our minds to the
entertainment business since its
inception I guess in the 20s or before
that that we that's where all of our
associations are they're all but only
think about the movie industry when we
think about the entertainment industry
that it's just been around for so long
that we always think that la we can
activate that with that and I also think
that it's um it has a lot to do with the
way la looks as a kind of parrot
paradise a kind of identic eden-like
location and of course we've seen so
much of it in so much of of the content
we've consumed over the years we've seen
it's roads we've seen as Hill sighs
we've seen its beaches we've seen its
deserts that I that that might be one
reason why we're we connect LA with the
business of entertainment well I mean I
think just to riff off what you're
saying if I just thought about street
names you know why is it that Mulholland
shows up in Tom Petty's free fallin or
is the title of a famous David Lynch
film you know Sunset Boulevard all of
these streets you know only New York
might have in some sense as iconic
street names which are sort of projected
out through the industry
so that's one indicator to me that you
know if I thought about the streets
houston I have no idea what the name of
important streets in Houston might be no
nor do i yeah I mean well look so much
of the talent that creates this content
of course lives here and they reference
everything about the place in their work
and you know look I have to say as
someone who grew up out here and someone
who has written about this in about
three of my novels were holy holy set in
Los Angeles it is the most creatively
suggestive place that I've ever lived
and I've lived in New York and I've
lived in Vermont and I've lived in
Virginia and I spent a long time in
England and in Paris nothing really
compares to Los Angeles in terms of how
was activated my mind and made me want
to write and I still feel that way I've
always felt that way since I was a
teenager there's a sense of
possibilities and a sense of freedom
here because of the constant mobility
and especially the freedom I associated
with being a young person in LA and
having access if I wanted to to be at
the beach and then an hour later via the
mountains and maybe an hour and a half
late or be at the desert that this whole
thing was so available to me and I had
the mobility to get to all these places
and that activated a kind of freedom in
my mind that's not wasn't only physical
but it was also creative and it's very
hard to explain that to people I mean um
when I talked to writers that I knew who
grew up in New York or grew up in the
suburbs I don't know if they really can
access that and I I think about that
alone it seems to me that in some how in
some ways that huge number of different
environments really defines the place
and because la doesn't have in what I
consider to be a good general
description in the world we don't think
about it the way we think about Paris
for example or you know even knew you
work people very often don't realize
that this is like you know the home in
part of the rand corporation or that
there's an oil field that partially
defines the city it's not a very easy to
understand place and I thought that in
part you know just as you're talking
about the natural environments of Los
Angeles also the ability to go back and
forth between Skid Row and Sunset Strip
and to see the sort of ways in which the
you know the illusion of the Hollywood
Hills and the dark underbelly make this
place just far more generative and you
know dark it's one of these places that
that fits the description a sunny place
for shady people well that's what I
thought about a lot when I was growing
up out here in the 70s and particularly
in the early 80s when for example Venice
is a is a good place to start
I mean Venice in the 70s was a slum dark
very dark place you didn't go to Venice
after night you didn't go to Venice
during the day but I remember they
started opening a few restaurants there
there were few art galleries
I remember 72 Market Street was one of
the first very first restaurants a very
upscale kind of piano bar restaurant in
a kind of derelict alley and there was
something kind of very Los Angeles about
that very thrilling right off the beach
and and a Los Angeles really does have
the kind of imagination that allows that
to open there and then flourish into
other restaurants began opening I
remember Wolfgang Puck open xinhua on on
I think Main Street and then everything
kind of started to flower out of that
but that was not unusual because I
remember a lot of times there would be
especially as a club kid and going into
a lot of clubs you go to these really
cool chic clubs in the sleaziest parts
of downtown in the lower lower reaches
of Wilshire Boulevard
and there was just something kind of
fabulous about an environment that
allowed all of this to kind of coexist
and you know Melrose for example was a
place a strip that I spent a lot of my
adolescence on and there were very
high-end stores next to you know
discount clothing stores next to vintage
sunglasses stores next to the seediest
bar imaginable and the fact that all of
this could coexist as really thrilling
to me and you know it just didn't exist
anywhere else that I've lived in the
world and it's something that I still
appreciate about the city though of
course la I think like all places now to
a degree and I don't want to grossly
generalize about it
but you know we're sitting here in
Hollywood basically in a newish
high-rise and all around us is massive
construction yeah they're high-rises
going up all around going all around
Cole right by the ArcLight Theatre here
and Sunset Boulevard the Sunset
Boulevard from my childhood is kind of
gone and has become a corridor not
unlike some of the canyons of Manhattan
and not unlike the Wilshire corridor in
a lot of ways there is massive expansion
and massive building here and also done
on that on that kind of global style
free zone that is so popular wherever
you go now around the world where you'll
I mean I know they just redid on well a
few years ago they redid the bel-air
hotels restaurant and bar which was one
of the more fabulous enclaves here
very mysterious you'd walk through a
forest over a pond I guess they were
ducks or geese swans they were swans and
then you'd enter into this mysterious
dark dark bar from out of the 30s and a
very kind of charming conservative
dining room very very old-school and
when they read
when they did the resign redesign it
basically looked like any Airport
restaurant in Finland or in in London or
wherever it just something's happening
and as someone who tours a lot I see it
all over the place it's kind of global
style right taking over and the and the
restaurant the bar the Bel Air now
resemble pretty much everywhere else as
does if we're talking about is Spago in
Beverly Hills was Wolfgang Puck recently
felt he had to redesign in the same
anonymous global style you know kind of
already black-and-white photographs
these futuristic like tiki torches I
don't know
so the LA that I think you and I are
referencing and that you can still find
a pockets around here is like everywhere
else it seems kind of fading into the
new generic global style in a way I sort
of agree with this however I've been
coming here visiting in hotels and there
are ways in which the old weirdness of
LA keeps sort of you know like like the
rose in Spanish Harlem popping through
the concrete's that sort of dark
underbelly
does Rick her so I was just for example
at this is it the Saddleback ranch which
has a mechanical bull on Sunset Strip
right and I was at a table and a lovely
looking young woman says you know do you
mind if I sit down that sort of thought
that was odd he's eating alone she's
like really quite complimentary very
friendly I just turned her when I said
it are are you a working girl and she
says yes how would you like to go back
to the to you know a hotel and I said
why are you doing this and she turned to
me and she said well I just got my real
estate license but unfortunately this
month is a little slow and I just
thought well that's a conversation
that's not so easy to have anywhere in
the world
no it's not and it reminds me a lot of
Hollywood and it reminds me a lot of a
lot of actors that I met out here when I
was casting a couple of big projects
yeah that is very much an LA thing this
sort of gay for pay hookup culture right
that is big among actors out here in
terms of they you know the bartending
gig didn't work out they're auditioning
tomorrow they you know they really need
some cash and yeah LA operates but Elia
is always operated that way I wrote a
novel about in less than zero there is
ways that kids can make pay back they're
drug dealers and one of them is
prostituting themselves and I had heard
stories when I was at Buckley about a
couple of brothers I knew who if not
exactly having sex with older men were
you know a little TZ maybe they strip
maybe they'd put on a little bit of a
show not necessarily have sex would but
there's always been this Gunray area
between sex money well also harass
classless and this you know also I was
talking to a very big mogul huge mobile
and I was in a conversation at cocktail
party and someone asked me where do you
think the best-looking people are and I
said well I think I was thinking Italy
is Sweden and in this mogul who's over
listening said uh-uh
it's la Los Angeles this person's very
intelligent has very good taste insanely
wealthy and I thought about it and I now
believe that's true so this intersection
of money sex whoring is it almost feels
like an inevitable thing and I've
written about this twice and I and I'm
just kind of realizing this now or
remembering this right now in this
moment not that I you know I don't think
about this all the time is that both of
the narratives of my to la novels less
than zero and then
25 years later I wrote a sequel to
uphold Imperial bedrooms where we kind
of figure out where everyone's landed
after they were 18
both center around the census the
central metaphor of prostitution in a
way and that and beauty and money and
that these were the things that seemed
so suggested to me about la I don't know
means what it ties back into the
entertainment industry it ties back into
exploitation right and exploiting beauty
and youth and a certain kind of
handsomeness if you're a man and a
certain kind of beauty if you're a woman
and that also being for so many people
they're their calling card it's what
they really depend on I remember talking
to a very good-looking actor and someone
that made a joke about oh it's not gonna
be fun to see you get old and just in
this bro agent and he was devastated
absolutely devastated completely and
that um I don't know that kind of
mentality really becomes the emotional
basis for the town in so many ways so
it's not it's not strange that that
happens because there is that that
intersection of you know Beauty money
exploitation is just you know it lends
itself it lends itself to noir right
well this is this is this is the thing
it LA really does in some sense live its
Noir at a level that would be fictional
somewhere else I mean I think about so
there's this very strange coincidence
that you and I came from essentially the
exact same milieu we both graduated high
school in 1982 yes we were both at in
the same sort of private school milieu I
believe that we knew people in common
although I've forgotten who they who
they might be and I very much had the
sense that when less than zero debuted
that you had privatized my childhood and
the
it was this it was this period which if
somebody hadn't written about it would
never be believed and it
the reason I'm trying to get at this I
guess is that I think it had an
importance that we didn't understand
while we were living through it so I
wanted to try some theories with you
because I think that you are in some
sense the poet laureate of whatever this
firmament was which is sort of Los
Angeles gen-x and then I'll tie it back
if if if successful to to what I think
it's significance is for us now because
I don't
I think it's underrated as a sort of a
point of departure with the past so I
guess what my theory is
is that if you look out at this backdrop
behind behind us imagine a neutron bomb
went off which was the divorce bomb and
it started with no-fault divorce in 1970
with Ronald Reagan who himself was
divorced signing this thing into law and
if you look at a graph of like divorce
rates per you know whatever a thousand
women it's got this weird sort of it's
declining declining declining and it
just skyrockets for the entire 1970s
before it starts going to decline again
and we lived through this yes and while
I'm asking do you remember that suddenly
like everybody's parents were on the
rocks that suddenly the parents
disappeared that there were like
children supposedly of privilege roaming
the streets and that it was really dark
ie well that's a lot am i sir ever no no
certainly remember a lot of divorces
becoming much more aware of them as I
entered into junior high school my
parents marriage was very strained and
by the time I was fifteen and I realized
that they were going to split my sisters
and I were however relieved because
there was so much tension in the house
caused by numerous things my including
my father's
call ISM so that was the divorce wasn't
the problem the marriage was the problem
okay so that was so I the the darkness
and I have to say as a teenager I wished
that I had and I did to a degree enjoy
the smell you much more than I did but I
was an alienated kid and I was haunted
one of the reasons I was so alienated
was I was gay which was even living in
liberal Los Angeles in 1980-81 even when
it seemed gayness was in the culture and
announcing itself in specific ways with
whether it was David Bowie or prints or
American Gigolo or Calvin Klein
advertisements you still worn out as a
teenager and so that alienates you and
you begin to see the world in a slightly
darker place or I think you begin to see
the world as it really is you see
through the facade of it you see through
kind of the poses everyone is making in
order to get through and you really see
the lie of high school in so many ways
when you're gay
and you're standing on the sidelines and
no song is about you and no movie is
about you and you have to kind of
reprocess everything so that was a bit
of the darkness of my la experience
divorce sure but um I think that for me
it was it was a being gay and being a
writer I didn't know anyone else that
was writing a novel I'd have written one
already when I was 13 or 14 and those
two things really did separate me from
the rest of the crowd it's not to say
that I didn't participate I went to
parties I even had a girlfriend I went
to the beach
I had my group of close male friends I
danced at parties when they were at what
point always six six seven yeah and it
was nothing that ever I ever agonized
over it was something I just kind of
accept it and said okay this is another
thing that I've got to deal with how am
I going to navigate through this and it
really was never something that tortured
me or I felt I had to
like tell other people or come at
anybody so I had a very even keel
acceptance of that but it does separate
you you are only four percent of the
population there isn't a large pool of
you know of other people like that so
that was that was my burden in a way but
um and I also did there there was a kind
of darkness in LA in the late 70s and
into the early 80s I felt it I saw it in
music I saw it as a kind of it was
minimalism and it was a kind of numbness
that was being explored in a lot of the
art and a lot of the music certainly in
part of the punk scene and in the new
wave scene but it was a numbness that
had a feeling as well it was numbness as
I mean this is beautiful and I
completely that to me was what
influenced less than zero this notion
that numbness was a feeling and that
numbness was something that you could
enter into and and play with and try to
express in some ways and that was where
I was at in my late teenage years in LA
that was what was on my mind all the
time and that's what influenced the
style and the tone of less than zero if
that makes any sense well this is the
weird thing about it
I've never heard anyone say this
numbness is home to me like there is a
weird way I found myself driving the
Ventura Freeway after college and I had
gone to some party that hadn't quite
worked out and was unclear what the
address was and whether somebody's was
squatting in somebody else's it like had
all of these weird characteristics and
the emptiness just washed over me and I
think Tom Petty was playing on the radio
and I just felt I'm totally numb
I'm completely alienated and I feel
completely home that is what I felt but
I do think that might be
very specific to our generation so that
that's I think our generation is weirdly
the key to a lot of what we see going on
in general but because our generation is
also invisible and because this place
had very different characteristics I do
see it that there's a little bit you
know the the portal theme here has to do
with trying to figure out how do we get
out of all of these mysteries that were
trapped within and culturally in in part
my belief is that la pushed our a lot of
this kind of nihilism to the world it
couldn't easily travel and so you were
talking about music before I remember
being very cued into this band X Y s and
X I thought was going to be huge I was
at a huge mistake on my part
on mine too and how could it not be they
were witty they had these weird
harmonies I think that happened in
fourths between John Doe and xzen Billy
zoom Billy zoom was et a bone virus well
the the drummer yeah but they get so do
you remember the song their big hit
regionally was the song Johnny hit and
run Paulene or set him off the Los
Angeles LP right now this song do you
remember the lick the lyrics of how it
goes um vaguely you got a rubato sterile
hypo right shoot a sex machine drugs
about serial rape he's got a rape 24
women in 24 hours and the last one
wouldn't cooperate
this thing is so off it's so dark it's
so completely wrong and it felt normal
for Los Angeles at the time yeah and it
was like this massive miscalculation
that first of all no fault divorce
hadn't happened nationwide like in New
York it doesn't happen until I really
late right and so there was something
about this period that was highly
regional but also was being broadcast
everywhere even in kind of cryptic ways
and I think that your book probably less
than zero probably looked kind of like
mildly weirdly exaggerated to the
outside world I don't think it was that
exaggerated well look certainly there
were things in it that I wanted to do as
a writer I certainly did not see a
twelve-year-old girl get gang-raped
which happens near the end of the book
and where its treated as just as natural
as stubbing your toe or something to
come across something like that and
isn't there's something about where
people are hanging out with a corpse
I mean well now that was based on
something that I had heard you're
kidding me there there and there was a
story going around that there had been
this person who would od'd in an alley
mm-hmm I think somewhere along Melrose
this rumor went around in 1981-82 and
that kids just were brought to see the
body of another kid and people had heard
about it and someone would beat someone
up at a party because of course remember
there was no cell phones then and then
people would come over find the space
and just gawk at this dead body and that
is a scene in less than zero but um
overall I really did try to make it seem
as realistic as possible and almost as
if it was journalism almost as if it was
reportage that clay of the narrator of
the book was really describing the world
he was a part of but not necessarily
describing what his emotions were and
all of the things he was feeling during
that time you understood that he was
very detached and alienated because he
never talked about himself and he just
described what his friends would say he
just just read what he would see what he
would be seen and I think part of why
the book works for people is that this
voice never varies as the book gets
darker and more violent and nightmarish
in a way and so they're you know I guess
that's what I was aiming for when I was
writing it to find that kind of
accumulation of power by resisting
hyperbole and then describing everything
in a very
flat minimal way and of course writers
in the past had done this but
transposing that into a contemporary
teenager living in a big city was
something that I hadn't seen before
teenagers in who were narrating novels
were usually very emotional look going
back to the few that there were whether
you were going to Judy Blume or whether
you going back to the granddaddy of them
all the Catcher in the Rye
I wanted to do kind of the anti catch
her the Ryan that way but I think I
drifted away from your question which
was kind of about I mean first of all
getting back to X they were a part of
the reason that they didn't fully work
as a band was that they didn't have hits
they kept each subsequent studio album
from Los Angeles - I guess what dealt
toys yeah - under the big black Sun
right and then I think it was the ain't
love grand was their stab at MTV kind of
a commercial relative the story then
after under the big black so yeah I
thought that was my favorite of the
three records that had been even more so
than Los Angeles I there's the you see
that the songwriting was kind of moving
away from the really kind of rough speed
rock of Los Angeles and entering into a
kind of more thoughtful kind of
songwriting but for for whatever reason
they never really broke and I think I
think that they were a huge influence on
less than zero one of the epic raps in
less than zero is from X so I was
obviously thinking about them but I was
also thinking about Led Zeppelin because
Led Zeppelin is also the other epigraph
in less than 0 but exaggerated I don't
know look as I said to you earlier I
really ran with that story I heard and I
also knew parts of from a couple of boys
who were living on their own actually in
Beverly Hills
were not staying out of Malibu with
their divorce dad couldn't deal with
them and they've got an apartment in
town a 17 year olds or the father had
rented it for them and I often wondered
how they had such nice clothes how they
were able to go to this place or that
place and it was interesting because I
look at that they knew a guy named Ronny
Love Levine who was murdered by Johan of
the billionaires boys club is at Levine
eleven Robert loves Levin right run 11
this I should know this this was my high
school and so I got to know Ron Levin
through these kids we're all 16 and I
remember this just goes to show an idea
of what my adolescence was like we would
congregate because we all had cars at
Ron Levin's and have drinks in wrong
Levin's living room and then Ron Levin
would pour us all into his convertible
rolls-royce and we would all he would
drive us two flippers which was a roller
rink kind of bar disco that's on the
corner of La Cienega and Santa Monica
Boulevard that is now a CVS we were and
by the way this is a weeknight this is a
school night and so we would go with Ron
to his booth Ron must have been I guess
48 47 maybe and he was gay very
definitely gay and he would have six 16
year old boys sitting with him at a
booth flippers was all ages by the way
there were a couple of clubs around town
there were all ages he didn't need to be
18 to get into somebody it was just a
short stop it I left this town when I
was 16 and when I think about all of the
stories that I had in clubs and bars
they have to be 16 and earlier and it
doesn't make any sense to me um look I
guess the drinking age was 18 in LA it
didn't move to 21 until I think the
mid-80s it was always look I got into it
when I was 16 in LA I got in everywhere
I got into bars I was it ordered drinks
I could get into the whisky on a
weeknight
I never and all my friends did - I never
remember having any problems with
getting carted or anything anything
along those lines right like somebody
would always know somebody the place was
totally fluid and that the route I mean
I want you to keep story sorry there's
nothing else about the lovin story it's
just it gives you an idea and maybe
there was a little cocaine involved but
that just gives you and that looked most
of the 1980-1981
that kind of just gives you an idea and
all and all nobody was damaged none of
us were triggered none of us thought we
had to go to the police
none of everyone just felt tip okay but
true but how many funerals did you go to
back in the day I have to tell you I
don't know I didn't go to anything I
didn't I mean look I mean compared to
now in terms or emergency rooms I mean
maybe funerals wasn't that much but they
were all they were this was not cheap it
wasn't that everybody was fine at the
end of it no but I do think
comparatively there was a kind of Gen X
resiliency that's and strength which is
what I want to get to okay but I do I
think there is and I think that we were
not wimps
let's just put it that way you know I
sure I knew people you know you have to
understand drug problems they I we
didn't really know what that was in 1981
or 82 I didn't have friends who had
outsized drug problems and I really
never heard of rehab well people were
doing amazing quantities of drugs and
then going off to Yale and Princeton and
stand for us or UCLA
what a lot of them went but um you know
the notion that no one believed you
could get addicted to cocaine from 1982
no one really believed that look I don't
know if I forgot anyone who's been
addicted to cocaine either but back in
high school
look the other thing that I had got to
say is that and by the way the 11
stories finished that's I just wonder if
nothing else well Elton what happened
Ron Levin
murdered by johan which isn't a whole
other story but but we I don't want to
lead over that we've just had what
Quentin Tarantino released once upon a
time in Hollywood it's the story leading
up to the Manson murders where with an
alternate ending yes and I guess for me
I was thinking back to this very I don't
know whether Joan Didion's writings move
you but they've moved me a great deal
she was perhaps the biggest influence on
lesson zero am i writing okay so when I
read I think it's the white album where
she's talking about how the the the
sixties ends spiritually with the
murders on Cielo Drive and you know she
writes with this just exquisite prose
and it's so it's so
perfect for this within a city that
thinks about earthquakes and and Canyon
fires she says you know that the rumors
spread like wild fires and in the
Hollywood Hills or something like this
is just dripping with this gorgeous
analogy and I thought about that and
then I thought about how how that gives
way to the 70s and the 70s is this
period it's like the Golden Age of
serial killers yes and then you you end
up with like this very weird concept of
privilege which is one of the reasons
that the Millennials concept of
privilege absolutely doesn't work for me
where you have like these very
privileged schools and you have a
murderous Club of investors who somehow
the kids are just not happy with their
station in life and you know there are
these schemes may be to kill parents and
you know you get the Menendez brothers
and I get the feeling that her feeling
is that things ended with the murders on
Cielo Drive and our story like just
getting started in some weird way that
60s versus the 70s is a big shift
because the 60s had this horror and
idealism fused together yes and the 70s
that the sort of the idealism just drops
out but the horror keeps going yes
I think you said something about that's
very interesting about living here maybe
you didn't say it maybe I'm taking what
you said and Moses unless about how I
think me and my peers were very aware
that we were living in a in a particular
time that was a kind of movie and that
was youth culture of the early 80s
really seemed to be centered in LA you
saw it in all of the movies from Fast
Times to valley girl to the music that
was being made to the go-go's being
thrown out there there there was this
sense that we were at the red-hot center
of youth culture in Los Angeles in say
1982 certainly look let's do some echo
of like Jim Carroll and the opposite
coast yeah I guess so but there was
something more interestingly
contradicting about Los Angeles or
something you know the darkness and the
beach and whatever I mean it was this
young yang thing and so um very being
very aware of that of course adds I
don't know a kind of artificiality about
the way you interacted with people and
the way behave now I'm saying this not
on a completely literal level I'm saying
this just an overall sense of a costume
your car the decor of a nightclub that
you would walk into and be very aware
that you know this was the place just
the staging is this really goes back to
what you first talked about LA as this
stage it's movie sets Sunset Boulevard
cruising around Mulholland Drive going
up to mom to get high the beach the
beach such a huge part of Southern
California childhood but that's also not
to say and to move it out for a little
bit but you said this about the East
Coast
I felt that time for the East Coast
wasn't necessarily the late 70s complete
I think it comes in wolf for me I felt I
was never more in a movie than I was
during the
yuppie years of the late 80s in New York
right before the crash 1987 and that to
me and even afterwards the crash didn't
really change or alter the way New York
operated but 87 88 89 Manhattan to me
was something as evocative as the
Roaring Twenties or the swinging 60s of
London you are very aware when was
Gordon Gekko 87 okay so you're moving
with the party you see from my
trajectory was I I'm in the same
firmament with you in Los Angeles then I
go to college on the East Coast and
suddenly it occurs to me that the East
Coast has not gone through this they are
having right people are getting drunk on
cold duck for the first time and I'm
thinking that's so cute right because
drunk and cold duck in ninth grade but
anyway I mean I mean that yeah I mean I
wasn't conscious of wanting to chase the
scene but I don't know how you felt but
I felt growing up here which really now
in retrospect was kind of glorious
growing up as a teenager here in LA is
like fantastic is the worst thing ever
this is so interesting for a writer's
you're able to do so well look I wrote
less than zero
would ya is a complete note that was it
kind of yes but there there is also I
mean I gotta tell you Eric that so many
people who read less than zero so many
kids loved it because they wanted to
move here it won't be part of that
that's a weird thing they thought it was
so it was cool and it wasn't supposed to
be in some weird way would but be when
you have death and sex and money people
react and respond medically even if it's
the most unhealthy
well best here the late 70s here we are
and they'll in the late 70s and into the
early 80s but um I
I've locked completely lost my train of
thought we were talking about oh yes
I mean lesson zero was dark there was
darkness around my the years that led up
to me riding it
but I also when I was living here I know
what I wanted to say but it had to do
with the fact that in so many ways I
feel that we were lucky to grow up out
here yes it had its disadvantages and
its darkness but looking back I mean
there there were things about it that I
loved and maybe I loved them at 17 and
18 and you missed those two years of the
massive freedom that one would have we
weren't living out here in 1718 where
you graduated at 16 and then you went
off or did you stay here no no I was I
was I I was 16 turned 17 in Philadelphia
okay and then I was in Boston and what I
found was that I mean just to be to be
honest about it I I've stayed away from
the city really for 37 years because I
just thought it was the blackest darkest
most seductive hellhole which it is
which is which it is and it can be and
it was generative I mean it so that that
notion of repulsion and fascination and
home and total alienation it's been
impossible to talk about because it's
all these things that usually come
bundled you know like home and support
and and meaning and that bundling didn't
happen and what I start you know if I
think about the title of this film that
you probably remember the decline of
Western civilization about like Darby
crash and the cramps and the germs all
that kind of stuff that seemed like
overblown and in many ways I actually
think well whatever the thing is that is
unraveling the American tapestry was
really present and visible early here
and that and we're I'm going to try to
get to and see if you're willing if
you're if you're not that's fine too one
of the things that people may know me
for is coining this phrase or pushing it
out the intellectual dark web which
people don't I've never heard with all
the commentary and almost all the
commentary on the on the IDW is bad
commentary because it's the commentary
at trying to figure
who are these people without union cards
and why are they commenting on the world
so they're always trying to figure out
some way of getting rid of this thing it
was very much two things it's an L a
phenomena to an extent that nobody has
understood and it's a Gen X phenomenon
to an extent because Gen X is invisible
to both boomers and Millennials
Millennials think that Gen X is the
boomer they did they didn't and the idea
that there is this in-between generation
that's not large enough to chant things
and devote things into reality but is
extremely generative very robust and has
this completely I don't know how to say
it you couldn't pick two more different
circumstances
Etan Patz gets kidnapped in New York I
guess in 1979 and the milk carton kids
start up and suddenly almost overnight
all the kids who were used to playing in
the streets with no adults in sight are
brought indoors and things really change
and somehow the Millennials are brought
up in that world where as as far as I
can remember I play back so many scenes
from the 70s and I can't see grown-ups
the moms in particular apps and maybe
the dads have been apps in a long time
yeah but like the mobs are somewhere
else but where were they because I would
say most of my friends Mother's didn't
work so where were they were they up in
their bedrooms were they out having
lunch with their friends yeah well do
you remember I mean I remember some moms
but sometimes mom was getting high with
the kids I remember that was a
particular mom there were moms who were
looking for mr. Goodbar you know moms
were trying to find some
self-actualization and that the women's
movement promised maybe there's some new
thing to do but everybody was hard
having a hard time finding what that was
right I think getting back to one thing
you said before we move on to that is
that the real darkness for me had to do
with the Manson Family and the Manson
Family haunted my childhood and my
adolescence and still haunts my notion
of Los Angeles
so if I had to choose something that I
fixated on and honestly became obsessed
by were the tate-labianca murders and
the Manson Family and that book that
Vincent Bugliosi wrote about the case of
helter skelter was kind of like a
strange Bible for me and it became a
kind of a dark touchstone yes there
there I still saw and I was still in a
group of people who were trying to have
fun and when I was in adolescence in LA
and especially when we were free with
our cars and basically free from our
parents and had that kind of sense of I
don't know ascendancy or being able to
go anywhere we we wanted to it erased
some of the darkness I mean I I there
there was a lot of opportunity to have
fun out here but I also have to say and
this I think connects more with what in
a way what your trajectory was I want to
get out mmm
I did not want to stay here oh so you
okay I wanted to get out and I knew at
14 I wanted to get out and I had to wait
for the plan to happen because when I
was 18 boom I was gonna go as far away
from here as possible I did ultimately
feel I think what you felt I felt like
beneath the facade of beautiful
teenagers and you know lovely setting
and nice houses that there was a
darkness that was encroaching upon
everything and it really did notice it
much more strongly after I'd left for a
year and I came back Ashley Ashley left
for five or six months and came back
after I went to college for my first
term but that was always the plan and I
remember seeing so many movies that took
place in New York even if they were dark
as hell I wanted to go there and I
remember seeing Woody Allen's Manhattan
for example and that's where I'm going
to be I'm going to be in that world I
mean now that world nauseates me
but at the time I was 14 or 15
that was the goal and I was going to go
to college back east and then I was
going to move to New York all of my
friends stayed out here all of my
friends were going to get into the film
business because that's what la is I
mean in a certain if you live in a
certain area of LA it is a company town
and you end up you know working for the
company which is the entertainment
complex and that is what happened my
four closest male friends all got into
the business really and that was what I
was supposed to be doing too because we
were all making movies and writing
scripts when were teenagers and all of
our fathers mine accepted were somehow
involved in the industry and that was
going to be the next move and it just I
was writing novels and I was working on
less than zero when I was 17 18 16 17 18
and I knew I had to go I don't know if
you must have felt that to some degree
in order to I mean I don't know if the
escape was your choice but the escape
from LA was certainly mine I only
applied to colleges back east and and so
and so I knew senior year that this was
going to be over at a certain point and
that summer of 82 I just could not wait
forward to well that's the Running Room
I mean that we we were we were living
through a something that I think hasn't
been understood or digested in terms of
its importance and I think that if you
think about well it's being resisted
because I talk about it all the time
yeah and it's being resisted people
don't want to believe that this happened
and that we were we're okay they won't
contradicts it contradicts what I've
called the gated institutional narrative
that there is this thing where the New
York Times is talking to the political
parties is talking to the universities
and they've settled on this thing that's
completely wrong it's a narrative it's a
narrative and the narrative has been
cracking and we have this funny thing
which I heard you talking about being an
anti anti Trumper where the idea is that
you have Trump and the Trump
yeah then you have the anti-trump errs
who are the people who are completely
deranged by any mention of Trump
whatever he said my was partner my
boyfriend yeah your boy failure is a
millennial he's a millennial any as he
is he has had Trump derangement syndrome
since the election and yet Eric he is
losing that and he is just simply
becoming an anti Trump well because
because well no sir I don't think that
that's fair sir
my belief is that if you were an anti
anti Trump er I am an anti anti anti
Trump er that is I against Trump right
but mere mention of his name doesn't
send me into paroxysms I don't write I'm
not apoplectic with rage when he said
something that's been carefully
constructed to set everybody off who
carries certain behavior pattern right
and so what my belief is is that I'm
going through a very private weird
little mini hell in which I
intellectually can't stand the guy but I
understand him very well yeah I
understand why it works I've predicted
this in some weird way I wrote an essay
on kayfabe I don't know if you I do yes
yeah that that you were one of the
people actually suggested he could win
it was that you yep why okay I just had
two more Quran on the program yes sir
press release positive I thought
everyone was lying about their feelings
about Trump when they were asked about
it public well because you you needed it
you needed to say how horrible he was if
you were part of the institutional
milieu or if you needed to keep a job
and make sure that you weren't on the
wrong side of your clients and what what
has been go what I find very frustrating
I mean you have to appreciate the
mainstream has no positive interest in
this show me or anything that my group
is doing whatsoever right yeah and it's
it's not just I mean it it's the fact
that we have this very negative
view of CNN and NPR not what they're
supposedly standing for right right so
this in this narrative you know I guess
what my take on it is is that the
dominant I don't even know how to say
idealism of a time is usually a false
narrative that's hiding how people can
make money during that period right
right we are the world all right is a
portrayal of concern about Africa the
poor in Asia what can we do to uplift
the people but really it was a story
about if we don't break our bonds to our
fellow countrymen if we don't make sure
that we can not have to take care of
Appalachia and the poor in the south and
the downtrodden in our inner cities
we're not gonna be able to make money
the way to make money is to move
operations overseas to keep your you
know your country with its headquarters
wherever its tax-advantaged that there
was some process by which globalization
was the betrayal of your countrymen
right and that thing was portrayed as
the Davos idealism yeah and the Davos
idealism is cratering yeah because it
was a wealth transfer program posing as
a philanthropic effort right and so the
reason that nobody wants the Clintons
nobody wants the Democratic Party nobody
wants the sanctimonious nonsense about
you know our thirst for justice and our
hatred of oppression is is that this is
a search for a constituency that's large
enough to get people elected who can
continue to keep people making money who
have been figuring out how to make money
and Trump the reason I'm anti Trump is
is that he's taking lots of ideas that
are actually originally wholesome and
he's giving them this shitty kind of
mean-spirited nasty spin like for
example there is nothing wrong with
restriction ISM whatsoever there's
nothing xenophobic about history
right the desire to want to keep a
border is not a xenophobic early
I completely agree okay so when he
tinges it with hints you know he's
playing around with something he knows
what the inference patterns of the left
are so we'll say something and the
levant will say oh my god you're really
saying that you know you think all
Mexicans are rapists and then the
Wrights fault is that pardon I mean
whose fault is that I mean that's the
lefts fault
from taking the bait or overreact no
it's not that they figured out a means
of keeping people in line whereas as you
start to explore something that will
stop the money-making that the transfer
of wealth from whoever it's like force
transfusion right the institutional left
I believe figures out how to transfuse
one group to supply blood to another and
what what the left is supposed to be is
something you know more wholesome and
more decent as you start to question the
transfusion mm-hm
you start to get this question like
surely you're not suggesting that we
should close our borders to the
downtrodden s'right and Trump is saying
yeah I'm not scared I'm not going to
you're not gonna back me off by just
saying that surely you weren't saying
you know that's a menacing tone and for
that many people love him because do you
remember the scene in Reservoir Dogs of
Tarantino where you've got I guess is it
Steve Buscemi and I can't remember the
other actor with a try figure who the
rat is and mr. blonde comes in and mr.
blonde is the psychopath who shot up the
jewelry store right and they can't
figure out who they can trust the only
person you can trust is the psychopath
because the psychopath isn't under
control
well Trump came through as mr. blonde
mm-hmm and the one person we know isn't
under institutional control is Donald
Trump because he would never say those
things okay so now we've got a new
paradigm where the only trustworthy
person is the least trustworthy person
which I've been trying to map this out
and the problem with it is you can't
wake people up because they're dying to
get back to the process of making money
by betraying their fellow countrymen
they really the globalization thing came
to an end there's no new idea about how
to make money right and the pyramid
schemes are collapsing right so what's
going to happen well that's what I'm
that's why you're on the portal sir
well look getting to that getting back
to what you said in terms of a threat
name of the book is about preference
versus public private truths public lies
right I knew a lot of these people I
wrote about them in white I write a
section of the book is about the mood in
Los Angeles in the months leading up to
the primaries and then to the election
and then after the election and it is a
cast of my usual entitled characters
even though this is a work of nonfiction
and many of these conversations play out
in the Polo Lounge or at Spago like they
do in my la novels with irate rich
people who cannot believe that things do
not go their way which is also something
that's less than zero and imperial
bedrooms so even though white is a
nonfiction chronicle of whatever a
certain kind of the arc of a gen Xer I
see it it starts out in the late 60s
early 70s with me as a child and then
I'm standing you know with my dick in my
hand in the summer of 2018 going I can't
say this I can't express myself this
words freedom of speech it just it seems
to be and I'm much more upset about it
than I'm alone in a boyfriend who's used
to rules he's used to all the rules that
have been this is maddening I can't live
like I know I can't live like this
either but anyway so I I knew these
people in Los Angeles
I knew the Obama Trump voter I knew many
of them who were making that jump so and
I just sense something different by
looking
at everything then my millennial
boyfriend did who was already you know
printing out his Hillary t-shirts and
you know can't couldn't wait for the
Haitians
no he's a permit work he's a Bernie he
was a Bernie guy Bernie Sanders guy and
he held his nose voting for Clinton but
anything but Trump because Trump drove
him insane and there was just no
way that Trump could be elected
president so that was all going to be um
but you know so I did know and I and I
write about this in white people said
don't tell anybody I'm going to vote for
Trump
don't tell anybody I'm voting for Trump
and so I wasn't completely surprised
when Trump won but in but what surprised
me and this ties into what you were
first asking what completely surprised
me for the next two years leading up to
now is how so many of my smart friends
became infected by Trump look look the
same or what do you mean by that and
well look all of our narratives we have
been forced to deal with Trump I talked
about this in an interview that I gave
with Washington Post where I even if you
don't want Trump in your life he's in
your life and you have to have an
opinion about him because everyone else
is talking about him either people
loathe into such a degree that you're
sucked into the conversation and I
believe it's the same with people who
love him and I just what was a huge
exhale what was that about no no I'm
with you I'm with you I want to write an
Eliza program I swear I could write a
small program that generates his tweets
like for example before Trump I had a
simple idea which is that if I wanted to
win in an election as a Republican all I
would have to do is to talk about the
nuclear family and every educated person
would say you mean nuclear not new
killer and then they'd lose it was like
an automated reaction that there was a
class thing that says
correct anyone who says nucular okay
well that's a pretty simple program yes
you win the correct pronunciation of the
word nuclear and you lose an election
because you're a dick
alright so Trump is going to hit this
thing over and over again it's a the
left is programmed to say certain things
to defend certain things and you know if
you have to make the point that there is
absolutely zero connection whatsoever
between Islam and terror there is no
connection whatsoever zero it's an
illusion okay somebody can hit that I
mean all day long every day
well I remember reading an issue of
dabiq put out by Isis where their point
was I think was called that they had an
article called why we hate you why we
fight you and they said you've
marginalized all the people in your
society who point out that there is an
aspect of fundamentalist jihadi Islam
that just hates you because you don't
believe in all of the way we do and
because that couldn't be said like they
couldn't be said I mean that's what I
there's what the break I okay well as a
general sit there there was once upon a
time a heuristic that said the best way
to have a multicultural society is is
that you have to have some load bearing
fictions like all religions are equally
problematic in all ways there's no way
that's true
Jane you know Jane's are not equally
problematic as Jews Jews are more
problematic than Jane's and I'm able to
say that because I'm Jewish
okay as a result those heuristics
hardened into dogmas because they were
necessary to keep our society operating
we have to believe at the moment that a
jury of 12 people knows how to convict
somebody based on guilt even though that
DNA evidence shows that that's not a
real rubric okay well I mean it's a
heuristic maybe it maybe it works some
of the time right okay so as these sort
of heuristics have been breaking down in
these
heuristics of the left are on top of the
ones that are necessary for civil
society they that the desire to maintain
this complex of ideas like trade is
always good no trade is not always good
for all people that's it's beyond
moronic right right but it's only
recently that you have economists like
Brad DeLong saying actually it's a so
you know what you're optimizing is a
social Darwin Darwinist function which
trade is good for you based on the cube
of your wealth
so the richer you are by the cube of
your wealth trade is good for you right
well Brad DeLong is also saying and why
are there's everybody complaining about
the trade deals we inked since they
helped people in Mexico as if like
American voters are gonna vote to help
Mexican peasants I means great if
Mexican peasants are helped but I just
don't see the lowest echelon of American
society having as their top priority
helping Mexicans with their vote I mean
none of this makes any effing sense but
then why aren't they deprogramming
themselves because they're what's not
going to move them forward say in the
new world order and that's the problem
with Trump Trump presented something
extremely new into the conversation and
the left can deal with it the media can
deal with it I always felt that if they
had kind of dealt with him in a neutral
way and just reported what he did
without all this hyperbole I don't know
if he would have won necessarily because
all of just smart honest people had to
be ejected from the institutional layer
terrifying well no no no it is your
universal expulsion yeah of people who
will not go along with the gated
institutional night my theory about this
if you haven't met it is that we grew
very quickly in a very stable way that
was totally anomalous post-world War two
to about 1972 and every single
institution that you see has an
expectation of that kind of growth
continuing and so what happened is is
that all of those institutions when they
went pathological they
became ponzi schemes and you needed to
have a group of people in that
institution who would not reveal the
Ponzi scheme and so effectively our
expert class has been selected for as
the people who will not blow the whistle
on the fact that they're lying all right
right and so you can get this at Harvard
or you can get this at Stanford maybe
the University of Chicago is something
of an exception Hollywood while
Hollywood is right exactly Lacan Valley
and so all of these institutional things
are suffering from the embedded growth
obligation disease or ego right and so
these egos have turned like the
institutions are not interested in
hearing how to beat Trump because it's
easy it's easy to be Trump it is but the
only problem is is that if you beat
Trump in the way that's easy to beat
Trump you will not service the people
with second and third homes in the
Hamptons right right and so those people
are saying well I wasn't thinking of
spending that much to beat Trump right
no no that's really yeah that's what the
issue is is that right now I the
exciting part is I want to retake the
institution's do you do you really want
nine conservative Supreme Court justices
if you do if you if that's if that's
what excites you no I highly recommend
talking about reparations for slavery
well why don't you tell something some
sort of a child Holocaust survivor that
they need to pay reparations for slavery
see how that goes oh I mean this is
insane we did not say some you know it
isn't sin and self are used to
self-hating Jews we've had that as an
issue forever all right
the self-hating American oh man you know
just suck it up man yeah okay so you
were born with white skin wait what did
you do do you want
it's like watching people it's like
watching a teenage girl on a cutting
episode
you're not responsible for every bad
thing that this country has ever done
we're not gonna write all wrongs it
would be absolutely unjust to go after
every past injustice in it like are we
gonna get rid of the arch of Titus in
Rome because the Romans sacked Jerusalem
and it commemorates you can see they're
carrying off like this giant menorah
they stole our stuff man
all right let's tear down the arch of
Titus let's burn the Merchant of Venice
Oh
how deep do we want to go with this
madness we're nuts well it needs what
look I think part of why I'm very
sensitive about this is that because I
am a gen Xer I think boomers like my
parents like my mom my stepdad Laurie
Paris born my father was born in Nevada
and my mother in Illinois they were born
in the you know technically not island
they're silent but but my mom completely
relates to boom right my dad technically
you're the last boomer yes I am but I
know I know I know that you are but turn
in terms of the chart right right right
in terms of the chart so yes my parents
were my mom and my stepdad are silent
but they really are boomers but I don't
I'm gonna disagree with you are ya I
think that what we don't understand is
that we settled on a narrative in which
the boomers are the problem the Silent
Generation really begins the problem and
we are letting the Silent Generation off
just as we are not paying attention to
Gen X and I believe sir that you are the
last of the boomers but that you are
spiritually Gen X and that you figured
out you almost started really defining
Gen X I forget who it was who wrote the
book Gen X you probably nod does with
Oakland right I think that what I
remember from this is that a few years
either way was really important right
and I believe that the silence are the
first generation to wrestle with the
problem in 1972 seven
three that the country won't wake up to
which is that our growth pattern changed
for structural reasons it wasn't about
some bad decision it wasn't about the
gold standard it wasn't about the Arab
oil embargo something really
structurally changed okay
and in my telling of the tale the
silence try to figure out how to restart
real growth it's like the engine has
gone out they're gonna try to restart
the engine it doesn't work
the boomers look at these efforts and
they say huh that doesn't work but it's
good enough for redistribution and to
play games with fake growth so why don't
we help ourselves to fake growth and
we'll just grow our slices of the pie as
if the pie we're growing and I'm sure
that that must mean that somebody else's
slice isn't growing but that's really
too bad for them and so the silence
start a lot of these problems the
bloomers continue it alright the
Millennials confuse the Gen Xers for
boomers because it right to them boomer
means older than millennial right and
the only generation and this is the
thing that I find fascinating that I
think really has a good hope of
restarting sense-making is Gen X I agree
I completely agree with that and I do
know that whenever I attempt to do it
millennial thinking shuts you down and
so that is what I that is what I've come
up against on this last book tour I've
done earlier this year and I'm going
back out on the road in the fall
millennial hysteria and overreaction to
my talking about Millennials in any kind
of critical way and even being somewhat
sympathetic to them completely minded
sympathetic brett-o completely you're
you and I are both hanging out with tons
of Millennials yes and we're having some
success we're having some like I don't
understand this thought pattern and the
Millennials this is another thing I
believe and you you please correct me
MMR I'm fairly disagreeable yeah I think
the Millennials are starving to know
what actually happened and I harshali
what I try to tell them is you're that
the super ancestors these silence and
boomers who like I think Bill Ayers you
know was the the
head of the Weather Underground and he
gets his job as a professor whereas
people I know they may say the slightest
wrong thing in their out right like okay
you were a you were a leading terrorist
and you can have a job as a professor
hmm that world in which twenty five year
old men you know could take down a home
and immediately build a second home and
yeah everything just turned to gold it's
like well it's not really that they were
doing anything so clever they just they
were in a stream that was moving really
fast and you got a dry creek bed right
and yes a few of you are going to do
something so brilliant that you can do
something against it you know I mean
like ariana grande is not hurting for
money okay however the idea that you
could have in the financial sense beta-2
a process where you could just like I
don't know go to law school or open to
dry cleaner or you know start some new
nonprofit and you can have a perfectly
fabulous life that thing died and the
Millennials have the sense of like okay
well this is all hopeless and maybe
we're not really that good
oh yes and my point is look man these
other guys could have three-martini
lunch lunch is everything still worked
out yeah there is this sense of it and I
talk about it in in my book I talk about
all the things I've noticed and I've
marked down with living in close
proximity with a millennial a key
millennial the past ten years and the
things that I've noticed about him and
that I've experienced and I started to
write about this I actually tweet about
it quite harmlessly and under the
hashtag generation was because I was so
surprised how offended he was how
over-reactive he was bordering I felt on
hysteric about just the normalcy of the
world and the way human beings are with
all of the contradictions and all of
their flaws
as I said earlier he and I'm not saying
that he puts it out there but there seem
to be I found a love of rules that rules
offered a kind of pathway a narrative
that wasn't there otherwise and that all
of these rules about what you can say
what you can't say how you can express
yourself how this is sexist how that is
racist was a way of kind of controlling
a world that they felt was had disobey
'end them in a way that there wasn't a
way to make money that the economy was
was this the thing they can do to you
which is what they are doing so it is
now happening and I see it in the
reaction to this book which is critical
of a lot of ways of thinking and I think
you and I are pretty much aligned on
what the problems are right now are we
let's explore that what do you what do
you see is because I have a different
take the rules thing for example maybe
I'll try that and see whether yeah what
do you like him I think people have not
understood the role of marshall
rosenberg's non-violent communication
starts off with a good idea which is
that maybe there's a way in which speech
that is particularly damaging as a
physiological impact on us our cortisol
levels spike we're going to fight or
flight there's all sort of you know
fighting words as part of our legal
structure what if we call that violence
okay now we have to have non-violent
communication so then you have all these
rules about what it is that constitutes
violent versus nonviolent communication
as speech becomes violence and then the
entire concept of free speech goes out
the window
furthermore you have an abandonment I
think if you probably looked at the
gender ratios of teachers and schools my
guess is that you'll find that it has
changed quite considerably being
dominated by one gender rather than a
mixture of the two and as a result you
have this sort of thing that I don't
think people had really understood which
is that in part there's a way that boys
will be boys was used to disguise a lot
of behavior which I would have called
toxic masculinity had that term not
polluted and turns into something
metastatic and unusable right there
really I went to an all-boys school and
man I saw some stuff that would
absolutely curl your toes on the other
hand we're now using it to mean somebody
makes the joke in the elevator throw at
floor women's lingerie okay their
careers over yeah what that's insane
look my problem isn't necessarily with
the things that you're talking about
kids getting bullied for example no that
shouldn't be happening it's a part of
life
I look back in my life and I think what
if I hadn't been bullied what if I had
been really um I would look just as much
as anyone else I knew any other boys I
knew yes I was and but it I don't know I
mean was it traumatic did it help me
become a writer did it make me want to
become an artist I certainly don't think
I would have been a writer if I had been
captain the football team or the prom
king certainly things that happened to
me that were painful helped create an
artistic persona and helped my voice as
a writer all the stuff that you were
talking about fine maybe there should be
a big fix for them I don't know I mean I
also think that life is really hard and
basically how you toughen up is that you
go through the hardships that build you
into a person that can deal with life's
everyday hassles and the pain then
inevitably comes to all of us what
worries me is how this affects the arts
and how we deal with art how we how we
let it into our lives and that is the
most worrying thing to me in the last
five to ten years seeing that art must
be a certain way that there have to be
rules for the art to be accepted with
the community that outlaw art I don't
know where it is anymore certainly was a
big part of the world that I came of age
in and certainly it was something that I
wanted to explore as the writer of less
than zero or the right of American
Psycho two books that I think because of
sensitivity editors that they have no
publishing houses would never be allowed
to be published an American mainstream
fiction so that lawlessness and that
kind of recklessness that great artists
traffic in is really being minimized
because it's it isn't following a set of
rules and I talked a lot in the book
about how aesthetics don't really matter
that ideology has become the aesthetic
and not what people want is kind of an
affirmation they want a lesson they want
to learn something and they want it to
be very very explicit ambiguity metaphor
I really don't know if anybody traffic's
and that anymore in terms of you know
communicating with Millennials so that
is the thing that has bothered me the
most the the other things that you're
talking about yeah a people shouldn't be
in pain but being having to include
certain things in your art for it to be
palatable or for you to make money or
for someone to publish it or for it to
be shown in as many places as possible
that is that's a problem and being told
what you can or cannot say and something
you create is also a problem the list of
rules now being handed out to artists
about what's acceptable what's not
acceptable as a writer and as a public
person who has a podcast and writes
essays you know about entertainment and
about the world that I'm a part of and
getting attacked is crazy i it is the
insanity that you're talking about I
recently wrote a piece for Italian Vogue
about the differences between fashion in
1999 when I published a large novel that
took place within the fashion world
called glamour AMA and today and so I
thought about I thought oh okay well
they're paying quite well when no one
else pays well and I can riff on this
for a couple thousand words and so I
wrote about how mysterious the fashion
world was in in the late 90s and how its
exclusivity was what a
made what it made it so alluring it's
it's it's lack of inclusion is what made
people want to be a part of it so so
badly compared to now where you can see
the met Gaul is streaming online and
everyone can be interacting and throwing
out their comments while I see in
close-up the inside of the party and the
dress is right as they're happening is
that I don't know is that exciting is it
more exciting to not know exactly once
behind the curtain and of course I'm
writing this as a gen Xer I'm writing
about this in a way that is really
conforms to my Sensibility
I also talked about how the models the
women and the men were really quite
extraordinarily beautiful and they were
they were goddesses and they were gods
and we looked up to them because they
weren't us they weren't us and that's
why we were so drawn to them these women
were otherworldly these men were
otherworldly and there was something
about that that I thought it we don't
have anymore
where we need models that look like us
that we have to be more inclusive of you
know body image and that we have to
accept and that and that the modeling
world in the fashion world is trying its
best to do that and you can see it in
shows where you know they have whatever
buck-toothed it whatever it is I'm not
not people who conform to normal not
even normal but let's be clear about it
model bone structure is almost like a
mutation completely it's the what we
traditionally think of is something that
is is extraordinarily rare
it does particular things for clothes
that normal normal humans don't a friend
of mine is a supermodel and at some
point I said to her I'd never realized
it but you're really a mutant yeah and
her response was yeah I'm all legs and
no torso and her hands are like Ezard
Edward
their hand hands like just just the way
that Mike Michelangelo had to distort
the David somehow these people are
actually distorted I got blasted for
writing this yeah absolutely blasted by
Millennials huge a huge controversy
about this piece now I think part of the
problem was that was translated into
Italian and then someone wanted to
translate it into English so when you
were translating the Italian back into
English it's a whole other can be all
these other meanings but basically the
beef was I don't believe in inclusivity
in the fashion world well I meant I
meant exclusivity was what made it so
erotic and alluring no that's they read
it as I'm saying that inclusivity I
don't believe in inclusivity mean that
I'm a racist that I am a body shame er
and it was so remarkable to me that
that's the message that they got out of
an older man talking about what he liked
about in the late 90s about fashion that
moved him to actually write a novel set
in that world a complete distortion of
really what I was saying based on this
emotional idea of being excluded
themselves and it's just such a
remarkable way to to reread something so
that it conforms to your view of the
world I certainly didn't have that when
I read things that I didn't necessarily
agree in when I was that age
can I push back on the slightly yeah
please so the way I read it is that they
might have actually had a point and then
they missed a point right so one of the
costs of having fashioned be mysterious
aspirational and dare I say transcendent
is that it does remind us of our merely
mortal nature there was a period of time
where you know you would show people
without makeup
and just how completely plain and
ordinary they were right there all sorts
of faces that lend themselves to being
turned into something that cannot be as
canvases on which to be painted let's
say and that there is something powerful
about deconstructing fashion if I if you
remember someone at when I bring up
sometimes is Jennifer Lopez's famous for
Sachi dress yeah I am sure that adhesive
is somehow lurking in the background but
the idea of having adhesive on your
boobs and having the fabric somehow
stick you know all sorts of contrivances
that's much less exciting and alluring
if I know how the magic trick is or done
so the idea of a magic show in which the
audience demands to know how every trick
is done is a very weird thing because
some of us want to be fooled we want to
be seduced but we also are shamed in
this process because of our own very
plain nature one of the things that I
have to deal with is is that I have
moles all over my face and some some
percentage of every YouTube video that
I've ever done
comments and you think the guy would
have some money you need to have the
moles removed why is that guy wearing a
wig right you know that's clearly a
weave no but nobody his age has hair
like that you know whatever and the
shaming is incredibly powerful on the
other hand the transcendence is
incredibly powerful and the number of
people who can see both of these things
which is yeah they have a point and
they're also creating a huge negative
externality and cost that they're not
taking into account we are in some sense
in some sort of awkward waking up that
there there has been a very dark side to
fashion to the models to the way in
which we neuroticism these women are
recognized when they're 12 and they're
14 and we have been complicit as a
society in the you know errata cessation
of children for a great deal of time so
what what astounds me is not that they
push
but that the quality of the pushback is
so shitty well it it's it's just a
reflection of their way of thinking it
is pure ideology I don't send someone I
mean look writing anything is kind of
you know I don't say an act of magic or
an act of willing disbelief in terms of
your creating something out of nothing
and I'm creating this idea about my
memories of the 90s and what I was
attracted to about fashion and
contrasting it negatively to what I feel
fashion is now where I just it's not as
interesting because it's mmm I guess
more inclusive in terms of letting you
see the strings and everything but
letting you see the strings and letting
you see how everything is made is really
endemic to this culture now it's it's in
every with the PDA
it's in connecting all the Marvel movies
and all the back stories to all the
characters this generation that's there
is no mystery in terms of that they
don't want mr. I think mystery frightens
them and makes them feel whatever unsafe
ambiguity makes them feel unsafe and it
confuses them so I don't know is it
really shitty to thinking this shitty I
guess it is to a degree it also is
overly reactive to me and it and of
course it is because the minute
something is posted you want to get your
voice out there so you post something 20
minutes well that's true but like I
would say that for example I always ask
this question do people want to be
seduced if you if you believe that you
don't want to be manipulated you'll
never have the experience of being
seduced because seduction is in some
sense a willing manipulation usually on
to people's part right and so when when
Jennifer Lopez was trying to seduce the
world at scale with this dress that
miraculously stayed on her body we
wanted to be in the audience and I'm
sure you know one of the I've had about
gay men is that in some sense
it's very often gay men are like
magicians assistants or consultants they
very often take great pleasure in seeing
how the trick is done without wanting to
be completely like the heterosexual
manager sitting there in the audience
lapping it up right and the gay men are
like oh you know did you see her makeup
it was fabulous like they're actually
thinking about the construction the
craft you know there's sort of a
different I out an outsider I yeah and
it of an outsider you're not being
carried away like women and also will
say oh did you see I love the way she
you know she wears her false eyelashes
right whereas men are like if they're
heterosexual they're sort of believing
the whole thing right I can't imagine
living in a world where I didn't want to
be seduced daily right that's what I
want to be I want to be seduced all day
long I want to be seduced by every book
I pick up I want to be seduced by why
else would I Drive to a theater
why else would I Drive to the ArcLight
and pay a ticket and sit in a dark empty
room unless I would want it to be
seduced I want to be seduced by my
coffee yeah I want to be seduced by
everything and I do think there's a push
back on that because giving in to
seduction is being out of control it is
a no control in it but that's the point
that but you I think you've made this
point before it has to do with this
crazy loss of trust and in a world
characterized by a loss of trust I do
understand the desire to worry about
well you weren't careful and you are
shaming and you're having a negative
effect over here right whereas in a
world of higher trust people say you
know like in Silicon Valley the concept
of pitching people say pitch me mm-hmm
you know because the VCS who have the
money are used to being seduced you know
like oh your pitch was insufficiently
paniculata van in sufficiently seductive
you're gonna have a harder time with
your company if that's how you do things
let me show you how to be at orient
things so that you're more likely to
succeed because that way I'm more likely
to make money with my investment I think
that there's some aspect where this
desire for radical transparent
he has to do with people who feel very
cut out of society I think it has to do
because people don't read anymore I
think it has to do with people don't
read fiction anymore I think it has to
do with a kind of strange lack of
empathy even when everyone says you know
warm fuzzy things to each other which to
me increasingly is just virtue signaling
and acting out you know feeling your
virtue listen being virtuous as I write
of the book are two very different
things
I think it's I think it really is down
to people don't read anymore and that
someone can find more meaning in cuphead
which is the giant new video game that
all the kids are playing and that
they'll never be reading they'll never
know the mysteries of HP Lovecraft or
whatever I do think that something has
been severely minimized in terms of
experience and in terms of a breadth of
experience and I don't care if I sound
old
I've always sounded old I sounded old
when I wrote less than zero I mean I was
an old man at five but you said if you
wouldn't choose novels again I wouldn't
I absolutely wouldn't know what would
you choose in a world a web series a TV
show and miniseries I choose it I I do
think they've replaced it I think adult
literary fiction has slid down we've
lost about 13 percent of the readers
since 2013 that is a lot that is a best
bad business and that's that's over loss
of a billion dollars in sales that is
suggestive of something and I also don't
meet anybody anymore who reads serious
adult fiction serious meaning quasi
literary to literary adult fiction I'm
not talking about you know obscure
writers that are only taught in academia
but it is something that I don't know I
am loved I really do believe that
reading that kind of long-form fiction
encourages empathy and encourages you to
step into other people's shoes and to
see the world from three or four or
eight different angles
rather than your own oh but I mean this
the that that to me is the purest
example of getting that experience more
than theater more than listening to a
record more than going to a movie
because it is not a passive experience
it is an active experience actually
putting yourself in the shoes of the
character and seeing the world through
the way that they look at it and it's
just that you can't get that in any
other kind of medium and if that's going
I mean I don't know I mean once what's
replacing that well I don't know that
there is and that's one of the things I
wanted to get to which is if we are in
fact losing the capacity as I've said
for a semi reliable communal sense
making that we can't make sense of the
incoming information in any way where we
can communally kind of agree on well
what just happened and what should we be
thinking about about how to how to
approach how to approach that if we
don't have a cannon where I can
reference a line or to you know to get
it a really complicated thought in my
own tradition we've lost canned humor
where a lot of like let's say Talmudic
teachings were contained in a joke and
you would just use the punchline of
nobody told the joke once everybody knew
it you just used the punchline to say
well that's a super subtle principle you
know like well in terms of referencing
one line the idea is that does protest
too much methinks is a complicated
concept I don't want to have to explain
it from scratch but if I can point out
that somebody is falling out you know
Alan Dershowitz seems to be protesting
too much at the moment right and I don't
want to have to say more right if we
don't have common literature common
canon if we don't have the time to sort
of take a more Strauss in view which is
what is the what is the writer really
trying to to say that can't be said in
the open if we believe that transparency
is always the answer and that sunlight
is always the best disinfectant is there
any way of waking up into a different
era so that this thing that is safe
using our culture doesn't take the whole
enterprise down sometimes I think I'm
old
sometimes an I am I am old and I think
that this is the natural state of things
and that we are just moving forward on
this trajectory and that bit by bit you
kind of get you can fight I suppose in a
natural way to try to stay on that
trajectory but it's moving along and you
know that golden world that surrounded
you is moving on to younger people and
to sexier people and to more vibrant
people and I I think sometimes and I and
I don't believe this is true about
reading I sometimes think that oh this
is what it means to become somewhat
obsolete in terms of a pop culture world
in terms of being a member of the pop
culture world and it and it just goes
this way and people are left behind I
think a lot about why the Quentin
Tarantino movie struck a chord among so
many middle-aged men I know is because
it's really an exploration of that of
being you know so all of this is a
roundabout way of saying that maybe
people are figuring that and the
trajectory that we're on is the one that
they want to be on but I just don't know
if it I don't know if it is and I don't
know if I don't think we're ever going
back to real I agree with that I don't
know that I want to go back to the
previous world yeah no I don't think I
do either
and I am I just I just wish it to a
degree and I think it's it's as with you
that that I guess a little bit more
empathy critical thought and that this
notion that you can see two things in in
a sentence or in an opinion you know the
Fitzgeralds famous dictum about the only
smart people are the ones that can
really see both the beauty and the
horror in a rose and if you're if you
you need to
able to see both to be an artist or to
be a person in the world if you just see
one or the other whatever and I don't
see that anymore and it is that's what I
miss I mean I don't really want to
necessarily go back they'll look at
watch you know either watching the Quinn
Tarantino movie I mean I wouldn't I
don't know if I wouldn't mind going back
here to Hollywood in 1969 just in terms
of Oh on a certain kind of fetishistic
level in terms of clothes and decor and
I think that there is a Golden Age of
Hollywood I think one of the things
we're missing is we developed this idea
of critical thinking and it turned out
that there was a parallel theory that
never got developed which I've called
critical feeling which is how do you get
your feeling to be responsive and
adaptive as opposed to reflexive and
kind of lit right and that the group
feel is this very weird thing that those
Millennials traveling my theory about
this I don't know whether you'll bite on
this order to think it's silly is that
maybe Generation X are the so-called
magic Negroes to the Millennials the
Millennials are a larger cohort maybe
they're going to mean more you know
nobody from the 1930s who was born in
the 1930s ever became President of the
United States maybe the idea is the Gen
X has a different role and that the
Millennials are hungry to be inducted by
something older something more estab man
to be recognized the Boomers are weirdly
not going to do it the silence are
almost spent yeah and I wonder whether
our problem is that we were angry like I
don't think generation would work s--
because what it does is it sets us up
opposition Lee we're taking their
nonsensical energy right by the way is
completely maddening and I think it's
very strange that I grew up in a very
threatening world real physical physical
and I'm more worried about Twitter than
I ever was in the world where people
were wrapping their cars around
telephone poles are ending up oh D in in
the Cedars er
something about this world is weirdly
dangerous because there are no normal
rules it doesn't know when to stop it
was willing to take away your ability to
earn to destroy your reputation to move
your private life into the public sphere
and it doesn't seem to have any empathy
I wonder if the real trick and this is
like the hardest thing to even imagine
is to realize that these are damaged
kids and now damaged adults and that our
grit is supposed to serve them maybe
we're supposed to lose twice lose once
to the baby boomers in the silence and
we're supposed to lose again but we are
supposed to take up our place helping
them become a better version of
themselves I think most of my audience
is millennial I bet yours is too a great
deal of it is millennial and I talk
about the demise of a lot of things I
talk about the demise of reading I
thought I talked about the demise of
American cinema which you would think
would not be interesting to them at all
but they're there and certainly I have a
large millennial following despite how
often Millennials attacked me this past
spring with the publication of the book
they were definitely there at the
readings they were definitely there at
the signings and a lot of them were
there when I gave a talk at the Peter
Thiel deal foundation about a month ago
so there is that audience and I agree
with you on a certain level I do think
they want to learn and they do want
guidance I think they're hungry for it
to a degree but they are overly
sensitive about how people see them and
that is a very interesting and I think a
new thing in terms of shame because the
the the guiding principle or one of the
strongest signifiers in the Millennials
I know is shame shame is a huge
motivating factor to be shamed and that
is something that I I don't know I can't
relate to and I don't think Gen X can
really relate to that as much either
it's not as it was never as powerful a
motivating well how you express yourself
in terms of being online in terms of how
people talk about using the order us I
think that what we don't understand is
is that we're not this is another theory
feel free to shoot it down
I've watched the very strange
interactions between Millennials from a
perspective a jet of a gen Xer what
they'll often say is that was a little
rapey
yeah and if you use the word rape to a
gen Xer it's like boom you've just
dropped a bomb but like rapey like I
would never use the word rapey right and
but and then another one of them will
say yeah you're right it was a little
bit rapey and then they go on and so the
idea is that they're trading there they
have an agreement which is like it's
normal for people to say things that are
kind of rapey and racist in kind of like
yeah you're starting to go into dangers
territory just I'm signaling to you you
probably don't want to go there and
there's like thank you very much I
didn't want to go there and then they
all go on their merry way very often
what we do is say what did you say like
we're back on our heels cuz we're not
part of this agreement right and we have
an idea of like there was nothing wrong
with what I said don't you dare talk to
me that way or no no I absolutely didn't
mean it I promise you I promise you so
we don't understand that it's relative
to an agreement that we're not part of
to warn each other to back off and give
a quick apology and then keep moving on
and I don't even agree with it like from
their perspective if I'm showing them a
George Carlin routine mm-hm and they say
that was a little racist mm-hmm we're
now at a weird impasse where if I
continue to say I think that routine is
actually quite important and you really
need to look at it and pay attention and
try to figure out what he's saying now
we've escalated wow you did I gave you
your warning shot and you declined it
now I'm gonna have to call you out as
really a bad person and now I'm gonna
have to potentially use my high leverage
position as a reporter for a famous
newspaper to actually ruin your life
like we don't understand that that's not
what they're hoping for they're hoping
for this sort of oh yeah you know what
was I thinking
I I would never want to point to
somebody to that George Carlin routine
the ambiguity of irony that's missing
sure ambiguity of irony and ironic irony
and being ironic was you know a key a
key part of our generation and it was a
way we expressed ourselves and it's a
way that we dealt with things a lot of
it in our in our novels in the music
that we listen to very rarely was music
this declaration of myself and how I'm
feeling at least as a gen Xer growing up
in the late 70s and into the 80s but
that lack of irony rips up takes away
shading and takes away a humanity
because nothing is exactly as it seems
and if you want to look at the world in
that way and then every little thing
that you don't like becomes racist or
rapey and you're not able to place it
within a context and taking the totality
of it and look at it from three or four
different angles and you're it's just
pure reaction to I don't know a litany
of rules that you've been told you have
to follow I'm not doing it I mean I'm
just not on and I don't apologize to
them and I don't say anything no but but
I just don't say anything if people I
mean I didn't I've never written an
apology buddy and I've never defended
myself to any of these people either
because the arguments just isn't worth
responding to on a certain level you've
you've taken you've deconstructed it to
a degree where there's an ounce or so of
sympathy but I also think they should
know better I think I'm giving people
way too much credit for those pulling up
their pants and understanding what it
means to be an adult and that you was
I'm trying to get them to entertain the
idea
that for example if you chase injustice
with greater injustice you have not
gotten rid of injustice you have a
problem of the old lady who swallowed a
fly all right I'm trying to figure out
how to get through to their minds what I
see now maybe there are ways in which
I'm wrong I'm open to that but I'm not
open to the idea that suddenly every
everything has been wrong and the one
generation has suddenly figured it out I
have to say something
Early's as we I realized that I don't
really care
yeah here what Millennials think about
me and I really don't know if I care
what I think about them the overreaction
to the hashtag generation was which I
thought was a perfect example of a kind
of snarky Gen X way of looking at
Millennials was intended as comedy and
it was tending this something to talk
exactly I got all chuckle at it I write
but still did too
and then when I did take it a bit
serious more seriously and expounded on
it in my book and realized that I was
sympathetic as well as annoyed right um
I just I don't know I think that the
reaction to that was endemic of of you
know millennial thinking and that it is
um I don't know it's problematic but I
also realized I've got other things to
worry that's fine but what I'm worried
about is we've got a generation that is
now going to probably use its high
leverage positions to deranged a lot
yeah and and cancel and well canceling
you know some of us can afford what yeah
but what worries me is I see this as
eroding the outer layers of our civil
society they're about to get to core
structure and it's gonna keep going and
I don't think it's cute I think you know
I think it is absolutely capable of
getting us into war
I think it's capable of getting us a
president that would be dictatorial as
an overreaction to their nonsense yeah
so I don't think nothing is riding on it
I think a lot is riding on
and I have to Scott redic turi impulses
one is to say what is it that you're
actually trying to say maybe we can work
to try to understand you better and the
other one is cut that out
know Christ and so I I don't have the
indifference I think that you do I think
what I have is I have two contradictory
impulses one of which is to say I bet
you're saying something and I'm just not
getting it and the other is you're
wildly out of control and you need to
see a different path
of course boomer youth millennial youths
Gen X youth I know which one that I am
probably most impressed by on a certain
level in terms of I'm shocked in terms
of a kind of level of clear-headed I
don't want to say adulthood but just a
way of dealing with the world that is
wildly different from millennial and
boomer and I think that's interesting
that you think that there could be a
moment where Gen X might step up to the
stage and announce itself forcefully in
a way that perhaps we have we're doing
this as well I mean you and I thought
we're modeling a conversation which we
have a couple of disagreements yeah I
think it's polite both of us are capable
of taking our sabers out of their sheath
but there's usually no reason to know I
don't never and and what I do find is is
that I just think what I was hoping to
do here a little bit is to talk about
this context in this firmament which I
think has been invisible that we have a
boomer millennial story there's a very
important role of Gen X that has been
ignored and your your work I think has
been probably the best example of it to
be honest I find it almost impossible to
read because it's so it's so right and
that what what we do next is we have to
think about the long term longevity of
our society I'm very worried for example
that some of these millennial females
need to start families even though
they're pretending that it doesn't
really matter one way or the other
whether they have families or not I
think it's going to be incredibly
destructive if we don't have people
invested in the longevity of our society
through somewhat normal
truckers now I could be wrong in that
maybe the idea is is that a family is an
outmoded concept and that people don't
need this to be fulfilled but I do think
that if we don't actually have adults in
the room and if we don't become those
adults and strong and caring above you
know that's just the way you're dealing
with a bratty child we're too cowed by
these bratty children we actually have
to say hey I'm really sorry but you you
have to stop throwing a temper tantrum
and if you have to go to your room go to
your room but you're out of control you
we can't have the New York Times
becoming the agent of like individual
destruction as it destroys the
reputations of people who fall out of
line of the orthodoxy that that thing is
a threat to our society writ large
anyway I don't know whether you agree on
that note all right I think I I
completely agree well
it's been fantastic having you here and
you've been through the portal with Bret
Easton Ellis I hope for those of you who
are listening on Apple or Spotify you'll
subscribe to the program and hopefully
we'll be putting it out on YouTube as
well so make sure to subscribe to our
Channel and we'll see you next time
thanks very much
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]