[Music]
honestly I'm kind of interested in
hearing your narrative on why
sense-making that's important why this
question and I'm not actually gonna name
the question yet whatever the question
is why it is not just important but
central what I think the strange
attractor that draws us all here
together is sense making it's about the
exploration into what is real and what
is meaningful is bound to what's real
and we find that we have the at least
have the experience of having choice and
we're trying to find out how to orient
our choice and so since making to inform
choice making is what is what is reality
what is my relationship with reality
what is fundamentally meaningful as a
basis for how I can make choices that
are more aligned with what I find
meaningful
yeah my think mines probably many layers
of abstraction below these framings
although Attili you know check and
appreciate what you guys are also saying
my basic gut sense is hey back to
complicated versus complex we're
probably not gonna solve the complex we
give existential problems we face with
individual horsepower thing rivalries
games we're probably gonna need to get
together and be able to create a higher
form of collective intelligence and
sense making and what I've been seeing
lately
paying attention to this space is it's
starting to bubble up but it feels like
a wildly unstable element and it's
breaking my heart / freaking me out
it's concerning me that we are efforts
to create a group coherence seemed to be
going so badly so far and so I'm deeply
committed to figuring out what the rate
limiters slash Achilles heels missing
links that can help us at least stop you
know failing forward making you better
different mistakes because it feels like
our efforts right now are actually just
the last half century red ducks with
very little go forward learning
happening so it feels like
transformational culture is basically
just repeating the baby boomer hippie
new-age traps
I'm just running into the running off
the roads at exactly all the same places
there's already the skid marks and so
talking with you guys I find incredibly
valuable on what are the big systemic
issues what are other ways to think of
this and how do we help give more people
in your terms the generator functions to
keep figuring this up together and make
newer better more spec
era is just not the same old predictable
ones I mean my my path her I think is
the in fact it may be identical but my
experience of it of the way I would even
describe is very first person which is
that my path here is through a very very
large number of distinct personal
failures like just running into a wall
and going okay well that's wrong turning
a little bit running into another wall
that's wrong during a little bit right
into another wall like the number of
times that I have up is insane
like I came in like thousands if not
tens of thousands it's crazy and in the
process of that for example this is a
good case study one of the things they
ended up getting a hold of was the
notion that you could actually do things
when you could imagine what the
consequences of your actions might be
quite a distance down the road and you
could actually really really good at
that
to the point you could actually sit
there and hear someone to describe a
plan to you and you could listen to the
plan and go that won't work right and be
very confident that in fact that plans
on a good plan I mean an example might
be I'm going to walk up to the fireplace
and point my hands I didn't say light
and I'll say well you know that's not
gonna work
I've got a good model of how reality
works I've done this sort of thing
before
bad plan all right so what I found
though was that as I absorb more and
more life experience and more and more
knowledge I began to be noticed that
more and more often more and more
people's plans were of that sort and
that was like well that's interesting so
I took that as an object of inquiry and
by the way again
my own being first and foremost so okay
 long-term planning is not working
out so I got you know kept going okay
how can you actually make effective
choices how can you actually plan at all
about what's gonna happen in the future
and what I began to notice was the stuff
we've been talking about like everything
that we currently believe that we can
plan won't work like none of the stuff
that we have in our tool kit that allows
us to make plans for the future is gonna
work out fill in the blank I pick any
problem I kept running the situations
for people to describe a particular
problem everything we're going to solve
climate we're gonna solve conflict we're
gonna solve education and
just sort of listen to them talking
about their plan and going well that's
not gonna work not only is that not
gonna work it's gonna work like terribly
what's happening so this led me to then
finally looking at it okay what might
and then that began the process of
saying okay how do we actually get to
the point where we can begin to get some
level of clarity on what might actually
be a meaningful step and that leads me
here that this is the answer to that
question the answer of recognizing that
the question of sense making together is
ultimately a question of how do I make
better choices and how do I and you
become a we who make better choices
hopefully in some context the builds to
us collectively actually being able to
make the kinds of better choices that
are truly responsive to the environment
we find ourselves in like it's just sort
of the first step of that cycle
[Music]
the way I've been describing it is I do
it in a historical narrative which is to
say that there was a method of human
beings coming together into a group that
had certain adaptive capacities that I'm
gonna call the the Dunbar coherence and
this is we've talked about it's like
that thing that happened somewhere
around the Paleolithic transition the
Upper Paleolithic transition where
humans suddenly kicked into something
that was kind of a new thing culture the
human animal began to kick ass I'm gonna
call that the Dunbar coherence and that
was really effective and that blew all
over the world humanity covered the
whole globe filled every niche became
the pea put it in every niche until
somewhere in the range of 35,000 ish
years ago it started running into itself
right so it's able to out-compete every
other organism on the planet until it
ran into itself and so when humans from
the demurrer coherence ran into other
humans were in the Dunbar coherence and
they were so successful that their
population began rising beyond the
carrying capacity the environment that
they're in I either entered into self
created conditions of real scarcity then
they had to start competing with each
other and this led to a next wave of
evolutionary exploration for trying to
find something that was a more effective
way for human beings to come together
and work together than the Dunbar
coherence that's gaming my game a is a
solution to the problem of how do you
get people to be able to work together
effectively as a group at scale and so
Dunbar what the limitation of the Dunbar
coherence was that it couldn't scale
past about a hundred and fifty people so
Larocque Harari posits basically he
reduces it all massively and says it's
our ability to gossip I don't think
that's that reductio was really bad in
my perspective it's a lot of stuff like
our ability to embody models of other
people's states and the state of all the
complementary relationships they have as
an example like there's a lot of stuff
going on but any of it game a then says
all right how do I
solve the problem of scale while
maintaining the benefits of people
working together and this is the three
problems how do I actually create
something where the group is effectively
able to actually support itself in the
context of nature how do I create a
condition where it doesn't eat itself
from the inside how do I avoid
corruption infection and things like
that and how do I actually create enough
power inside that that group that it can
actually compete now with other groups
right now of course we had the whole
story of game a playing out over time
the solution the game a comes up with is
this entire store there's society mind
paradigms think of it it's like almost
computational actuation that simplifies
human relationships and puts them in
very simple relationships to have inputs
and outputs formal structures money law
anything that can fit in a semantic
narrative Lee actually been really held
by a person in teaching you've written
down in a book and repeat it over and
over again and simplified there's a lot
to it but I want I mean we don't have
forever so then we fast-forward it's
okay game a has a whole bunch of things
inside its possibilities space so it can
we deliver on the Ming Dynasty and Rome
and the Prussians and 21st century u.s.
sorry those are all inside the thing the
game a can be but they're all variations
on that theme we come to where we are
now the problems that we're facing or a
different set of problems right and the
problems we run into now is that game a
in and of itself can't ultimately deal
with complexity both complexity in terms
of actually being able to take full
closed-loop responsibility for the for
the natural environment every
instantiation of game a that has ever
shown up has always ultimately depleted
the resources of the environment that is
sitting on top of to a level of collapse
of some sort couldn't feed enough people
either produced you too many people or
depleted the resources it can't deal
with complexity on the inside meaning
that it always goes through some kind of
group selection on the interior
corruption defection dynamic that leads
to fragility that causes it to collapse
on the outside and then the third is the
thing that we talked about which is that
precisely because it is so effective at
power on an underlying premise of
win-lose dynamics
was invented for the purposes of
competing with other people in the
context of scarcity as it actually has
become extremely powerful this is the
problem becoming godlike at the level of
power but not at the level of wisdom
all right so game a runs to the limits
of its of its boundary conditions it
can't solve those three fundamental
problems in Evin of itself so something
new has to be developed so it's okay
well that's game B just literally we're
just defining a place it's a pointer to
something over here so like a wool what
is that the first thing is the reason
why we can name it game B is to say
what's something that is in fact a
different game altogether so go over to
the basis it's something on the order of
magnitude of the difference between the
band level nomadic Dunbar 150 human
level and every single thing that has
happened in civilization since then that
whole box is different right that order
of magnitude and it has characteristics
that allow it to actually actually
address these three questions and their
complexity natural complexity and the
problematic of exponential technology
that comes from learning it's okay
what does that look like what are some
characteristics of that and that's some
of the things we've been talking about
today at the center of it for me at
least as I've gone through the
questioning of this over and over and
over again it recognized for example
that you have to change the mind
otherwise you just recapitulate the
society is this thing we've been calling
coherent collective intelligence and
coherence specifically is at the very
center of it but in many ways game be
even talked about has a bit of that
Taoist sense to it as you're naming it
in the context of game a quite often
you're actually importing gaming into it
so you have to actually treat it very
very carefully it's less about being
able to describe it than it is in fact
just being able to do it it is the kind
of thing that you do not the kind of
thing you talk about you can talk about
how you can become capable of it but
designing it talking about it is
generally a full fundamental error that
does that make sense what I'm saying
there
I mean I think just depends on how
taoist we imagine game B to be well
that's very odd because if you can't
actually be taoist interestingly enough
but it can actually be it's more like
the taoist insight that points to the
dow but i can say very clearly if i
could articulate it my definition is
complicated
it's not complicated game b is not
complicated game b must be intrinsically
complex so i cannot define it in any
finite set of statements because any
finite set of statements it's
complicated so it's not that kind of
thing so if I'm explaining if I'm
describing it I have to be doing it in
something which is essentially poetic
not a specification or as daniel said
i'm pointing towards the generator
functions they give rise to something
that is more than the thing that is said
noticing three distinct things to come
up one is the question of why why did
this thing which I'll just call
coherence that we've been talking about
the the second is why does it thus far
fail to scale and then of course the
third is how might we do about solving
that problem all three seem to be
showing up close to each other and my
sense do you want to share more what you
mean by coherence right immediately what
comes up so what is this thing and
there's a lot of different ways of
talking about it but we might say
there's ah actually it's interesting it
seems like you actually have to talk
about it in many different ways because
it is the kind of thing that cannot be
conveyed effectively in language you
know it's the matrix unfortunately no
one can be told what coherence is but we
can't actually tell a lot of different
stories it's become the blind with the
elephant and after a little while we
might be able to in ourselves grasp
perhaps what is being pointed out so one
way of describing it is it is a it's a
form of collective intelligence that has
as a characteristic
a high degree of capacity in the space
of novelty and a intrinsic antifragility
in both human and throw poke complexity
and nature complexity another way of
saying that is if you work backwards in
taking a look at all the different
challenges and problems that we are
currently facing we meaning Humanity is
the answer to the set that contains
those problems another way of describing
it is it's something like flow since we
have that as a nice concrete frame then
we can invoke that in an unconstrained
way I often times associate with flow
with flow in a domain a rock-climber is
in flood when climbing rocks a jazz band
is in flow and playing jazz coherence is
flow absent a context absent a
particular location you know so you
mentioned you said it has a relationship
with novelty what prompts you to put
that into the mix because if I just hear
the word coherence so that just feels
let you know from physics electronics
whatever it would just be things in some
form of sync with each other but you
added in novelty and antifragility and
brothers have seem interesting but
they're not what I would have just
expected to come from the word so can
you help unpack either the Y or the how
you got to those yeah I think also to
begin it's I think what you bring up is
good we should just say that there's
different kinds of collective
intelligence and
some kinds of collective intelligence we
have different names for with my call
them different things so in this context
we're going to have to be very familiar
with the notion that word choice is
oftentimes going to require some careful
definition as you just did so let's just
for everyone who's listening just
recognize that oftentimes I have a
certain vocabulary daniel has vocabulary
you have a vocabulary we're all
operating under what I've called rule
Omega which is listen to what is being
expressed not what is being said and
asked good questions until what is being
expressed as actually felt that's landed
so if we think about the examples of
flow you've provided so well one of the
things that shows up so commonly is a
sense of there being an emergence or a
synergy where there's something about a
whole that is greater than the sum of
the parts and that as it turns out
happens to be the best way to respond to
novelty
let me add some words that I think might
add clarity to the question you're
asking we've discussed offline some
different types of coherence in
different contexts and like formal
models for looking at what coherence in
different contexts means and so when you
mention like physics like things of the
same type
like pendulums or lasers that's a
coherence of sameness they all become
the same wavelength
they have the same periodicity and when
we're talking about humans being able to
come into coherence we're not wanting a
homogenizing coherence and if you think
about something like a body liver cells
and neurons and fat cells are all very
different types of cells and yet they're
operating in a way where the body is an
emergent property that has capacities
that none of the cells or organs or
subsystems taken separately have so it's
a coherence of different things where
the difference is the basis of synergy
rather than being the basis of an
unreconciled will conflict the
difference is a basis for synergy where
each of them have capacity separately
and then the whole has capacities
neither of them have that are found in
each of them plus the relationships as
opposed to the differences being a basis
for unreconciled will conflict so we're
interested here in the types of
coherence that can occur where there are
differences right differences of
experience differences of perspective
and yet like so I'll just tie a couple
other words together Jordan said you
said it's kind of like flow if we think
of flow from fluid dynamics in terms of
like laminar flow versus turbulent flow
there's a more flow is less entropy and
actually not just less entropy buts
entropy the movement towards holes that
have greater than some of the parts and
so I think that's what we're really
interested in and collective sense
making is how do we come together in
relationship
that has less friction less entropy
relationally Moore's entropy where the
group of us has capacities has emergent
properties that aren't found in any of
us in isolation the coherence is that
phenomena that emergent properties arise
from right and then so the the other
distinction was we've got we've got
examples of this kind that have never
actually able to get pretty nuanced so
we'll just be careful about that were
getting nuanced we have a particular
kind of coherence but I'm just gonna
label coordination just we have a label
for it and this has a lot of wittiness
talking about in fact it has emergent
properties so for example if you've got
a mathematician having a conversation
with an economist there's in fact a hole
in their conversation that is greater
than the sum of the parts there's
there's a connection between those two
ways of thinking the toolkits of
mathematics that's not available to the
economist unlocks things the economists
wouldn't have known about but for
example the economists questions there
weren't things the mathematician was
thinking about unlocks things the
mathematician wasn't thinking about
right so there's a synergy value to that
that's also not the thing we're talking
about that's awesome
really good useful but for very specific
reasons which we can go to if we'd like
it doesn't actually have the capacity to
to satisfy the requirements of call it
the problems that we're facing Kant said
if I just set aside the problems of
nature implicitly it can't satisfy the
problems event ropo complexity one of
which is why it keeps breaking down
every time we try to build something
like the San trope of complexity
oftentimes it becomes the primary reason
why it breaks down yeah I mean it seems
like if I'm hearing right the question
is just how how can we get together with
each other in a way that leaves us
smarter kinda more creative more
courageous more resilient
than any of us are a part and me at
least as far as terms for me flow is
often a bit of a buzzword and I think a
lot of people project onto it but some
slightly more precise like if I'm
thinking of examples and you can tell me
if I'm barking up the right tree or not
but like examples I think of is Victor
Turner's notion at University of Chicago
of communitas which is a it's not simply
a collection it's not just a crowd or a
mob it's a felt presence of coherence
among a group and then you think about
like Quakers use the term like gathered
meeting there's a regular meeting we all
shuffle under the meeting house
no one says much and people or even
people may say a few things and that can
not be a gathered meeting that's just a
physical collection of humans on a
Sunday morning but a gathered meeting is
there you know over centuries of really
delicate listening into that is that
place where you're speaking only when
spoken through know that the collective
intelligence is given voice through a
given individual but it's clearly not
just their thoughts ideas or words does
that try yes for you guys okay now I
know obviously analogies of humans and
brains and minds to computers are
obviously problematic and a whole bunch
of different levels but as far as a
simple one does this also seem to be the
notion of connecting CPUs or computers
in serial such that the connected
computational power and capacity is
greater than any of the things in
between and that they might actually
even be able to tackle problems that at
any individual computer would be
uncapable of solving actually no and
that goes back to the notion of
coordination so that style of connection
is coordination and it does have the
characteristic of increasing capacity
and in fact increasing capacity in a
fashion that is
well at least depending on the specific
kind of problem and the physical
capacity to do compute often times it
better to polish you for solving
particular kinds of problems that make
sense so I just said it does I'm just
winning is there a magic in the
supercomputer is there a like for
instance if all I can do is let's go
back 20 years you know and if all I
could do is do email and AOL you know
but if we connected up enough of them
together we can actually project a
hologram and actually you know model
something totally new and different but
none of those things couldn't do I mean
if it's if it's a problematic metaphor
we can abandoned I'm just thinking no
it's a very it's a very good metaphor
and problematic I don't know about it we
actually want to have it be helpfully
double-click on why yeah there are
elements of parallel processing and
elements of serial processing that are
important and then there's something
that can't be fully contained in
parallel and serial and the thing that I
am sensing Jordan's calling coherence is
what is our we do we have a model where
we're reducing consciousness to
computation and if not what
consciousness is other than computation
is part of the limits of that model yeah
and I don't know where this comes from
but I think it might be yeah Union
analysis perhaps but the notion of the
third they talked about in like dyadic
relationships and sometimes they'll even
do couples therapy whether it's almost
like you know a plate for Elijah or you
know like a seat for Elvis it's like
there's the third and the third is the
intelligence of the relationship and is
the third you know a working place the
idea that there is between among us but
not specific to any of us an additional
intelligence that can emerge and that is
that that is that the differentiator
between what you were describing as
coherence and simply maybe collective
intelligence or processing your
coordination yep okay very I'm gonna say
yes okay yeah and so I'm wanting to
translate different ontology listeners
might be coming from and say there's a
couple at least a couple different ways
we can think about this both of which
are meaningful
so there's a question of can we come
into a type of relationship as beings
where there is a kind of synergy a kind
of coherence where there's actually an
emergent property of something on deck
that then has a top-down effect in us we
can actually listen to that and there's
some interesting kind of metaphysical
propositions that would make that be the
case and I would say that's interesting
and then there's also the well if that's
not true
and mind is still processing in separate
brains is there still something we're
intending to listen into the group as
opposed to just myself and just having
the intention to consider the
perspectives of everyone there consider
the relationships between everyone there
consider the group as a whole not just
the individuals and the individuals and
speak what could be relevant and useful
for everyone and feel think about that
and feel into it use your whole self I
don't have to have a ontology of an
emergent collective consciousness to
have that process be a useful thing so
is there a point Jordan is is it helpful
or problematic to consider so let's say
what you just said which is let's call
it super skillful active collective
listening right where it's it you can
take first person second person third
person perspectives fluidly in order to
help both you know articulate extract
make sense of as much information and
sense making as we can together that
feels sort of secular humanist rational
that's just us being better people
playing better together is there
anything - what is gained and lost by
positing the third positing a
transpersonal element that may even
render us our individuality sub ordinate
- so clearly right so so in a lot of
traditional societies they might have
some wild-ass crazy ritual
like in Haitian Vodou or something like
that and there may be the there is a God
or a spirit that this ritual is
dedicated to and when enough of us lose
our separate sin itself they would they
would tell the story or make the meaning
that that is when the spirit of
such-and-such has come through right if
we're talking about post rational
coherence is there a thing that is super
ordinate to us if so is that helpful
in the sense of like get out of the way
all right we're laying in the mothership
or is it problematic because it creates
magical thinking projections and other
stuff well interestingly I think we
actually have a nice self referentiality
that just happens right here because so
the first step might be something like
something I call paradigm mapping Daniel
actually did paradigm happening I'm
gonna go so you take a particular story
that somebody's telling and you point by
point map it to a particular paradigm so
I could describe that in terms of
cognitive science and say okay what's
really happening is that when we create
a proposition that there's a third what
this does in our own minds is that it
allows us to no longer have an emotional
attachment to the rightness or wrongness
a particular idea which gives rise to a
cognitive capacity to be more creative
more fluid in explorations and therefore
is a more generative way it's a it's a
form of hack that allows us to have that
cognitive disposition right so I just
did a mapping to a kind of language in
cognitive science that would take
somebody who loads and runs cognitive
science as a sense making framework and
make them go okay that makes sense feels
good my I don't feel scared or angry
about what's happening right now that
feels like a feasible thing but of
course the meta proposition is that
mapping it to a paradigm full-stop at
all is the problem so anytime you're
actually trying to make sense by mapping
to a paradigm whether the paradigm is a
you know Vishnu or the God pan or
cognitive neuroscience or whatever
you're already recapturing the discourse
in a
particular way of thinking that limits
its capacity to be the thing we're
trying to actually do so the answer to
the question is like if the answer is a
question like the classic Buddhist just
whacking in the back of the head like
that's the only real response to that
kind of a question is don't go that
direction
sure okay so so yes and then but he so
if coherence is this ephemeral emergent
property best never named the never
subject to reality captured reality
tunnel capture like if that thing then
how the hell do scale it cuz we're
storytelling monkeys and at some point
we need recipes to help the thing
propagate so this good unless
everybody's just Yoda is then why does
it always break down mm-hmm why do why
wait to meet when just go doesn't break
down one of the reasons is because as
our friend Lao Tzu discovered and by the
way also a friend Buddha discovered
enter friend Jesus discovered every time
the storytelling monkeys try to turn to
a story to tell they it up so let's
be mindful of that and recognize that
the storytelling piece of it definitely
isn't the answer
okay so Sherlock Holmes style now carve
that out of the available portfolio of
things that we can do how do we go about
doing anything at all that doesn't
involve being a storytelling monkey oK
we've got it we've got an arrow problem
it's it's smaller it's a smaller space
but you know so let's just think I mean
if you know where we are culturally
these days there's a lot of people are
stumbling into these spaces via broad
access to ecstatic technologies so
whether that's transformational ffedith
festivals or you know transformational
technologies or whatever it is or
psychopharmacology you know all these
things people are bumbling into these
spaces on purpose or not they're getting
there they're recognizing holy
we're in the deep end and or this is rad
this is awesome this is terrifying
this is powerful right whatever it will
be they're there they know it when
they're getting there even if they're
not a hundred percent sure
they got there and then the moment
they're no longer in that coherent field
we're back to trying to make sense of it
in the prison-house of language telling
stories and making analogies or
metaphors so let's make a distinction I
think with this distinction I think is
quite helpful there's at least two
distinct uses of language this one over
here
I'll call semantic reality mapping this
is really good for things like building
houses or putting together battle plans
it Orient's coordinated behavior where
the checksum of reality is pretty strong
science does a lot of this sciences
pretty much this kind of thing over here
is poetry parable where the fingers
pointing to the moon and the point is
the moon not the finger this we can use
which is to be very careful that we're
not doing this so the problem that I
think happens all the time
particular with the folks that wear lots
of feathers and like to take too many
drugs is they do this so they have an
experience and then try to turn to
science so pre-scripted versus
descriptive both really they do
prescription and descriptions because
poetry is not really description
it's an octave figurative versus literal
yes yeah so the trick is we have to
actually be able to use language as some
way of creating a a resonance frequency
or protocol match that generates a
capacity for communication that is not
itself specifically semantics which I
would propose both parable and poetry do
it Orient's you in the direction of a
feeling in yourself like think about
poetry when you read a poem you don't
understand the poem but something about
the way that the poem coordinates
language helps you weren't in yourself
to an experience that feels like the
feeling that the poet was also feeling
so it creates a possibility there being
a connection at the level of interior
feeling not a connection at the level of
understanding well some something you're
I mean it felt like you did have some
future-forward practicality and
application in your initial description
you said it does well with novelty and
it's anti fragile and there's me as you
thought of it feel like timeless
qualities but it for sure feels
important now and going forward and and
I was wondering because if we can't do
the here's the instructions on how to
get back here because then we've named a
thing that's not the thing and emergent
coherence is kind of this weird slippery
thing to pin down you have communities
of practice like Quakers and others that
have spent centuries and even you know
generations passing on that knowledge I
was just with some indigenous for DNA
and Lakota folks right and they have an
infinite tradition of we will talk until
the thing that needed to get done
emerges but nor are we on the clock and
if this takes 10 minutes so be it if
this takes 10 days so be it so is there
a version of this that is you know kind
of quote-unquote scalable in the 21st
century for our current situations and
conditions and also nervous systems and
time scales / destruct abilities or are
those incompatible and we actually need
to say if you humans groups of humans
care about the possibility space that
coherence might afford us then you're
going to need to unplug and have a
different value set than contemporary
mainstream norms and
bit rates committee is is pretty simple
if somebody says they want to become a
to play basketball for in for the for
the Lakers they probably ought to become
a really good basketball player I mean
the real answer is that these lineage
traditions indicate to us that the human
instrument has a particular ambient
capacity to achieve offense this thing
coherent okay our job is to get really
really good at that to take that
particular ami in capacity and hone it
to a level that is the equivalent of a
contemporary marathon runner or a
contemporary sprinter honing the
instrument of running in a way that a
stone-age human can't become that Usain
Bolt of coherence is the answer to the
question it's there it's clearly
possible your knee is becoming Usain
Bolt though remember once the
five-minute mile was the five-minute
mile the three-minute mile four-minute
mile once the four-minute mile was
broken which was considered to be
impossible now I've got high school
students who can do it and it says one
of those things where once you actually
get to a particular node there's a
possible this is a location the
possibility space of homo sapiens
sapiens but can actually achieve that
particular point get there and then
build this the technique of that and
bring other people into that place and
use that to discover how to actually
scale it here I think you're asking very
important and also the hardest questions
and we don't have some of the previous
structures together yet that we would
deem too so when you talk about how
would we have a kind of coherence of
collective sense making and collective
choice making at scale well we've never
had at that scale right as you're
mentioning there was a certain level
that some tribes were able to develop it
was part of how tribal life happened and
we know that below Dunbar number and
above done row number there's really
fundamental
and then number is not a number it's
arranged based on the level of coherence
of the type of people more coherence
better communication protocols slightly
bigger number but one way of thinking
about the Dunbar number is a level at
which the communication protocols that
mediate the coherence break down which
is what you're asking a scale question
as you mentioned we'll talk it out if it
takes 10 days if I've got less than 150
people say and there's a big decision
that's gonna affect everybody's life
everyone can actually enter a tribal
conversation and all get to be part of
something that's gonna affect them which
means everyone sense-making can be held
together this was your question around
parallel and series right it's like both
those everybody sense making can be
heard and then choice making can factor
everybody sense making but if I met
thousands of people there's no way to
have everybody talk to even hear each
other without some kind of technology -
and so then tribes got bigger than that
by certain kinds of evolutionary forcing
functions by instituting things like
command and control hierarchy that
controlled the communication flows where
some people were doing choice making not
informed by the sense making of the
whole and now you get diminishing
returns on collective intelligence and
that's in the only scaling methods we've
had and that was that angry gods
hypothesis thing that we were sure yeah
there's many different technologies for
maintaining that particular style of
collective intelligence which of course
I could - is called game a like a whole
whole way of solving that problem yeah
basically game a and scaling
coordination or that are pretty
synonymous scaling coordination beyond
the Dunbar number huh meaning all the
other additional bells and whistles of
game a you would you would assert
basically I kind of follow on for how do
you how do you control and coordinating
resources and humans beyond 100 250 yeah
yeah money formal hierarchy the notion
of formality in general the idea that
there's a role that somebody fills as
opposed to humans are just humans and
sometimes like diamond it from formal
subordination to dynamic subordination
that shift
law policing each one of these are just
tools in the gaming a toolkit that are
all endeavoring to solve that problem
shared in group identity like political
left or nationality or religion or race
or whatever this it allows a
coordination of an in-group relative to
an out-group in an assumed rival risk
context and so game a is basically rival
risk game theory there's a way of
stating it and sort of it has three
distinct challenges that it's always
trying to solve for it's trying to solve
for is it able to coordinate so as to
maintain the integrity of the whole in
the context of nature can it feed
everybody is it able to coordinate in
the context of each other it's able to
avoid defection or group selection
inside its interior or just corruption
and is it able to coordinate because of
the other things of the same kind that
are doing the same thing that are trying
to steal each other's drinking shudders
milkshake all right and you now have
history and you have the failure of all
the previous civilizations because of
breakdowns in those three okay so then
let's imagine the game be groovy
coherence version how do how do we play
this let's assume that the kind of the
cat's out of the bag
people are stumbling and bumbling into
at least transient coherence via more
and less more or less and durable means
these days and that could literally be
psytrance
at boom festival in portugal plus
psychedelics is doing something and they
and the whole reason that there's an
even sai-san's
EDM movement i come I can't listen to
this stuff personally but I've heard
I've heard people who have been
skeptical finding themselves in the
middle of one of those dance floors with
premium function one acoustic tunes
sound systems you know and again
overlaid with psychedelics overlaid with
large crowds of people light sound all
of those kind of transformative
technologies dropping into something how
what how do we enter this post
conventional communitas coherence
whatever it be without the
moment the kind of the peak of it wears
off reverting back to game a power
structures in game theory because that's
what I keep seeing I see people
glimpsing it people of being lit up
recognizing it as something new
important magical profound healing
fill-in-the-blank starting to even agree
to organize around it where new family
where tribe we're gonna wear the frothy
edge of evolution whatever it would be
and then the wheels come off Monday
morning when the checks have to be
stroked or when the project you know the
project plans are late or we start
getting back into nitty gritty 3d yeah
so this is what I was trying to say
earlier I'll say it again I think maybe
more effectively so when you think about
we've got the concept of game you think
about game a there's two pieces to it or
two aspects or elements one element is
let's just call it society and they're
their element here is mind right so
there's a particular mind that you're
running to be able to run the code of
your society and society is effective to
the degree to which it has code that
works and minds that love it well okay
well if you delete this OOP but you're
still running this yes I've just had my
site trans experience and I've had
connection to the Godhead and what I do
immediately without even a second
hesitation as I immediately began
running it on the old code I am
recapitulate in the old code yes I'm
gonna get the same out no matter what
every time which is you know every
single time you see for example my the
aforementioned individuals who have been
the Kotick or great teachers that past
who studiously didn't write things down
and immediately were followed by people
who did which media became a state
religion which immediately started the
process of killing other people in their
name them it's a pretty interesting
story how gamey does that so the first
answer is they wanted the christ we got
joel osteen ID yeah how do you not do
this
what's another kind of mind you might
run well okay that's actually a very
tricky question because to think about
it involves invoking the mind that is
not to be to get rid of itself so the
answer is first slow way the down
think developmental we're going to
actually have to go all the way down to
conception in the developmental pathway
and only do that which is in fact
actually within the coherence that we
have in fact actually have achieved this
is why I said you actually to go to that
Center in the build-out so let's say you
want to say okay we've achieved
coherence and now let's build a an
organization that's like saying I'm a
three-month-old I'm gonna go drive a
race car nope sorry what can you do
maybe you can kind of have a
conversation that isn't going into game
it may be sadly but development has a
really cool thing you can get better at
it so the first is to actually really
recognize the absolute irreducible
necessity of comprehensively rebooting
mind all the way down were you saying
all the way down down what down to
childhood and infancy like early
childhood development we do with
conception so Jordans got infant right
now and we were so he's very much in
that active process of watching and
supporting development we were talking
about the other day
I don't know if it's true or not but
there's at least a story of some Native
American tribes were when they're
teaching language rather than and the
kid first starts asking the what
questions what's that what's that what's
that rather than say it's a crow in a
mountain a buffalo they would say that
is the great spirit expressed as a crow
the great spirit expressed as a mountain
great spirit expresses Buffalo so their
initial semiotic s-- their initial
ontology had the interconnectivity of
everything first and then the
distinction and so when we say all the
way down it's like to the level of do I
identify as a separate self in my own
experience that can get the design
game-theoretic relationship to you and
identify you as other do I experience
that or do I experience some kind of
deeper connectivity in which synergy is
the only thing that makes sense okay so
now we're into an interesting neck of
the woods right by the way just
practically speaking though somewhere
around eleven ten eleven is a good place
that's the level of mind from like
concrete operational on up noting that
you have to also deal with all the stuff
that's going on in the body in that pre
period so if you have resolved childhood
trauma or anything that's going on in
terms of even simple things like
bilateral integration do not the right
kind of developmental environment you're
gonna have challenges so you have to
actually work that whole thing that's my
conception the stuff that happens those
developmental stages going back and
making sure that the instrument is in
fact a fully functioning human
instrument all the way up and then of
course when you get to that childhood
adolescence phase that's where a lot of
the paradigmatic stuff starts to begin
to layer in and of course everything
that you learn from 17:18 on you should
put go ahead and shelve most of that
shelve it in what way
like don't allowed or don't allow it to
make sense of reality from that's the
indoctrination into game a formatting
information semantics
yes it's the code all the code that
you've been running that partitions
reality into prefabricated true and good
bits and bits yes yeah I said we're
getting somewhere interesting I want to
know where you want to go yeah it was
well it was specifically what you were
describing as far as you know the
apocryphal indigenous traditions right
that never semantically encoded
separation of self constantly infused
this is a this is this is great spirit
as it you know as an expression
and and and you know presumed or
inferred I think is a pre enlightenment
pre rational sense of selfhood that was
actually permeable liminal and you know
this is the bicameral mind if you know
like it that's it's that neck of the
woods the idea of hey maybe back in the
day humans no matter how much our
Hollywood movies you know project back
20th and 21st century valleys into our
sandal Bible epics you know we actually
people conceived of this themselves in
fundamentally different ways their
boundaries of self were more permeable
and they were able to connect in
preconventional collective sense which
actually was the subjugation of the self
and the subjugation of the of serenity
because that stuff hadn't even
necessarily come online in the ways we
tend to think of it then you've got you
know rational french enlightenment
articulation a hyper individual ego
separate selves and then our efforts in
this era say seventeen hundred to
roughly now right the only time is
probably the 70s yeah we've had these
we've had fascism communism cults I mean
it was cults and comics right that
notion of the subjugation of the self to
the collective and it's at odds with our
value sets and is often been super
problematic so this question is is how
might we other than just growing your
humans which you know I hear you saying
for obvious reasons how might we get to
a post conventional collective coherence
that rather than subjugating individual
sovereignty actually for grounds it and
preserved animates it protects it and at
the same time we have that dynamic
subordination or you know not game
theory capture we play well with each
other no one sucking grabs the ring
and we all create the the Council of
Elrond so you just set up hyper
individualism and some kind of oneness
or collectivism as a thesis antithesis
and you're asking about synthesis it's
one way of framing it
and so far in the conversation for
whatever reason you've been doing a
beautiful job of asking questions but I
kind of want to ask back since I know
this is exactly the center of what
you're focused on how do you see that
synthesis emerging beats me man I mean I
feel like to your point a little bit
like we have to train and we have to
practice you know you said you everybody
couldn't become who same Bowl but like
you can't make a soccer team whether
you're saying both there's only one of
those sons-of-bitches and he's faster
than everybody else all right and so I
honest to god don't know it feels like
their needs I mean as as like I hear
what you're saying from the kind of
full-on like Zen koans of it like don't
name the thing and on the other hand if
we are looking to migrate people into at
least beginning to practice it together
however messily and imperfectly what are
the liberating structures what are the
rules to the infinite game right even if
baked into the rules of the infinite
game or it's not the rules either how
can we do that so that we don't have
these glimpses of something more shared
between us that continually seem to
unspool and you know and here's a few
that I've seen I mean I think the key
thing is to recognize that obviously we
don't know how because otherwise we
already would have and that's crucial
it's important so it's worth continue to
try which of course all of us know
intuitively but I think it's important
to keep putting it out there and my
sense is at least my own personal
experience is that it's becoming more
clear like I don't feel like I've been
wandering in the desert coming back to
the same place now it feels like
actually there is more and more clarity
so I'll give you some examples of things
that seem to be more right than wrong so
one is let's just take think the concept
of learning and what I want to do is I
want to I want to shift and it's not
novel like this happens biscuits I think
it's key is just to hold things in the
right order the difference between
teaching and cultivating Epiphany
and so teaching is I give you a set of
information I through any particular
means generally rote endeavor to cause
you to be able to repeat that
information back to me and verify that
you've absorbed it in a way that has
high fidelity so that is coding it's
software and I'm creating some sort of
software mapping in you in cultivating
epiphany I try to find some how to
actually generate in you the insight
they gave rise to that being the thing
in the first place all right so it's not
even teach a man to fish but cultivate
in a man the the capacity of becoming
fisherman in himself that distinction is
definitely one of the distinctions
generator function more than output
that's a way of putting it okay and then
we can know I've got some thoughts on
how to do that synthesis you said that
was one of the distinctions no I think
this this useful thing of saying hey
here's the here's the stuff I found yeah
and you know most of it has been a
disaster but there's a few that actually
kind of work
so it's this let's see what else we got
okay so here's a few we talked about
coherence of difference rather than
coherence of sameness like heterogeneous
coherence correct so when you're talking
about the subordination of the
individual versus individuality there's
something having to do with that there
is a meaningfulness and a beauty and a
dignity of the individual that we don't
want to subordinate in some kind of
homogenizing way we don't want to
decrease the diversity that leads to the
resilience of life right and the
richness of it am i own discernment and
choice making even as i'm part of a
collective that feels really important
right and then simultaneously there are
kinds of diversity and difference that
only lead to
unreconciled bol entropic conflicts and
so those are not interesting kinds of
diversity and so we want as much
diversity as we can create synergy
across we get maximum synergy from
maximum diversity with maximum parallax
so now think about for a moment with the
idea of parallax and just just define
that if it was like so parallax in terms
of the way the two eyes neither eye has
depth perception or peripheral vision
right and when I have both eyes together
they they have a lot of shared things
that they see but because they're in
different locations they also have
slightly different things that they see
so there's overlap a difference right
and this is important so when I put the
two together they're not competing for
which one is right that would be
ridiculous right they're actually the
optical cortex is putting the
information together in a way where if
there's actually an error in this one
its corrected by what this one is doing
so they error correct each other and
then because I can compute the
hypotenuse of the triangle I actually
get depth perception and periphery so
the two eyes together give things that
neither of them did separately plus err
correction so I want them to have some
shared reality and I want them to find
their shared reality but I also want
them to have difference and then I want
them to relate in a deep way and then I
wouldn't want my ears to be more eyes
right like there's a deeper kind of
parallax between ears and eyes where
eyes are giving me location of things
and ears are giving me a different kind
of location things so the ears with each
other give me echolocation and the ears
and the eyes together give me a
different kind of sense making in
3-space so we are mr. Potato Head so if
you think about like every imagine if
the ears and eyes were just fighting
over which was right and the other one
was one was comprehensively right in a
complete description of reality and the
other was comprehensively wrong that
would be ridiculous we would dissolve
into gibberish right there is a place
where they all have accurate information
about reality and it's all partial this
speaks to them that initiatives like the
third that you mentioned so in the
context when the relationship between
the eyes and the ears there's a third we
know that sir that's our experience our
open though yeah right so then the
question is okay
eub eyes all the years where's our third
but it didn't meet about that is that
then you get some very interesting
things where on the one hand you have
both of us actually have a clear
awareness in ourselves that we are here
to with fidelity report what we perceive
of reality we are deeply cognizant of
the fact that that is not reality mm-hmm
we are deeply caught in to the fact that
the other is here to report reality and
that somehow there is something that can
happen that gives a deeper grasp of
reality and the reason when I'm zooming
in on that is that it actually a lot of
the characteristics of this kind of
place have to do with a a way to fully
and deeply honor like all the you
know without the least bit of attachment
to any of it and that's key you have to
actually we're not in the it's not the
pries the trans so we actually want to
know lots of stuff I want to have really
amazing frameworks we want to have a lot
of life experience when to bring that
all the way in but then we also didn't
want to have complete non attachment to
any of it and be able to code of create
a bespoke since synthetic language in
real time if necessary ok so that's kind
of interesting I mean I loved all that
ok so I want to add something to this
because this is actually like this is
really exciting to me so I've got lots
of senses right and they're all taking
in some true information they can all
have error and they're all partial
I also have lots of actuator I can move
lots of different muscles and of course
the the leg doesn't want the to compete
with the arm for which one gets to be
the actuator it actually wants to not
just coordinate but to be in a kind of
coherence right and so I've got lots of
sensory stuff I got lots of actuator
stuff why is it that it's not just
random splotches of coal
in sound but it comes together into a
coherence of self and world and self in
relationship with world as a coherence
phenomena so how all the sensing comes
together inside of me is a coherence
villain that's the binding problem in
neuroscience rain and in the philosophy
of mind and then the actuator why am I
not how do all those parts work together
so well as a coherence phenomenon so if
we think about that every human on their
own the next level up is sensing making
sense and actuated but then when we come
together like I want you sensing stuff
differently than I am and I trust that
there is information in that that I
actually really want to have access to
myself and I want the collective to have
and I want you actuated differently than
I am but I really want to come into
coherence so in almost fact I mean I
wasn't kind of like that the joke about
mr. Potato Head is actually kind of like
who is the third right if we personify
and your sounds like so we're all
different organs bringing different
perspectives when we come together we
get dimensionality right we get a
whether it's a colocation of binocular
vision we get more out of aggregating
and integrating our realities and that
then becomes as you said not just
fragmented data feeds it becomes a
Gestalt boom though it becomes a reality
for some super a sensible version of us
that is greater than the sum of its
parts
yeah
so you said initial conditions good with
novelty and Auntie fragile but what and
then you also said hey the mine that's
running like you take the societal
structure off but the mind the mind that
was formatted to support this assisted
social structure persists even if you
have this experience it's gonna get
looped back through old fundamentally
gamei habits and patterns which sounds
super fragile this right like
like right now coherence is highly
highly fragile yes and yet you're also
saying it either has an inherent
property or maybe you just hope that it
would be ultimately eventually anti
fragile can we pull that app up because
I think I wouldn't be having this
conversation if it was a done deal
or if the first time people glimpsed it
were like got it let's go rock
with this this is actually wildly
delicate right now yeah I think this if
you if you hold in your mind the example
the game of game this happens of you
like the best current example of
coherence and it really is like in the
entire universe as far as we know it by
the best actual example of coherence and
then we say okay well if we do the
anthropology and we take a look back and
say oh how long did it take to pull that
 together finding the remember I had
that spot in possibility space so
imagine a cube and in that cube let's
make the cube 1 million by 1 million by
1 million so it's a big cube ok and all
over there are different kinds of
phenotypes hominids happened to be a
sphere about a thousand by a thousand by
thousand in that cute mollusks are down
here inside the sphere of hominid
there's an even smaller sphere which is
homo sapiens which is maybe five by five
by five in terms of the possibility
space and you're talking sentient
biomass what's your what's your million
cube my cube is the well it's actually
an n-dimensional space but I'm reducing
it to three to make it work so don't put
indexes on otherwise it's go
talk down the metaphor exam and isn't
exam doesn't does it hold it so the how
do you find in the totality of all the
things that are going on a particular
complex that hangs together two
particular homeostatic autocatalytic
phenomenon that has the thing and
necessary for it to actually hold
coherently right so what happens is that
there's a lot of different exploration
around this little place just think of
it as a place if you're not of sapiens
right so in hominid you got primate and
you got hominid and you smaller and
smaller in problem in hominid there's
all these foof explorations of okay how
does this thing what were the different
ways to play in this hominid game and as
you kind of get closer to the the
location of Homo sapiens you got you
know homo erectus right and you got I
will bear against us there's a some
things come together but it takes like a
million and a half years to actually
land on Boop there's the thing that
actually has all the different elements
together by the way meta contextual it
has not just the physiological
capacities but it also has grand mothers
and fathers who can actually support the
neoteny authentic necessity for this
plus sista to be able to actually emerge
with culture so there's a bunch of
that's been put together through
evolutionary process it's exploring the
space of possibility and as it kind of
hits there's enough bending of the space
of possibility until it orbits around
that spot all right now if you take that
we're looking at something which is
inside that homo sapiens sapiens spot
and I might hypothesize by the way has
been there the whole time which just
finds a meta arc coming here but we're
not gonna go into T ha T ology that is
maybe it's one by one it's a small
territory but we can notice when so
first we can use that as an example of
saying okay this is how hard it is so
we're gonna kind of vector in that
direction and what kind of like Buddhism
will emerge and kind of move the game
forward a little bit will kind of learn
some interesting stuff and then collapse
them Christianity will happen and look
at him do its thing and a big level up
occurs and the general sort of state of
Homo sapiens but we don't quite get
there so now at this point we're like
all right given everything we know and
given the timeframe that we think we may
have actually to pull this off what's
the process by
we explore it and of course again the
point that I'm sending is to degree to
which as an individual you can put
yourself inside the sphere that defines
this location you can get there
then in that place can you bring other
people into that place and in that place
just that group what can happen there
and this then the conception metaphor so
now we're moving from the long term arc
at the species level is just took at the
long term ARP at the individual level
the fertilized egg is fragile in the
context of once it goes to his
developmental arc extraordinarily
resilient being an adult human is kind
of a kick-ass animal really really good
at being animal but of course the
fertilized egg is still extremely
fragile
so the question we might ask is like
well what's our womb well I'd actually
push back on that I'd say a
adult human this is a is a weak naked
kick by everybody but with culture with
the instruction manual he's badass I
actually disagree I would point out that
the the things that just basic humans
can do like the Roche it accurately are
actually rather astounding in the
context of the animal kingdom and the
plasticity of the design parameters with
human body can actually be trained to do
that is not coded in the instinct of a
given animal is as impressive as the
flexibility at the level of IDS base
that there is no Baryshnikov in the
animal kingdom and to the egregious
there is diversion to carve that animal
cannot also then become an Aretha
Franklin I think that's actually pretty
 intense how much plasticity in
design parameters in this particular
physical body then of course you layer
that plug that actuation capacity the
plasticity of actuation capacity in with
the plasticity of perception and
ideation obviously that thing is got
well you get to to the moon and back but
I think the the the proposition that I
think you're hitting on I think the key
question is recognizing that the
definition
or the necessary incision conditions of
coherence that I was describing is very
much the adult form the mature form and
so it is very much the case in my
experience the coherence as it currently
is able to manifest I were actually able
to establish it is extremely fragile and
quite difficult to hold together even in
just ordinary conditions much less than
quite challenging conditions so the the
question of scaling it is a question
actually of how do we simultaneously
increase its let's call it strength its
capacity to maintain coherence under a
wide variety of different conditions its
scope the degree to which it can
actually bring in more people and its
depth the degree to which it's actually
able to fully realize the synergy value
of those people like instead of like a
narrowband
broadband so the question of how do we
scale coherence I think is all three of
those simultaneously if you would if you
mind if we can go back to that
initiative like the little things that
seemed to be seem to be true one of the
other ones that I've found is that most
of the failures to show up seem to
actually fail for relatively simple
reasons having to do with
either the particularity zuv how human
development in world delivers certain
kinds of trauma or the particularity of
how the coming to being of Homo sapiens
delivered what you might call a species
level trauma so either people who are
entering into coherence enter into
relations of codependency where you've
talked about you know the victim mindset
and the savior mindset like these are
all habitual responses that are either
hard-coded into homo hard coded in what
humaneness is at the at the more sort of
a primal level or because we are human
beings who universally have been
developed in the context of society
we've developed an enormous large number
of blind spots bad habits and traumas as
a consequence of that so sort of step
one of these sort of you know things
that seem to work is you have to
actually have gone through all the work
of actually at the very least resolving
yourself out of the trauma of society to
the extent that you know to pretty high
extent to be perfectly honest and then
having a capacity of being conscious of
how biological instincts and habits that
are hardwired below the developmental
level are going to show up in
relationship so being able to go through
that level of training and there seems
to be a kind of a minimum of those two
that Pete any one has to be some level
of development along both those kinds of
work to be able to intern in coherence
at all yeah and so because now we're
dealing obviously there are no folks
comfortably camping out in a happy game
be land and anybody who are going to be
the trail breakers pioneers bridge
builders are going to have to be
shedding game a conditioning and
potentially accumulated traumas and at
least but you know we've had some of
these conversations to folks that are
breaking trail and even let's say folks
they're breaking trail and leading the
way and even fairly often bringing
others into
experiences if coherence themselves
suddenly to significantly still
traumatize the wounded healers right and
so and even in an instant specifically
we've even come across a community
that's dedicated to working on all those
traumas and back there's there's quite a
few there's quite a few that are you
know engaging in their access point to
communitas is through helping people
better engage experience catharsis right
and then you get this ecstatic moment of
like holy we're healed we're whole
we're connected isn't this beautiful and
amazing and then it on spools right
there and the question is like well wait
is it just we need to do more of the
thing that these guys are already doing
they were partial or they weren't quite
there yet and do we get into some
puritanical increasingly high buff or
who gets to play at the coherence game
because you know you're bringing your
dirty shoes into our pure petri dish
like how do we actually help the
transitional generations generations
well I think you already said that key
piece so one is humility the other is
patience
I think one of the problems that tends
to happen is there's a real significant
meaningful breakthrough which then takes
itself up set as having been to the
breakthrough oh we did it
awesome we're there right as opposed to
a okay this is probably a three to five
maybe six generation process so it's a
more like this this less like this
movement and directionality with just
any incomprehensible level of constantly
going into humility and recognizing that
no matter how much seems to have been
done we may only be eight percent of the
way there and so that's a lot left and
some since that's that but you can
always get you can get closer and and if
when you are closer this is crucial
right being able to distinguish the
difference between when you are more
towards that and less and then being
able to notice that the choices that are
coming from more towards that are the
ones that should be leading your choice
making
and the choices that are coming from
less from that of the word should be
trailing and fading so you actually
become a vector and so that then you
become better and better at using that
sense of more like this that's like this
in more and more of your choices you
actually begin to get a very nice
progressive movement in that container
of humility and patience with enough
runway and enough tolerance for creative
destruction because you talked about
you'd run away
well time that you could you talked
about like hey humans are amazing and
check us out we can figure out living in
the Arctic in the deserts well not
really you drop any single naked monkey
in either of those places they're dead
in 72 hours but right right but but
enough clothes but no cigars and some
lucky bastard finally figures it out and
then that gets encoded in culture and
then not everybody has to die and
suddenly we're a desert tribe or where
did the Inuit right so so how do we do
this if right there's both fragility and
not in definite time I am reminded of
the movie the Martian what I notice is
that there's a another trap two traps
actually one trap is the trap of urgency
and here the trap is the trap of like
perceived a responsibility when you say
it's a trap of urgency meaning the
perception and then the acting as if or
do you mean the actual the perception of
the acting as if which is in fact fully
accurate fully accurate perception and
the acting as if is a trap right it's
the it's the notion of you know James
Bond defusing the bomb the clock is
ticking he has to actually be acting his
nonchalant as if he's in the process of
you know swirling his martini because
even the least bit of feeling and
urgency guarantees failure it's the
mountaineering go slow to go fast right
exactly so that's another key right and
this happens all the time as you get it
now you can see it happen I've seen that
happen many times in myself or there's a
recognition of the urgency which leads
to a certain hardening and a certain
willingness to explain moving into
either things that are not yet actually
possible in coherence
or rationalizing pulling from the game a
toolkit oh that's a doozy you're done
okay that speaks very much to what you
are saying in terms of people falling
out of their state and we could talk
about what a stage development take from
a state experience but we could also
talk about what are the sources of
fragility if we want to talk about
antifragility we should understand the
sources of fragility and what we can do
with those and so some simple constructs
if we're endeavoring to create some kind
of coherence we could have that break
down from internal forces where external
forces are both right so external forces
means rival risks type dynamics which is
an in-group that is smaller than
everything given that it is still
interacting with the rest of the world
that its embedded in so I would say all
in groups that are smaller than
everything have some inherent fragility
of that kind then we can look at
dynamics on the inside it could cause
fragility and breakdown which is
actually going into rival risk type
dynamics with each other because the
coherence that brings about the synergy
that brings about the emergent
capacities that actually gets selected
for happens because of a kind of
relating that is anti rival risk it
allows a very deep type of synergy to
occur
I'd like to have a proposal meta and I
met I met a move the meta move I'm
noticing that the conversation has a
particular topology to it and I'm
curious why that's the case
so it's meta because I presume that the
answer to that curiosity will have
something to do with either homos we are
in fact primates or something about our
developmental environment this causes
topology to spontaneously emerge which
is to say that the conversation is a V
Daniel's talking to you
I'm talking to you Daniel and I are not
talking to each other and there is no
third
like something right there yeah so
that's one that's the meta move why why
is why did that topology settle in the
way that it settled in then the meta
meta move the unfortunate oh the meta
meta move is of course in the act of
actually contemplating the meta
we can in fact endeavor to be doing it
rather than talking about it and we can
notice how the doing it informs the
talking about it in a fashion that
resolves the question and in addition to
the three of us and whatever the
container or emergent is this is also on
film and there's the consciousness of
the people who are watching it which I'm
also sensing into and wanting to make
sure that this is hopefully useful for
so that's included in the consideration
something between comprehensible and or
interesting so there's a third to the
enth I mean I I would at least I feel
like there was there have been moments
little blips where there's been at least
for me new or interesting perspectives
and our house and insights and I don't
know whether that's things I just
haven't heard you guys say before or
whether those are actually you know
imagined but yes what I'm noticing is
that I'm noticing a feeling that they're
not being something coming from Daniel
that actually creates the right kind of
symmetry in the conversation so I'm
interested in getting your perspective
in a fashion that is not responsive but
is in fact a direct like coming from the
inside out
the thing that was feeling to share I
just didn't hear a spot where it was in
it was relevant actually very much
connects to the conversation that the
two of you were having but it was what I
was thinking about anyways which is this
relationship between the subordination
of the individual for the collective and
the sovereignty of the individual like
fractal sovereignty and I was thinking
about the body as an analogy of it's
such a fascinating thing where all of
the cells are autonomous agents governed
by their own internal genetic code they
could grow in a petri dish for some
period of time but they're operating in
a way that is both in their own good
interest and in the interest of the
other cells around them in the entire
body simultaneously so there isn't a
theory of trade-offs of what is good for
them is damaging other or they're
sacrificing themselves for other and
that's stripped the level of
cell-to-cell but it's also true at the
level of organ to organ and organ
systems organ system in cell to organ so
at vertical levels and horizontal levels
there's this kind of just radical anti
rival risk synergy of sovereign things
of things that have their own
self-organizing boundary the facha of
the organ the cell membrane and we're
talking about that at the next level of
organism to organism and we've done that
up to tribe and now we're talking about
beyond tribal scale but that that kind
of process and I'm thinking about cancer
in the body because a cancer cell starts
doing what seems to be in the short-term
better for it it actually replicates it
consumes and replicates faster but it
breaks down the coherence of the whole
and in the process it ends up killing
itself killing its progeny right it
suicides because it debases the
substrate that it depends upon and kind
of a short term small-minded focus
and so there's this idea like regard to
like the there's an interesting feeling
even of that way of speaking of it as
subordinate the individual and I was
just thinking of Einstein's quote that
it's an optical delusion of
consciousness to think there are
separate things when in fact there is
one integrated reality that we call
universe and so like we can actually
rationally get and something I think
about all the time is ok I can think
about myself as a separate thing but
what am i without the atmosphere I don't
even exist what am i without the plants
that generate the atmosphere I don't
even exist what am i without the
electromagnetic field without the earth
without gravity without the other people
that made the things that I use and the
concepts that I use so when I get that
I'm an emergent property of the hole
that has uniqueness and individuality
but it's not separable from that the
distinctness doesn't mean separable 'ti
then I have both distinct and
inseparable simultaneously so I have
interconnected with the whole and having
a unique role to play and so the
dialectic there is something that
increases actually the distinction in
the uniqueness and increases the synergy
and interconnectivity simultaneously and
the first part is to just recognize if
I'm doing the cancer thing it will end
up being bad for what I care about -
even if in the short term it seems like
a good thing and I think that's the
thing with rival race game theory that
we're at the place where we realize
exponentially larger extraction and
pollution and war an information war is
existential now so we can't even
rationalize that we can keep doing it
that way I'm noticing as you're saying
that I'm trying to get to the feeling of
it which is by the way quite hard but
one of the places I landed was that you
know we still have that nice example of
the jazz band unfortunately we actually
have concrete examples of what these
things are like to be in and I'm
noticing that as a player in the jazz
band that feeling of
not being subordinated to the whole but
actually somehow being supported in
achieving a higher level of
individuation is felt so the question of
course was that feel like it's
interesting to notice that while some
people not many I think try to think
about that
strategically like okay how do I make
sure that I am in fact protected most
people are in fact proceeding by do I
actually feel like I am increasing my
autonomy do I feel more agenting and
more autonomous and more able to express
my essence or selfness
into world so immature should like what
does that feel like to actually move
into that place and if we could do it
like what would actually had felt like
for this single cell going into the
multi cell because there's something
about the quality of that that we can
actually grasp at that level you've done
it many times in many different modes
like you've done and when you've gone
like creating a team's doing athletic
activities together that's if they flow
into something but where the place where
each individual begins to drop into a
space where they are at their peak as an
individual so yeah and that feels like
something you know straight forwardly
obvious which is basically my
coordinators are met and I've seen in my
worldview and everything and and my
needs are validated such that I can then
drop them in order to play you know
going from my five finite game of
separate self into a more infinite game
of emergence and it feels like there
also needs to be a tolerance for
ambiguity and a willingness to get messy
so back to the jazz guys I mean
consistently the most righteous jams
come out of kind of going in down into
the mud as a band you know someone's
often noodling exploring a theme or you
know and it's not actually danceable
it's not anything and it's even to the
point of just unspooling entirely and
then some Quicksilver starlight comes
out of that you know and then it all
gels and it's that
patience to your point about timing
Jordan you know it's the patience to let
it all come undone in order to come back
together in some new emergent form that
seems almost essential and and I don't
know that when you were described cuz I
mean as soon as you described organisms
organs and all that I was like oh yeah
okay
so social media digital narcissism
 scraping everybody else's Jam
biting people's rhymes poaching people's
dama feels like the cancerous impulse
that we're experiencing right now and
when we come when we glimpse this
emergence or of coherence it's sort of
like oh you're you know your life's work
and special like the thing you're
uniquely designed to do you know what in
a traditional sense might be called
Dhamma you know fits perfectly with the
thing I'm uniquely here to do and holy
 I was carrying this thing it was
lonely it was hard it was scary it was
heavy but now I think that actually
these pieces lay down beside each other
and now we're actually beginning to see
a picture that none of us held and none
of us could see and that to me is like I
think how this happens right but on the
other hand we're also having people be
like oh that's a pretty damn picture let
me just scribble it and snap a selfie
and post it well there's an
interesting that happens there right so
as an individual if particularly the
social environment if you take
responsibility in yourself
mmm-me to this right okay so the human
instrument I think has a really
fine-tuned ability to discern the
distinction between those two things so
you can tell when somebody's faking it
in a deep way like something in your gut
is telling you something's off they're
not connected they're not expressing
something that's coming from their heart
right they're playing somebody else's
jam or whatever the phrase is do you use
if you don't when that happens if you
give that attention if you give it
energy you are up everything it
is crucial as an individual that on the
one hand when somebody is actually out
on the tightrope in the middle of trying
to figure out how to express something
from the heart that is very difficult
that you actually call
what that's gold well done awesome and
on the other hand when you feel it know
there's something off about that this
guy here's faking it that you also
express that clearly and so the what
happens you get a very interesting set
of feedback loops to the degree to which
everybody is playing the game of both
participant and curator with
authenticity and skillfulness you
actually start getting positive feedback
loops that move into a space of
increasingly anti fragile power but if
there's defection and the defection here
I mean things like laziness or bad habit
or of course obviously just
old-fashioned defection like oh I'm
gonna steal that and run with it then it
doesn't come together so but this is
this this is nice right this is fine
like two degree to which Jaime you show
up consistently every single time
willing to put it on the line and
calling what is true true and calling
what is false false then and I meet you
there trying to do the same thing what
ends up happening is that we actually
build a relationship that has resilience
to it there's strength to it and there's
strength to it both in the sense that we
can have confidence in it and it says
that it can do more than a relationship
that doesn't have that in it so there is
actually a natural like orientation
towards strength that does show up there
but is also based on skillfulness
determined at the bottle to be a
consumer and a curator because otherwise
you got the difference between Burning
Man and fire festival yeah well this is
goes back to that problem of society so
much of discernment is just like almost
the first thing that is beaten out is
discernment and so being able to come
back and do things like recognize the
whole thing here is part of discernment
and being able to listen and say okay my
heart aches when somebody says something
all right well that's probably real deep
important true learn how to listen to it
learn how to speak what it means with
clarity so this is like an that minimum
ingredient the sermon is a minimum
ingredient and in short supply these
days and in short supply but everyone
everywhere can actually improve the
discernment where they are and it will
always be
a life better so it's an easy thing to
say increase your discernment it's never
a bad idea to your earlier call there's
actually something that I feel to add
the conversation that hasn't been spoke
to yet but actually was feeling into and
wanted to speak to the kind of topology
you were noticing because there's a
something that I noticed about that I
think is actually really nice so we
could ask is it because Jamie is sitting
in the corner and it's literally just
the physicality of it there's probably a
number of factors but it makes heaps of
sense that you and I have actually got
to have more conversations on these
topics more recently than we have
there's kind of an assumed knowing we
didn't all get to jam before on this or
prepare this this is real-time
extemporaneous and I don't know if
you've ever even expressed Rule Omega to
Jamie but he's just doing it yeah and
he's kind of openly inquiring into the
questions that are really alive and it's
a little bit easier for us to riff off
what each other saying because we've got
some recently shared language on these
things and but the rule Omega is
actually a really simple practical thing
that I towards coherence that I would
like everybody here to get is if if
Jordan are talking or if you and I are
talking like we we have this and I think
we naturally had it as worth making
explicit is if you say something that
sounds ridiculous to me or batshit crazy
or wrong I actually give the benefit of
the doubt that you might have a reason
that I didn't understand first so rather
than just default into you're probably
wrong I'll ask more questions and and
that giving the benefit of the doubt
that you actually might have something
useful to say increases my making sure
that I understand you before I'm
responding and that actually and the
disagreeing was something that you
weren't even saying because I didn't
seek to understand well enough creates
very turbulent flow rather than laminar
flow breaks down coherence right
if people could just do that towards
coherence if they could just give the
benefit of the doubt that each other
that everyone has some signal even if
it's on a very different part of reality
than the part they're focused on and
even if there's noise involved and
they're listening for the signal first
that would change everything
that's a starting place so Daniel
expresses something and let's see he's
trying to express something's hard which
by the way the rule make is designed for
that kind of a thing like I'm not
interested in having conversations that
aren't actually trying to break new
ground so okay do it dude so you
expressing something hard and in the
expression ninety-eight percent is noise
and two percent is signal like the jazz
riff but what happens is that my job is
to actually do two things one hold all
of it not just say it that was that
wasn't a hundred percent right so I'm
just gonna nuke it hold all of it then
in my self discernment to what degree
can i express something back that gets
rid of the fifty fifty percent that is
noise so now I've got six percent signal
express it back and of course if he can
then do that and now you three is even
better a more profound instrument
because you're gonna be bringing a
different perspective perhaps you can
take it and actually zoom in on it down
to the poem you're actually 50% signal
that's the idea and so one it's an
invitation say hey we're trying to do
something's hard let's all try to do
something that's hard to be willing to
take the risk of not speaking elegantly
and on the premise that everyone else is
doing their absolute level best
to hear that which is trying to speak
itself through you and listening them is
in themselves like oh there it is tone
got it there's something beautiful and
clear there here's what I heard and
that's weird Omega and there's a
psychological safety that's created to
be able to try out new stuff knowing
that we know we're trying out new stuff
we're giving the benefit of the doubt so
it actually does become more explorative
and that's where you get more novelty
and then I imagine I don't know if this
is true for Daniel I imagine it's true
for you but certainly if it's true for
me is that I'm also noticing it myself
but this
constant you know when you're meditating
you feel this this constant chatter and
flow of like all the things that are
going on internally that are either like
certain ideas are popping up or
emotional responses some of them are
like social emotional responses some of
them are like just like I got a P and
like being able to actually notice all
that chatter internally and do the
disturbing interior and say okay Paul
that chatter which have a heart that's
actually signal oh
but listen to all of it you have to have
you'll make it goes in and out right I'm
listening to myself fully and I'm
listening to the to the others fully and
trying to use discernment to
continuously allow that process to turn
that into gold now there's a really
important distinction that we're saying
something that is different than the way
that some people think about
multi-perspective ism which is we're not
saying I'm not saying all perspectives
are equally valid and I'm also not
saying that there is no way to integrate
them into higher order understanding I'm
saying all perspectives have some signal
generally have some noise and that
perspective is itself a reduction of
information on the reality being
perceived and that's actually quantum
foam live at all from just the
definition actually of observer
observing observed I can't to take
myself out of reality to observe it in a
unitary way and if I'm observing you now
versus in a different state I'm gonna
observe different things right someone
else at a different time if I'm
observing the west side of a house
versus the east side of the house versus
the aerial view versus inside the house
they all give me some signal some truth
about the nature of the house none of
them give me the whole truth of the
nature of the house because it's a 3d
object with interior T in depth and I
can't collapse it perfectly into a 2d
picture right so perspective itself is a
reduction on information complexity so
the first part I give rule Omega to
myself that my perspective has some
signal but I'm also positive it's
incomplete
and thinking that my perspective knowing
that there's truth in it it's easy to
think it's the truth
or it's true with a capital T and that's
like an immaturity we have to get over
there's some truth and I'm positive it's
incomplete and I think there's a pretty
good chance if you've been perceiving
the situation you might have some
additional truth that I actually really
want which means truth is trans
perspectival and Jordan was saying
earlier also transparent I'm attic
meaning I have to take multiple
perspectives through multiple types of
interpretation that was at the beginning
saying like the words aren't gonna quite
get it so we're gonna have to come at it
from different perspectives because the
words are also in a reduction on the
information complexity of the thing this
is also a big part of that what happens
in the post I have pre trans you know
what's why is this not a Quaker meeting
the Quakers are doing something awesome
but they're running one paradigm we have
to actually say it's okay let's run
what's what the very minimum from both
the Lakota and the Quaker paradigms
while we're at it I'm usually running I
don't know 70 or 90 distinct paradigms
simultaneously all the time and there's
many and ie and it is not to try to
collapse them down to a single master
paradigm but actually to allow each one
of them to have the particular piece
that they're holding just like eyes and
ears say okay cool this paradigm is able
to grasp things in a certain way this
one doesn't that's neat recognizing
always that you're never going to be
able to perceive reality but that by
virtue of getting more and more
dimensions of parallax you can actually
have more possibility of having some
insight and it's the insight is the key
not the sense so you're actually going
from sense making into insight which is
very different means you sort of outside
in inside out yeah right that you're
trying to actually build a capacity to
be someone who does rather than a
knowledge you want to understand oh
what's happening you want to be able to
respond to what's happening so it's here
you become a musician by virtue of
having a skillful portfolio of
sensitive qualities in self and then a
skillful mapping of that into expression
you don't become a musician by being
very good at reading somebody else's
music so there's something I the thing
that I was actually saying that I wanted
to add to the conversation has to do
with the rival risk nature of ego so
like when you talk about falling out of
it the fact that we exist within a macro
economy where we have private balance
sheets and our balance sheets are rival
risk meaning I can advance mine by
ripping your stuff off and vice versa we
have we have structural basis for
rivalry because they involved in a rival
risk context we have to change that so
there's like not just a new sense making
and culture and experience but also new
infrastructure and new social structures
probably beyond the scope of what we'll
get to today but even we take the
balance sheet away there's the like is
someone wanting to take up more space in
the jam session because of unmet
identity needs and do they actually care
about the felt experience of somebody
else who's seeking to express something
and we actually feel do we actually feel
each other and are we coming from enough
wholeness that I'm not relating out of
need most of the time yeah yeah and
musicians call that cutting right like
ever like if somebody deliberately out
plays the other person and leaves that
and leaves their contribution diminished
versus accretive yeah right there's a
cutting sessions in this bad boy
yeah yeah yeah so notice you know if we
switch this domain I'm thinking about
the folks in this side of the camera so
let's take this and make this practical
in the context of sense making in the
world do we live in right now almost
everything that we're talking about if
you apply it one of the things that you
notice of course is that all the stuff
that typically goes under the heading of
sense making is worse than useless so
any newspaper any news program pretty
much every scientific paper to be
perfectly frank you know we've done that
analysis and taking a look at how a few
of them are replicable
and how much of an incentive structure
there is for actually lying to be able
to generate local selective advantage at
least misinterpreting yeah or
overstating or whatever it's yeah it's a
mess so game a as a sense making
architecture
broadly speaking waste of time
well that opens up some very interesting
challenges and this goes back to the
notion of game B being immature
infantile no zygotic haha but where we
are now I would say is holding yourself
a feeling of care for everything and
then truly act and make sense in the
direction of your actual responsibility
which I believe has been said more
elegantly as what does it think globally
act locally
just take that seriously but the reality
is is that everybody's got plenty of
work to do at home and we're trying to
that's what I'm saying what I'm I'm
articulating is that to do this thing to
come into coherence to play game B
there's a lot of work that has to be
done in the individual in yourself and
then the way to learn how to do
coherence is always going to be with
people with whom you actually have real
relationships not us nothing three of us
your wife your husband your kids your
parents or at least other human bodies
with whom you can actually be in real
physical proximity meaning for a
meaningful amount of time so that's
that's definitely going to be the fabric
out of which this thing gets woven it
takes time for sure and it takes doing
the hard human stuff so you actually
have an embodied experience of what it
feels like to actually do the hard human
stuff as opposed to book-learnin on that
direction and good instincts and good
habits built through long practice and
the notion is to say Oh Chris connect
the dots the proposition is if you want
to actually resolve problems around
immigration in it
honestly not to make yourself feel good
or to look good to other people but for
real then the path to get there is this
path that starts here
in yourself and moves out in spirals
through things that you can actually
touch and truly take responsibility for
and then always showing up from that
Center of sovereignty mm-hmm
so that feels like here is Jenny 101 or
Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz right well
you're saying hey the way forward into
game B and emergent coherence is to
actually come all the way back home to
the basics of good old-fashioned
humanity but in order for me to be able
to reanimate and fully live into the
basics of good old-fashioned humanity I
actually have to have gone on some
initiatory transformative journey in
order to remember in fact that
cow town in Kansas is the best place
ever and there's no place like home
nice so you just join I get it well
they're adding those two together it
comes clear beautiful yeah yeah that's
very nice is race it's actually odd how
simple and like plain things are and of
course what's interesting is that once
you grasp that once it once it lands you
begin to see how the the bigger
challenges begin to self resolve there's
a point you made that wasn't the main
point it was a tangent but I think it's
super critical so I want to emphasize it
which is okay so why can't we trust any
of the things that normally look like
sense-making
well there's a bunch of reasons but
basically we learn how to do signaling
for intentional game theoretic purposes
and so rather than just share signal
that is true and representative we share
signal that will advantage some
rivalries agenda
so most signal ends up being that and
one of the things that you were just
saying is a consequence of it is that
there's an ethic to not up the
information ecology right like in the
same way that we say don't pollute and
most people get pretty comfortable that
don't
or your cigarette butt on the ground
don't actually dissing form anybody else
for your own getting ahead or withhold
information where you can avoid doing so
because you're actually disempowering
the sense making of others in the
process and to really be tuned into as
though as I'm seeking to make sense I
want to increase other people's
sovereignty in their capacity to make
sense so I want to increase the intact
Ness of the information ecology they're
exposed to rather than decrease it right
up to but not beyond the point of
boström and those guys info hazards
yeah-oh to the degree that someone else
has clearly rival risks agenda with
regard to information then you have to
factor that in so far as sharing
information with them within decrease
sovereignty for lots of people but glue
together what Daniel said and when you
just added to what I was saying to
degree which I'm playing this game with
complete strangers out in InfoSpace well
never meet I'm probably gonna lose I
don't haven't how much info in for
playing which game the game of will
Omega the game of information ecology
cuz multipolar shops someone's gonna be
a dick to agree shouldn't playing with
my wife I'm probably gonna have a better
life so that's the idea it is if you're
playing it trying to say okay hold on
I'm trying to solve the game theoretic
problem with complete strangers by
telling the truth anybody who had
interests chance how to do game theories
can say oh you're the one who's actually
the dupe we found this I don't be Ned
stuck
don't pinhead stark unless you're
actually in Winterfell with your family
then be Ned Stark that's the idea right
don't the key is don't go to King's
Landing yeah
full stop that's the key but since so to
your point though if you're saying hey
yeah you know honor information ecology
for the enhanced sense making of all -
the folks who'll do the multiplayer
polar trap grab the ring capture the
flag but in a reign in a realm of
infinitely distributable
digital information we always
simultaneous
claiming both of those games at once
without even clear understanding of the
witch and the wind and the who that's
when this thing has got to go away
unfortunately this sort of the remember
I said the inverse is and the current
sense make the environment I have an
expectation that I should simultaneously
be aware of everything that's going on
in the world and a sense of my having
responsibility for it you just pointed
out the media infrastructure that
supports that possibility has a
catastrophic collapse around it so
bizarrely enough the only way to have a
prophylactic sense against that
catastrophic collapse which we can
double-click on it that's not clear what
I mean by that is to only have your
media infrastructure be driven by direct
real relationships so begin with real
relationships and proceed from there
lots of problems with broadcast but the
ability to amplify dangerous and wrong
memes and to be able to share without
context and without relationship and
without connection and without relevancy
and without being able to speak into the
capacity for listening and if you just
come back to the body for an analogy
cells go cancerous the body's dealing
with them all the time right you'll you
only get cancer if the body can't deal
with it but imagine if a single cell had
the ability to broadcast its message to
every other cell simultaneously and it
didn't have to go through propagation
through the cells surrounding it and
those types of things like we'd be
 instantly we the kind of key
thing that's helpful is that each cell
is being modulated by the cells near in
to come back in to check and so there's
error correction processes okay
so let's unpack that because so for sure
you said hey think globally act locally
but that doesn't scale fast at all
you talk about developmental processes
patients that stuff doesn't meet
timelines and then we discussed the
notion of the moment you go to some form
of politics of suspicion effectively
right and and the idea that there's
esoteric exoteric
you know the secret with an inner
sanctums outer sanctums those kind of
things I think that's clearly worked in
the past for any you know ultimately
infinitely potent linear traditions and
the kind of those sort of things there's
filters and gates of who had access to
the information in our unique
contemporary situation taking the
example like Sasha Shogun right so the
chemists who you know re popularized
MDMA created a lot of you know designer
molecules compounds and psychedelics and
then was collaborating with the DEA and
then when the DEA looked like they were
going to be shutting down and repressing
that information published his two
cookbooks where he open sourced I said
it's basically about open sourcing
versus closed source and he opened
source all that information now net
positive on the world but if we use him
as an example if he went the open source
route
now you also ended up with street corner
chemists being able to do things they
never would have been able to do without
his two books published you also ended
up with the advent and rise of and
popular promulgation of psychedelic
therapies did Sasha do the right thing
should that have been kept and
cloistered and how does the notion of
coz I mean the thesis of stealing fire
was the only shot we've got to avoid
weaponization commodification or
collapse into hedonism and particularly
the first two are just better funded
better focused they're gonna beat our
asses every time is to open source
reliable techniques of self initiation
effectively right and ideally in service
of coherence faster than efforts to
capture it and I don't know whether
that's true and I don't even know
whether that's wise but that was the
best idea I had at the time so
like what did we think about that could
you could say just dump it all out there
publish it let the chips fall and hope
that the Rebel Alliance right somehow
hangs onto the plans for the Death Star
ahead of the instead of the empire
building even better desto what I was
thinking as you're saying that was Lucy
she's dead metaphor while the stuff was
going through me as you were as you were
talking and one of the things that came
to me was
I feel reasonably confident that there
are in fact things that are appropriate
to being open sourced we actually
mentioned one earlier discernment so
discernment is the sort of thing that is
somehow that's just uncapturable it's
anti capturable
so two degree to which somebody actually
goes to the process of building their
discernment they are in fact more likely
to become an ally than they would
otherwise have been for example and so
the Rebel Alliance shouldn't be building
or outsourced in our open sourcing plans
on building Death Star's
they should be building an open sourcing
plans on how to build a Rebel Alliance
so that if the import what about
lightsabers hold on it's just so if the
Empire gets a hold of the plans all that
happens is the Empire becomes more Rebel
Alliance and less Empire
so not lightsabers not lightsabers this
is this is actually a really tricky
topic one relevant concept is the
concept of safe to fail probes and so in
you were mentioning earlier that the
people who went into the Arctic like
probably most of them failed and then
some smalls that figured out how to make
it and then those are the ones that
figured it out right so and the same
with the jazz riff where it's mostly
gibberish but some beautiful thing comes
evolution has a very high fail rate but
it's exploring a wide search space and
then the things that make it through or
awesome right and one of the things
you're asking about timing is can we do
an evolutionary process factoring the
time that we have and can we keep
allowing failure with exponential
failure possibilities
and so the CDC open sourcing everything
that it knows about bioweapons would be
stupid because on one hand you could say
well it's cool that they're open
sourcing the knowledge so more people
can work on protecting against it except
you actually have more capacity for that
knowledge to be harmful than to be
beneficial and with bioweapons or with
anything that can be weaponized at that
scope with AI with nanotech with you
really have different considerations
because you can't really control safe to
fail probes and say so say that again
like just just phrase that a different
way if the worst thing that can happen
is your Jam isn't that good
like that's not that bad it's a bummer
and you the next thing you have a better
Jam if the worst thing that happens is
you release a autopoietic pattern
replicator that kills all life you can't
 around with like playing with that
thing and so you you actually have to be
much more careful that if anyone is
exploring how to create antifragility to
that knowledge that should be held
carefully okay great so let's so how do
we say hey let's just imagine that we
have with a little bit of thinking let's
say we could woodshed you could fund you
know whatever 24 rad and MacArthur and
level super smart folks to come together
and come up with protocols for group
coherence that work more often than not
do we open source that or are we more
concerned that it can also build the
Borg well if I double-click on the
content of that the answer is it we open
source that but that's because there's
no such thing underneath it there's no
such thing which has protocols for group
coherence there's more along the lines
of remember it's we were trying to
cultivate insight not teach so it's
there's a way to generate a in
individual humans the ins the embodied
insight to be able to in themselves
build a capacity to come into coherence
that then does actually come into
coherence so if you were to be able to
again the sermon ISM is the canonical
point the open source determine great
open source practices and techniques
that work in the directionality of
improving discernment at the individual
level but I want
go back to something you said earlier
because I think this ends up being quite
a key you mentioned something that about
the like the path of relationality
doesn't scale but we're all for me with
the addition of how a supersaturated
solution does it phase transition to
crystallization that I think is the
answer if you actually do this thing
where what your your field effect which
is just say your open source broadcast
is bringing more and more people into a
poised state where their ability to move
into coherence is becoming easier and
easier and easier then when is up
happening is that a small amount that
actually does drop into coherence
creates a crystallization phase
transition that could actually scale
extremely rapidly and has the
characteristic of being very strong and
very precise because it's starting on a
basis that has no compromise yeah I mean
I think we're actually I mean it depends
on how we're defining coherence and what
you're what you're perceiving as initial
conditions okay and your question about
states the state is basically because it
feels like you're emphasizing a stage
based argument which is that it's slow
it's hard work and you have to really
grow and develop into the person that
can stay really hold coherence and I
think what I find notice what I'm
tracking I'm like yeah absolutely that's
the foundational level the springboard
from which you leap and obviously the
higher that is the less hops you gotta
have right to get to the level of
coherence and between you know smart
tech pharmaceuticals
you know lineage practices like there's
enough out there these days that you can
for sure create at least you know like
the vomit comment you can create moments
where everybody is weightless you can
create a and a transient group coherence
that and there's it's a bell curve
distribution from what I can tell 10% of
the people lose their don't know
what to do with that space or you know
in maybe is life tenant could be more
but likes to say tails you got you got
the people who can't hang and lose their
 and then you got the people it
doesn't budge at all and those are the
psychopaths and they should not have
been exposed to this and then there's
the bell curve in the middle who are
like oh wow you know the Omega principle
like oh wow I'm an organism I'm in here
I'm an AI holy we're seeing in
parallax this is joyful wondrous amazing
and transformative and so what do we do
with that I'd like to enter topic we
haven't talked about yet which is the
what Trust is to coherence it was
mentioned earlier not defecting and so
one model that I just used personally
for trust is I trust people as much as I
trust them in their worst states yeah
because if there's a bell curve
distribution on the states of behavior
they're gonna go into maybe it which is
for most people pretty coupled to their
emotional states unfortunately right I
want to uncouple those so that even if
someone's in a shitty emotional state
they don't behave shittily that they can
witness it and not act on it right like
I'm in the fetal position right now no
smashing and crashing things right and
then I want to help what makes them go
into the shittiest emotional states
which is trauma and meaning making
patterns I want to help heal that right
so they don't go into as shitty States
as often but then also decouple their
internal state from their behavior but
if if someone mmm sometimes takes
information I share with them and uses
it in really synergistic ways and
generally it is at least discerning but
when they're pissed off he uses it as a
weapon against me but that happens
well I can't share certain things with
them right so there is raising the floor
of the shittiest behavior you allow of
yourself in relationship that makes you
more trustworthy that is actually really
at the heart of our ability to have an T
coherence it says you know what no
matter how upset with you I am there are
certain up things I'm just never
going to do as my own standard for
myself and then part of our discernment
is to also be able to pay attention to
where someone is not just in their
highest states after the state induction
methods you're talking about but where
they are in the shitty parts and one of
the things I'm really interested in is
not just making people's highest state's
higher well what brings them into their
shitty estates is still anchored and now
they they actually have a wider space to
reconcile and they can even get bipolar
about it it happens a lot yeah I want to
help clean this stuff up for sure and
it's recursive I was landing there as
well I was thinking okay so state and
stage obviously for me the first thing
that comes up in terms of state is
there's the constant recurrence of the
trap of taking the state for the stage
all right so let's carefully partition
them and say okay they're not and to the
degree to which you've gone to burn him
in and take taking drugs you are not in
fact actually else anywhere but maybe
you saw like a limp so there is
somewhere else to go that's neat
so very carefully so the first is big
red flag state is not staged the state
is not gonna get you to stage by itself
take it slow okay so then what happens
in state and as I was kind of just again
some first-person experience well a lot
of the stuff that we were talking about
in terms of what given individual has to
actually be able to come into to be able
to start participating in a direct
collaboration and getting to stage in my
experience actually happened in States I
you want to try to heal trauma trauma
healing can happen very well with say
psychedelics pair of transparent
mannequin mind really really effectively
supported by certain kinds of ecstatic
states so there's a lot of things I
think I think if you actually take the
state and think of it as an instrument
they can be pointed at particular
capacities that can be moved into stage
because or through the use of that so
how do I use a particular state
experience to actually develop men to
the level up a stage in my personal
development and just have iterations
there then I think we're good then I
think it works very nicely but we know
where
Centaurus the Senators here we want to
develop mature human beings and there
are many many different state
experiences that are part of the process
of doing that many of which we have to
use now because our developmental
environment so us up that we're
gonna have to do some pretty interesting
tools to break stuff out yeah absolutely
I mean that would be my sense as well
it's just that they are it is a
beautiful thing that a peak state that
creates safety security connection
insight belonging can lend itself very
strongly to to be the fuel source for
deep thinking we see this with MDMA PTSD
therapy and a bunch of other things but
basically allows you to go back and
reformat and reintegrate places that are
currently wounded or traumatized and
that we do that in relationship with
others tightens trust tightens bonds and
then further creates the capacity for us
to learn to play well with each other
through all those stages which in a
surface show if we can learn to share
states well with each other and
experience momentary coherence momentary
transpersonal sense making and be in in
the in the mud with each other
supporting each other you know that in
the the linkage between those two is
that communitas is like you know to me
it feels like this you know nothing new
Under the Sun kind of but like if
you think of like gospel churches you
know coming out of the African American
slave experience it's like there's that
sense of they are perfectly designed you
know vehicles for a lot of this which is
you sway you impact that you have you
guys seem like that the trailer for the
new Aretha Franklin
Amazing Grace so it's like this she did
this ripping album called Amazing Grace
in a Watts Gospel Church in like 1974
and then all the footage was lost and
it's just come out like I literally wept
seeing this this trailer was
unreal and she starts singing the song
Amazing Grace and she just takes that a
and she just does there she goes all
over the she's like 29 years old at the
time and but but the Gospel Choir who's
backing her up are like giving it up
like they're feeling the shimmy shakes
they're feeling the juice they're giving
it up for and then they stop praising
and testify
like the whole thing just goes through
the roof and you're like oh my god and
then there's the swaying the clapping
the dancing the moving and you're like
it is weeping for the humanity of our
wounding it is praising you know the
divinity of our possibility and it's
connecting like literally like church as
a vet and you're like ah man we got
it you know we see the dust that
off and like create new versions when
you imagine the Gospel Church one of the
things that makes it so powerful is that
you're also noticing it is in continuity
with a bigger context it's actually part
of a real community yeah right and so
it's not like you teleport to the Gospel
Church and then you all fly back to your
different cities you walk out and then
you go live with each other and it
contains the whole of humanity it's got
little kids and grandmas it's got
grandpas it's got the whole human family
in a single place so it's kind of like a
heuristic if your state experience is
you and a bunch of other 20-something
rich white people it's probably not
right
something's probably off about that
there's something going to be missing if
it contains the whole of humanity
turistic right not ideology heuristic
this you know it's a and you know across
different a whole community if it's
continuity if the group is spontaneously
getting together in bali and then
everybody's lying back to their West
Coast East Coast
flyover cities again probably not gonna
get the thing done if on the other hand
you're already living in community and
the state experience is supporting a
deeper communitas that is lived 24/7
okay that's more likely to work so it
sounds like you're adding state stage in
place enduring enduring continuity
wholeness all right think of it think of
it as part of a whole continuous process
and then of course it happens if you get
all kinds of interesting stuff because
now you know one of the things as yours
as particulars you're talking as like
this really interesting thing like okay
what are the failure conditions in the
efforts to go here again like where does
it fail and one of the ones was really
interesting is like the difference
between Michalek gluing together
analytics and true synthesis so gluing
together analytics is this thing we're
like okay I've got one piece
paramedic of mine I've got another
pieces that I've worked really really
good in my yoga practice to be able to
feel peaceful I got another piece where
I've taken a whole lot of drugs together
with a bunch of people so we really feel
close and we work some stuff out of over
ayahuasca and then I'm gonna do is kind
of like put these in the same space and
pretend that by sticking them together
really hard I've actually achieved some
new synthesis right in fact what I have
is I have three distinct things that
aren't actually actually integrated so
it's the difference between a puzzle and
a photograph or even a puzzle and a real
piece of reality and I think we're into
this a lot it's almost like the group
equivalent of spiritual bypass which is
that we can arbitrarily generate a
simulation of eating each of the
artifacts of coherence and we can do so
so consistently and so effective whether
you really do think we've actually
achieved coherence like do you feel it
yeah I feel it me do you have
transparent mannheim got it no problem
like every piece every piece that you
can identify you can show and yet it's
not the whole thing because it's
actually not integrated into a
continuous wholeness so that I think is
something to be very careful about is
that you can't stitch it together it
actually is coming from the direction of
is this actually part of an integrated
wholeness but these heuristics you know
do I notice that there's a whole of the
human family the whole human tribe a
community a real community is the state
experience connected on both sides with
living this that kind of stuff like I
think there's a lot of really good stuff
that can be done using those heuristics
and preventing the failure conditions
it's that hope your grandmother like
does it grilled corn there's a grow corn
right can it produce children who grow
up to be good kids right that kind of
stuff and of course the point there is
that because that gives you a check sum
you know if you're evolving in a
simulation of coherence but you can't
actually resolve just basic stuff in
yourself but you can always just
teleport back to New York and have your
basic stuff nobody notices anybody can
fake it for 60 days but if you actually
have to raise children together okay
reality is going to tell you whether or
not to actually deliver on the thing
yeah there's a grow corn hope you
grandmother
nice I'm stealing that no they say one
of the interesting things in the world
where the market has subsumed almost
everything
is the difference between production and
extraction has become unclear most
places and so someone can do well
financially without actually growing any
real corn by manipulating markets by
manipulating marketing financial
services are mostly that type of
phenomena marketing is mostly that type
of phenomena and so someone can have a
false sense of being a success that
their ideas work because they're
financially successful though they have
been net in tropic to the world their
work has actually been met in tropic
that's actually that whole notion you've
been describing you've shared that with
me recently I've been thinking it ever
since you first said it but the idea
that wisdom has been subject to kind of
I don't know what the exact phrase you
use like captured by the market yeah
can you speak more than that because I
mean obviously you're talking you were
talking about discernment and you're
saying hey if you want to show up and be
a good person and just the right trust
the omega principle but not everybody
else is planning that you're undone yeah
and then you've been thinking through
even the signifiers of wisdom that are
available which would hopefully increase
people's discernment have gone tits up I
mean Jordan mentioned earlier when he's
talking about take a teaching from Jesus
or from anyone and then see what game he
does within it when it becomes like how
the teachings of the guy who emphasized
forgiveness became the basis of the
Crusades and the Inquisition is like a
really great example like have a
did we figure out how to do that and so
there's still a similar thing that
happens when if someone makes their
living by sharing wisdom and they're
able to split test optimize the nature
of what wisdom people respond to the
most and what persona expressions and
they can click optimize and they can
even just allow Facebook's algorithms to
click optimize the version of wisdom
expression that it lands the most you
get a capture of wisdom by Rev Wars
games and this is the kind of we
have to be like really honest with each
other about and honest with ourselves
about to create an information ecology
that doesn't have disinformation and

because right now like if true
information about reality is a source of
competitive advantage within rival risk
games and I both wanted withhold true
information and I want to dis inform and
I want to miss signal you slow down
there say all that again because that
last two senses is felt like important
if true information about the nature of
reality is a source of competitive
advantage in a rival risk game I know
where the water is and you don't but if
you go to where the water hole is you'll
 it up for me or whatever it is then
I want to not tell you where the water
hole is I also want to dis inform you
and tell you that it's somewhere else so
you don't accidentally find it I also
want to maybe exaggerate the specialness
of my knowledge so that I become the
only bearer of water or whatever it is
right so we have insu not not back to
you but just to some other potential
consumers right right so you're this is
potentially like rival RIS suppose that
wisdom keepers against each other
remembers the kind of unwashed masses to
which we flung and it doesn't even
have to be that conscious and
intentional right it simply happens in
the nature of I want to get this message
out there well this version of it is
more acceptable and it gets out there
better and right so then there's this
kind of multipolar trap degeneration of
the content to be susceptible to
broadcasts and susceptible to mainstream
ability of premature focus on scaling in
which case split tested analytics in and
then what that means is I'm compelling
people to listen which is the opposite
of supporting their sovereignty I'm
actually figuring out causal
psychological manipulations to
manipulate their choice to do the thing
I want them to do rather than try and
support the sovereignty of their choice
making yeah it's a pain in the ass but
we have to like every single time we go
to the like when you think about these
kinds of problems you lose for me I keep
coming back to the same basic place so
obvious is a prophylactic against this
entire thing is just you know broadcast
right as soon as wisdom is in fact just
lived relationally it's well it's why
landmark is bigger than the pasta right
I mean they've gone they've gone they've
diluted to the lowest common denominator
they they've made no bones about putting
people in
exposed vulnerable states and upselling
a living up yeah it is
transactional yeah there's gonna be
problems if it's broadcast there's gonna
be problems I just have to speak to the
irony of us talking about this on
broadcast
fortunately three white men specifically
within about roughly the same age I
think we're actually the same person
well I think the beauty of what's
happening though is that it's so
unlikely that anybody's actually going
to watch this video because it's so
incomprehensible and just hard to follow
that it's it's extra not a problem the
potential chance just kind of thinking
about that in terms of like the meta is
to degree to which this is actually
interesting at all what I would say is
that this is genuinely just a
conversation this is I mean for those
who happen to be watching this is
straight-up just exactly what a
conversation as up as that is
what we talked about and this is no
different as far as I can tell and I've
had conversations are both of you in
some conversations the three of us
together mean me a little bit more
formal but not a lot I think was a
slower start up like we cut it there was
a little bit of that's right we didn't
jump into it but this is more or less
just water conversation with us is like
so the your opponent thinks is quite
quite nice okay cool so what do we do
heuristic lis like how do we actually
prevent this from creating unintended
negative consequences so here's
something I wanted to enter in that I
didn't yet and this was coming in it
from a completely oblique direction of
anything we've talked about so far but
it has to do with what the motive for us
doing any of it is for doing any doing
actually and so it has to do with the
nature of desire and there's something I
I find really fascinating if you look at
the beginning of if you look at Buddha's
Noble Truths and desire as the source of
all suffering and as kind of essential
Eastern teaching and then you look at
desire as the cause of passion and
creativity in Western teaching there's a
really big dialectic between those
that's kind of worth
navigating and there's some deep
ontology as to why and why I model those
differences and so in a Western model
made in the image and likeness of the
Creator be creative and desire is the
source of the imagined more beautiful
rich future for us to be creative right
Eastern model it has us disconnect from
the fullness of the moment to imagine
that a future moment could be more full
and it actually makes us feverish and
 up and then when we get it we're
only happy for like a moment and then we
want something else
Eastern model focused on being which
happens in the moment Western model has
a model of time that is reified focused
on doing and becoming which is fulfilled
in the future and so of course I'm only
happy for a moment that I want something
else because becoming is actually what's
relevant becoming more and more full one
way I think about this is if I think
about desire as like voltage right like
a pressure or a gradient for flow a
basis for movement I can think about the
low gradient inside of me in the high
gradient in the world some some lack or
emptiness and myself that creates a
desire to get something from the world
get recognition get money get sex get
attention get something right and I
think that Buddha was right to say that
that is the cause of or at least related
with suffering and it's kind of like to
the degree that I am affirming a sense
of self that is in lack I get more of
that sense of self to those who have
more shall be given to those who don't
have the little they have shall be taken
away biblical quote but we're having is
like a state of experience a state of
consciousness so then there is a
different kind of desire that is not
just no orientation for movement which
is an inner fullness that actually has a
imperative to flow into the world so
there is a desire and there's a basis
but it's actually coming from wholeness
not from unholiness is that marley bob
marley like my cup overflows and i don't
know what to do yeah a fez this poem
i've become this beggar has become so
rich that my biggest problem that was
emptying my
world filled pockets into the world
quickly enough and so there's if I'm
coming from that place in the jam
session
I can totally just let you Jam if you're
in a meaningful place if I am coming
from the other place and I need to be
seen then I'm going to cut you off to
make sure that I get seen or make sure
that my lick was the best or something
like that and this is where the
identities that are still seeking more
and then can feel less in comparison to
each other is the basis of rivalry that
creates the fragility of the coherence
mm-hmm yeah it's such an interesting
thing like the yeah I agree with you
that that teaching is what you say
useful and works that there's a way to
actually recognize that you are capable
of being full with simply itself there's
no need to have something from the
outside to fulfill but rather through
doing something in self and then when
you're in that place
ah this is actually very similar to what
you were talking about when you talked
about the the least shitty to the most
to the when there is a high low there's
actually okay a way of developing self
so as to be able to even when the
interior the self is actually lacking in
some way still to relate to that as full
because the reality is is you don't
actually need that much very very little
really minuscule amount really
particularly in contemporary environment
and so there's a disposition that can be
achieved which is nice there's a
disposition that allows you to then be
in a relationship where that gradient
form desire is not have much traction it
does not pull from me at least I can
constantly feel it there's a pole but
does not have much pull and I should
mention by the way for me at least the
training has also been having a noticing
when it's going to build I'm thirsty now
okay well I better take care of that
that actually is something that needs to
be an actual conscious choice to satisfy
I need now this is
thing with your focus on sovereignty and
starting at home that is so critical is
because if I'm not tending to my own
wholeness I I actually can't do any of
the stuff we're talking about right
exactly and then and then what happens
is in my experiences that is that every
human being I've ever encountered is a
cup overflowing provided we're resourced
right so my sense would be is that is
that you were describing some element of
like well if you're Buddha right now
you're completely understanding and
you're purely coming from being you've
integrated that relations the constant
you know dialectic between being and
becoming them that's how you play the
game but like you were talking about
culture architecture and how do we
actually get humans in culturing and in
game a with all the traumas of life how
are we helping us you know walk each
other home then I just keep coming back
to that ocean notion of you know that
gospel church which is the idea like if
we can have momentary provisional
transient experiences of coherence right
Church you know the Holy Ghost feeling
right and we can use that as metronome
oh yes I was off the one now I'm back on
the one right I remember
and a tuning fork oh I was banged and
scraped this week but man I've just like
you know I've sweat my prayers I've done
whatever I've done and then training
wheels now I'd like MDMA therapy right
now I feel resourced I feel love I feel
connection I feel coherence and now let
me go and it might lost me the next hour
it might lost me all the Sunday it might
lost me to hump day who the hell knows
but I get a little further each time
practicing so rather than just we got to
do a whole bunch of hard slow Graham I
got to develop to the place where we
might finally get to start practicing
can we do these in parallel thank Bob
gigging a:hover talks about that like
well which is it
you know the tops down bottoms up gross
you know anything anything both because
that's how life happens and if but if we
and I'd feels to me like the piece that
socially we're missing the most these
days to your point about Bali and burn
you know transformational culture is
that people are really good at the atom
bomb peak experiences these days they
can blow up sky-high their
they're terrible at the other 360 days
at yeah the simple stuff yeah and you're
right sleep right yeah like at a daily
practice and like even like a revival
meditate collective Sabbath what is that
tone the Bell yeah yeah I've actually
overt I noticed it's such an odd thing
for me is that I grew up in Texas in the
70s so where prayer at mealtimes was
actually very commonplace but my family
didn't practice that so I had this
experience of like what the heck is that
and this was when move into secularism
and even the New Atheism was becoming
part of the cultural fabric so is what
is that and also a little bit of like
hmm that's not cool all right
and as I got older that actually kind of
disappeared but I've actually noticed
over the past what maybe from for years
I've actually going to build a prayer a
mealtime practice myself but from the
inside out meaning that it's not formal
it's not imposed I'm not like we're just
reciting a script that I've learned I
haven't learned it rather I had an
insight which was oh well there's a lot
of basic practices like feeling deep
gratitude that are crucial and you
always have to eat yeah so I would
always forget to have my gratitude
practice but when I said you know what
I'm gonna do this before I eat I'm gonna
do my gratitude practice I'm just gonna
bind something that just has this really
cool characteristic of being really hard
to forget i eating with something that's
really useful and has a little bit of
cultural vector and just combine the two
and then it just began to expand from
there so this is of course the
recreation of ritual that is also part
of the story yeah and that's a lot of
culture hacking we can do right I mean I
mean no grace gratitude at dinner
Shabbos you know Sabbath a day down a
down day every week to reflect and reset
like these are simple things that are
easy to dust off and reanimate and I
really think again I think there's a lot
that can be open sourced we just have to
make sure that we're not open sourcing
the technology we're open sourcing the
technology to bring into
so don't open-source the info
open-source things that build
developmental capacity the generative
process led Fanta so when you said you
didn't come back to prayer because you
were deciding to adopt the tradition but
you discovered that that made sense
yeah and earlier you're talking about
education that is not teaching info but
that is facilitating Epiphany yeah when
someone has real epiphany and they
figure out something that's useful and
then they teach other people and the
other people don't understand why and
that happens a few generations the
Dharma becomes Dogma right like the
thing that that had real wisdom just
becomes a thing to do because the
authorities told us and then liberation
actually looks like rebelling against it
and even if we're submitting to it we
don't really get the gist and so to not
have Dharma become dogma and become a
control system it has to be alive and
real and rediscovered for everyone and
that's a different process than an
emetic transmission exactly the medic
transmission well what about a catalytic
mimetic because that has to be no it's a
lot of good syllables doesn't it sound
like no truly I mean what would to your
point about your you're giving your to
your disclosing the protocols for self
disclosure that that could arguably be a
catalytic them principles more than
protocols mmhmm yeah yeah yeah throw
more I mean I'm interested like we're
even a mythopoetic catalytic mimetic so
what is the story of how we begin to
remember and it's going to have to be
again more in the direction of poetry or
the parable of how we begin to remember
yeah so that it's hinting to people in
themselves moments in their lives but
they have in fact come across stumbled
across or opened into beginning to
remember such that they can find in
themselves the thread that is there is
that they can begin to follow with
greater clarity mm-hmm yes and then I
can testify by the fruits right and then
we have to be very mindful of the fact
that yeah this is what the 12th
pun we've kind of gone through the cycle
on who's counting which we got the axial
age we had the Christian Islamic era we
had you know we have a series of points
where there's like okay guys here's a
whole new level up you know somebody has
an epiphany they have a real epiphany
it's for real and they're like all right
this time it's not turning to dog when
guys let's get it right the trick of
course here is that we kind of have to
okay so this comes to what you were
saying earlier that I wanted to comment
on I'm gonna say something that will
sound like really inspiring or
depression or ridiculous I'll go with
ridiculous go so I'm gonna speak
mythopoetic Lee about the space that
we're at and we've talked about it like
this before is that exponential tech the
technology extends the power of our
choice making and but are we have tools
that give us the ability to make better
tools that give us the ability make
better tools so we have an exponential
curve it's just been very slow and now
it's not very slow now it's in the very
quickly compounding place and so we're
getting exponentially larger levers on
our choices but we're not getting
exponentially better choice making and
so we are getting the power of gods
without getting the love or wisdom of
gods to wield that power that's a
self-determination scenario I don't see
any scenario where we don't get the
power of gods that seems eminent and
unavoidable and so they're really like
there really is this enlightenment or
bust thing that I see which is if we
have catastrophic level tech not just
isolated to state actors but they can be
radically decentralized who gets to be
totally up nobody or even not be
very Omnicon sidered to can do
catastrophic stuff on accident so this
is like the existential Bodhisattva yes
it is this is the Bodhisattva imperative
actually has to become universal for us
to make it through this phase and that
wasn't true in the Bronze Age or Stone
Age or Iron Age or any of the other ages
because we could just kill a lot of
people we could destroy
environments and we did now it's just
kill everybody in all environment right
so let's then jump back to the story I
was trying to tell earlier quite poorly
so zone of proximal development we've
all got that notion right that there's a
place we could get to now let's think
about them the level up from Homo
habilis to homo sapiens and the many
many different things that all had to
come together simultaneously for that
zone of proximal development to land
right you had to have yet Yatta knee and
grandmothers and fathers and the
emergence of the capacity for language
and a certain affinity to not beat the
 out of other males as soon as you
can count it like a whole bunch of stuff
each one of which independently isn't
necessary particularly useful and any
one of which lacking it the thing
doesn't hold together very well right so
you've got a bunch of like little micro
versions of it they don't that don't
work and they fall apart until
eventually get to the zone of proximal
development and then pop it kind of pops
together I was thinking about that in
terms of oK we've we're in this place
for alright we're making another run at
it
we're trying to get we're trying to get
to this spot and the question is well it
was what are the pieces what are the
pieces of the puzzle and I was really
interested in like noticing that we've
got a whole bunch and they come from
lots of different places you know you
mentioned the Quakers and the Sioux and
we've talked about like Buddhism has
stuff like non-attachment
like one of the interesting traps for
example I was thinking through in terms
of like okay if I had an epiphany and I
want to share it and it turns to dogma
one of the reasons is when it turns to
dogma is attachment I want people I'm
attached to the good work and so some
interesting things about okay what's the
toolkit what are the pieces of this next
stage that if they come together they
mutually support each other like the
that that when people stand in a circle
they all kind of like turn and they
begin to sit down simultaneously we're
just perfectly as you begin to lose your
balance you sit and you land on somebody
else's knees and it goes all the way
around the whole circle like what's that
thing where all the pieces come together
and the stage now has the elements that
support each other so we actually have
reached a new place
and what I know this is this this really
interesting thing where like if I apply
non-attachment
and humility by the way which are really
interesting cross products if they're
coming from very different landed
lineages and they reinforce each other
quite nice so zooming in on attachment
and humility in the context of urgency
and in the context by the way of we've
done a lot of conversations about the if
you really really think clearly about
the circumstances that we find ourselves
in even just the simple construction
daniel did of as you're becoming more
and more powerful as you become unlike
and to god in the direction of
destructive capacity if there's not an
equivalent like unto god then in level
of wisdom and care you're likely going
to things up real quick and we've
been through this many many times
there's every construction you go
through leads to the fact that we really
don't have that much leeway we don't
have that much time and the number of
paths that are not in fact catastrophic
are extremely narrow okay well hold that
that's true hold that hold the energy
and the degree to which that creates a
motivational push to cause you to just
do stuff that is hard at the same time
have both humility and non-attachment
you know those the and committed at a
level of intensity that's like way up
there and not attached like that's the
stuff that moves you to this point this
singularity where the pop happens and
the stage settles in yeah this is that
being doing dialectic being grounded in
a being that is actually full means
unattached to needing fullness from the
doing achieving a particular thing and
yet like a way i think about it is
there's a fullness of what is but i
stopped thinking about reality as a noun
and think about it as more verb like i
can have a fullness with what is and
they can also recognize an evolutionary
trajectory i can recognize the beauty of
life and be nourished by it and i can
also know that it's mine to add to the
beauty of life as best i can
and that's being appreciating the beauty
of life doing adding to the beauty of
life becoming increasing our capacity to
be and do a greater depth
[Music]
you