welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
all right everyone we're about to begin
welcome to the stoah I am the Stewart of
the stoah Peter limber
I run a stoic group here in Toronto
Canada and obviously we can't meet due
to the situation so I decided to launch
stoah so all stoic groups can meet on
this 24/7 zoom channel but I'm viewing
it more as a digital campfire for us to
coherent dialogue but what matters most
at the nice edge of our moment and it's
not just a group to talk and practice
stoicism it's a group to talk about what
matters most and I'm averaging about
like three events today a day and we're
just bringing a lot of interesting
people creative people and were
experimenting with different things and
today my friend it goes Lee is going to
have a talk about a 15 20 minute talk on
the kovat spectacle and the spectacle is
a term from Guy de Boer about how we
sort of are pacified through relating
with other people through images and in
de Bourgh had this as a capitalist of
critique but I think it can be
repurposed for many different things but
I'll let dillute explain more about that
and after David's talk we're gonna have
a group dialogue which I'll explain at
that point so that being said I'll hand
it over to devote thank you Peter so
it's okay if I also record yes okay
thank you
just to have a history of my mistakes so
thank you very much for being here and
I'm very happy to be part of this these
ongoing meetings and I'd like to also
begin by saying that please don't listen
to me as if I'm an expert on this topic
I have no expertise on anything I'm just
I've been thinking about these topics
for a while for the past a couple of
weeks and
part of the reason why I'm sharing them
is because I would like your feedback
because I think these are important
ideas so let me start by sharing the
screen if I can start share yes I made
some some slides okay so because I have
a background in psychology
again not expertise so so I'm gonna
start from a psychological point of view
I'm gonna start with a basic assumption
about life so what makes something alive
and what makes something alive is we can
call it activity or we can also divide
it them can analyze it into a subject or
an object and the striving of a subject
towards an object so imagine like a
bacteria or a warm striving moving
towards food so that's it basic the
elements anything less than that is not
alive let alone mental or psychological
so subject object but as things get more
complicated we go from a simple movement
of a subject towards an object to more
things so we can have if we assume that
is activity is the theme we can have
variations on this theme more
complicated permutations one of them is
the capacity for equal finality so I can
go out of the room through two routes
for example or I can reach my coffee cup
with my right hand and my left hand and
both of those achieved the same goal
they both get me to the same object so
two paths two means but common end
another perm
variation is activity can be accompanied
with tools this is where instead of a
subject object relationship so the main
the primary meaningful relationship is
between the subject and the second
object object number two but there is an
intermediary object which we can say is
a tool so this is these images are from
a primate named Sultan who was studied
by Wolfgang k√∂hler
he understood he discovered that he can
attach for example two sticks to each
other to get a banana to make even an
banana for so that too was the
intermediate object which can become an
object that aims with the subject
together towards the second object so
activity with tools so we are going
somewhere we are making it more
interesting now we can have activity
with human labour this is where the
intermediary element is not an object
anymore it's not completely it wouldn't
be fair to call it a tool although we
can but the intermediary element is also
a subject so we have a subject using or
through somehow through a second subject
achieving a call so the second object
has to go and get the object and
together they are successful with their
cooperation so where does that come from
a Danish psychologist Neil Engelstad
said that for something like this to
happen there was they would it has to be
an event in the history of human
development human evolution
something that we can metaphorically at
least describe with reference to the
fall of man's story with a story of Adam
and Eve
what is the story we can imagine that
this story involved a failing a person a
man who failed at being a hunter failing
just to hunt
and would come back to the group hungry
and didn't have food and you can imagine
there are some gatherers who were taking
care of the children they had some
surplus reproductive surplus resources
so the children could be supported and
grow up and the hunter needs to see in
this in this depiction of the fall of
man we see the man looking at the apple
with hoping that the woman is gracious
enough to give some of the resources to
him so he can survive and if he survives
what happens is that he can go back and
hunt again so the woman can decide to
treat the man as like it some kind of a
child child he's not a child but he's
also not not a child because he can
receive support we can receive some of
the surplus resource now what happens is
that the moment a person receives
investment from another person they
become economically entangled now my
friend Peter Andrew Taggert people who
have also discussed the gift economy
gift also is a form of entanglement the
moment I receive a gift I am now
entangled with the person who gave me
the gift I'm indebted to them and it
changes the way I see I relate to my
experience and I relate to my own
endeavors I become the second subject in
a sense and if I achieve something I
remember that somebody before in the
past invested in me and I enjoyed their
surplus labor and I am because of my
entanglement if I become successful
metaphorically if I hunt and I'm
successful then I will share my
results with them so that made-up
metaphor we can now leave it behind and
can say okay society in general invests
in us parents invest in us school you
know invest in us the educators media
anything that we receive while growing
up by developing forming into an adult
human being it has to is that formation
that investment investment of societies
is part of that and because of that
investment because of that education the
process of Education the inherit aspects
of the dominant order so what does that
mean it means that there are dominant
ways ways that are common is the status
quo the dominant ways of organizing
individual behavior and collective
behavior there are dominant ways of
organizing ourselves when we are alone
and organizing collectively when we are
together when we are cooperating
together and one example would be
organizing together in a hierarchy in
the form of a hierarchy and we can in
hurt we can learn how to do that well
and easy involve not just activity not
just doing things but also believing
things so these inherited beliefs and
engagements perpetuate this is the
assumption now we are getting close to
the the logic of the spectacle why we
have beliefs that are not necessarily
good for us
because one of the functions of these
beliefs and engagements is to perpetuate
those existing modes of organization
that in the first place
invested in us so they invested in us so
that we continue to act in ways that
would perpetuate the ways of behaving
and organizing so if we are we have been
invested in by a society that has an as
an aspect of it mass production a logic
of markets then we will continue to make
choices that will perpetuate those
values
to the fall of man the concept of a fall
of man is related directly to other
ideas themes in for example Heidegger
and philosophy
Heidegger talks about at the last month
the other people the day when we think
about for example what they say if I
make this this decision what are people
going to say what are we going to judge
how are they going to judge me if I go
on on this path for example this is
where we don't think just from where we
stand but we also put ourselves in a
position of the rest of society and how
we look from their perspective more
famous perhaps is the allegory of the
cave we get we inherited we inherit
these ways of translating appearances
and what something means in our society
what something means in our culture and
not just doing things but acquiring
signs of being on the right track doing
the right thing that we appear as if we
are in a good position having good
status okay now those that long
introduction which has basically the
biggest part of my presentation I just
wanted to open up the space for
understanding and understanding and
appreciating the fact that something
like the spectacle and the way we relate
to spec spectacles and the way we become
spectators how that comes about and what
it is what what are its origins the
origins are investments education early
education and our interactions with
other people so this is the now the main
and key the port a source what is the
spectacle spectacle is something that
captures our attention it entertains us
it gets rid of our boredom and it unites
us it gives us a sense of being together
that we are together why are we together
because we are all paying attention to
the spectacle
so even if something terrible happens in
the news and we all hear about it and we
have nothing else to do but pay
attention to it and comment on it that
itself gives us a sense of it gives us
the ability to forget they are
individual here and now and join each
other in paying attention to the
spectacle another thing that it does is
that it prioritizes appearance over
reality it becomes more important to
look right to appear right to look good
so to speak then to actually be good
so appearance is prioritized over
reality there's this line in in the book
that says to be good the logic of it
according to the logic of the spectacle
to be good is to appear and to appear is
to be good and we can derive from that
circular relationship we can derive the
conclusion that to be famous is
inherently good why because if you are
famous you appear in the minds and eyes
of many many people therefore your
appearance is expanded therefore you are
better you are more worthy according to
the logic of the spectacle it also
prioritizes appearance over action it
prioritizes observing things over
participating in things so when we think
about something and events like the
pandemic a pandemic like the spread of
kovat 19 if you think about it as a
spectacle we automatically because we
are we have been trained to identify and
to treat something as a spectacle or we
that relationship becomes a relationship
between us and something that is way far
that cannot really it's not really about
me it's not really about us it's
something that is at a distance it's not
personally relevant to me and I can make
my own I can make the best of it and
make my own choices in a way that really
is not essentially related to the nature
of the kovat a situation so here we have
a person who is celebrating his daily
run their daily jog which I don't judge
it's good to stay healthy but this is
not the response that empathizes with us
as a collective okay
the spectacle so isn't it isn't about us
it has no place for a reply imagine like
if I have if I meet a superstar in any
field after a really big event a big
lecture that they give that person
doesn't really have time to answer
everybody's question doesn't have the
spectacle doesn't have if somebody
becomes a spectacle they don't have time
to respond to all comments to all
questions this is what it means when we
read the spectacle doesn't have a place
for conversation or for a reply the only
place that it efforts the only place
that it gives us the only position that
it gives us is a position of an observer
passive observer okay this is another
one I think and you might disagree with
me but I think this is another response
that we can categorize as more or less a
spectators position on Kovac 19 taxes
filed unemployment filed social
distancing in order interviews locked in
and then later a he replies to himself
oh and finally got into lobby splat I
don't know what that is I assume it's a
Netflix show but ok just examples
I'm I'm worse than all of these examples
I'm sure I've done worse things so again
to emphasize appearance is prioritized
over reality so the questions that we
can ask and I think this is what I want
to keep in my mind and encourage us to
talk about more the question is this how
are we paying attention to an event like
cope with 19 am i paying attention to it
what kind of attention am I giving it am
i giving it a kind of attention that
leads to action that leads to
participation that brings out the
reality of the situation or am i giving
you the kind of attention that promotes
further passivity further observation
and further like just sitting in front
of my computer and keeping track of the
stats which I'm sure all of us do
occasionally but if that shouldn't be
the only thing with you okay another of
my last point this is a colleague of
mine I should probably share it with him
too
so I'm gonna read it he says guys please
stop bragging about your academic
productivity during this time many are
juggling kids home family abroad who are
at risk slowly at home members of a
high-risk group worried about future etc
have some freaking compassion this ain't
a writing retreat it's good you know but
it is good in appearance I mean if this
can be I'm sure
the intentions behind the tweet are good
and pure but again if we follow the
logic of the spectacle we can fall into
a trap of by just saying the right thing
by just looking good in amongst the
chaos and the confusion and stress if I
just say the right thing and appear to
be fair and compassionate that's enough
I don't have to do anything anymore I
just say the right thing and I think
that's I just flag this as a potential
trap okay
these are my sources in addition to the
de Bourgh book I also relied on the
Danish psychologist Niels angles that
catching up with Aristotle which I it's
an important book about psychology if
you're interested thank you very much
for your attention and I'll pass it to
back to Peter - all right so let's stop
recording because we'll pivot to the
group