this conversation turns out to be about
voice about what it is to give voice and
to have voice to share voice whether
you're watching on YouTube or listening
as a podcast remember to subscribe and
hit the bell to track upcoming releases
so no it's really as easy as that now
there are these cameras recording us and
we're recording our voices into some
microphones and after just meeting each
other we're now going to what have some
kind of conversation and the thing I
always find interesting about that is
feeling away into a space of
authenticity despite the fact or maybe
you know almost taking that as part of
the fact of a process of a different
kind of authenticity almost it's
adapting to a new container adapting to
a different context and you know all I
can say is I'm really happy to be doing
this with you I'm delighted to share
this time so really thank you for being
here with me well likewise Tim it's
really great and I love your setup here
and I'm just remembering you know as a
filmmaker when I got started the kind of
equipment that I had to lug around and
to think that this is this the way we
can do a studio now and and just how
easy it is how light it is how it's not
cheap but it's not a nearly as expensive
as it once was and what sort of
different conversations and how
different we are actually able to engage
with things like public discourse now
and how that's changing the tone of it
so when you're talking about
authenticity this you know the equipment
in you know sort of Marshall McLuhan
words the medium is the message and the
medium is now that much more familiar
and accessible and therefore the sort of
production and the the being in this
medium is also able to be more familiar
so
mm-hmm yeah I definitely notice finding
a certain familiarity in it there's
almost a freeing sense I feel yet
leading up to it there's an anticipation
which feels a little bit disjunctive
almost perhaps as though I mean
preparing for a sport game or something
like that I always wonder about football
players training and I wonder do they
play their best football in training or
do they play their best football on the
pitch and it's like well on the pitches
where it really matters and so in some
sense that's that's the thing you know
but what is how much does that container
enable a certain kind of something and
then how do we make sense of what takes
place in front of the camera relative to
the various processes and ultimately the
context in which we're embedded which is
our lives and those things we care about
and those things we aren't aware about
which are having influence on us and
some broad multi level Gestalt of this
world that feels sometimes strange and
absurd but ultimately something that we
love and want to see somehow better
itself to be in a to be in a loving
relationship with and finding the
orientation in that spaces it's strange
it does feel like some kind of does feel
like some kind of new frontier you've
done a lot of these appearances over the
last few months I've I've noticed online
of future thinkers as well as James is
the gloaming podcast and I think a few
others emerge with Daniel sourcing as
well who I've spoken to a few times
what's being the catalyst for you sort
of taking that kind of a bit more of a
public-facing you've always been a bit
public fight you've done plenty of
things and you've spoken about them but
there seems to be am I to my feeling
there's a bit of a development recently
among a few kind of avant-garde type
intellectuals who are sort of stepping
forward and finding each other there's
like a there's like a sort of a complex
systems thinking approach underlying
much of it there's this emphasis of the
importance of contacts and importantly
relationship and there's a sense of a
gathering of people finding each other
for what we're not sure and that's
almost there
questions who ask apart from when voiced
in a certain contextual way so I wonder
why do you feel drawn to be speaking at
all in this kind of setting the why is
is more difficult to get to than the
sort of what's been interesting for me
around this is actually finding a voice
and you were saying that you had watched
my film last night yes and there's this
sort of hilarious history to that film
which is that it's a film about my dad
and so much of the film is about
I mean it's about systems thinking it's
about complexity it's about interrelated
interdependent systems through this lens
of a father and daughter relationship
okay so there was no way to really talk
about those ideas without getting into
the sort of first rule of second order
cybernetics which is that you have to
observe the observer the observer
matters okay so then I as a filmmaker
was in a bit of a conundrum with that
process of how do I have a voice here
and what is that voice and of course you
know ago looking into this the genre and
the move of documentary films and
narration processes and this and that
and they're all very disembodied and
they aren't vulnerable they you know the
the process of talking about science or
philosophy or ideas has been
specifically about not talking about
intimate personal emotional
vulnerability and and through those
stories and through that even just the
the tenderness of the human voice um and
the spaces between words where you don't
know what you're going to say like those
are important that's important
information okay this is the warm data
this is the warm data so how do we tell
this story and include the warm data
when what's going to happen is we're
generating a different set of tonality
Xand expectations from something that it
was once called an audience I don't know
if it still is we don't know that's
debatable
but changing the rhythm changing the
texture changing the tone so that that
set of meta messages that really are so
close can begin to bubble up and you
know what I don't even know what they
are so I have to make space for them and
this is not how you do media this is no
it should be scripted it should be
concise it should be tight it should be
whole it should be you know you're
supposed to have the dirt you're
supposed to have the day pneumoniae
supposed to have the right and and
that's not how I did it and in order to
get there there was this process
probably the most hideous collection of
embarrassing moments ever for me and
they're all recorded if they were
embarrassing the ones that made it to
the cut no the ones that made it you
have to go through quite a few had had
to practice you know because I didn't
know what that voice spelter looked like
and I didn't know how to be in it I
didn't know because it's it's at the
same time an intellectual process as it
is an emotional exploration as it is a
cultural lostness and these things are
happening simultaneously in the sort of
particular alchemy of of me and if I
take the me out there's no alchemy for
it to happen in and you can't get there
so so in a way that discovery process
has been ongoing around finding finding
a voice
and part of that is recognizing that
that has to be a voice that has room to
learn in it it's not like a stick that I
can just dial in turn on and turn off I
hear you
yeah I hate you I really do I think that
some through out your words there I feel
I felt like a resonating pulse because
there's something about one of the one
of the most radical ideas I think I can
begin to articulate it's really
referencing is articulating this notion
of what is it to be off-script
mm-hmm but nevertheless from an
intention of authentic betterment of
self and society self and context
you mentioned this notion of space
between the words and the space in
therefore also before the words we can
drop in and in some important sense not
know what's going to come next but there
does seem to be a mode of orientation
that a mode of being that if you allow
yourself to drop into it is simply what
it is and there's something very
vulnerable about that and we've spoken
just previously about this something to
do with this relationship between
vulnerability and exposure because in
some sense it's not clear what's going
to come up and I would suggest that when
we're speaking from that space some of
the we could take you know the dynamics
of the unconscious for instance as one
level of analysis which is really like a
cluster of different sorts of patterns
which permeate our psyche and have an
embedded history in our
evolution and well what are we going to
say about that metaphysically well
that's all of a sudden an abstract
conversation but we feel these things
out and we aren't necessarily aware of
what we're being born along by but we
know or at least we feel it seems to me
in our moments of most aliveness that we
are deeply involved in whatever the flow
and the turn of that meaning is yet it
can feel so much like we are a tiny
little boat with very little orientation
on these massive waves and so there's a
vulnerability and that what is going to
come up and just what role am I playing
here of the many and just what is the
context in which that role is drawing
itself out and the future itself is sort
of unknown but sort of bravely we're
looking to be in a way that we can what
feel in in in Integris relationship with
at the end of the day that that we that
we did what we could without holding
something back which may have been a
which may have been like a little bead
of truth there that perhaps if it had
been spoken may have oriented something
a different way but all of a sudden then
we're getting lost in that abstract and
you can only speak what you can speak at
the time and it gets so complicated but
certainly there's this vulnerability to
going off-script but at the same time a
congealing of these cultural forces that
seem to be willing that there seems to
be it seemed willingness to happen it
seems as a necessity for us to create
together ways of being in the world
which are not pre-prepared which are not
planned in advance you know Jordan Hall
might refer to this in that kind of what
we might use a language of game a the
story of civilization so far a sort of a
top-down imposition of a kind of
narrative in order to keep people more
or less functioning in a predictable way
together and let's not challenge that at
all because all of a sudden whoa how are
we feeling psychologically then in this
in this strange world how do we step out
and and and build something which might
have somehow a love for itself and the
other
or call them closer closer to the heart
somehow anyway these ideas are powerful
so I think for me this is really a
important piece because well because I'm
coming into this from another angle and
that the the way that I was brought into
this sort of body of work around
complexity and systems thinking before I
read all the books and did the academic
work it was actually just how I learned
to live life it was how the
conversations went at breakfast when I
was a toddler okay so so when I first
set out to make that film I went to the
Bateson scholars in the world and the
people who were working in complexity
and systems thinking and all the
different you know sort of professions
and parts of the world in which that has
gravitas and said I wanted to make that
film and people said it can't be done
because these ideas can't be put into
that form and the thing is is that I was
coming to those ideas from a different
direction and that direction was one in
which they were lived and I it took me a
long time to really recognize that that
was something that I had to offer there
are a lot of people who are able to
deliver a particular kind of tone and
and aesthetic of versions of what
complexity and systems thinking and sort
of you know from the formulas to the
jargon to the various theoretical
principles and
one of the things about that is that if
it's not lived it's still over there
somewhere it's it's something you're
talking about and what I'm really
interested in is that that within of how
to when you're within that when it is
the the deep mode from which you respond
in the moment off script with your kid
with your spouse at breakfast in traffic
dealing with the tax guy like at that
level what questions are you asking
what's bubbling up so it's not like and
since I'm sitting in front of Tim I'm
gonna be the complexity girl and then as
soon as I'm off camera I'm gonna be a
raving bitch right and that's my plan
yeah well you know it's been done and so
I think that that for me that's really
important and when I was kind of finding
that voice in in this world which
incidentally didn't really exist it's
really like like you said it's really
become a thing we have a community now
there is an urgency there's at at you
know where were in we're surfing on the
same wave now we're we're together you
know but but back in you know oh nine
when I wanted to make a film about
complexity everyone was like what and
the the documentary film companies just
they just said there's no way we can
sell this what is it is it personal
story is that science is it philosophy
is it is it activism is it what is this
and I was like yes it's all of those
things and why should they be separate
so if we're talking about how we're
gonna bring these things together the
voice and the the deep impulses around
which this defragmentation
becomes expression becomes lived that's
key what does it look like to be in
complexity and not be talking about
complexity but to be responding to it
with you know like I said with my with
my kids with with the lady at the
restaurant with the whoever it is that
I'm in conversation with so I think that
I'm really glad we kind of got off on
this pathway because sometimes I feel
really underestimated and I feel like
there's almost a kind of competition a
sort of sports trivia game night of how
to kind of bat around the jargon and you
know and I can sometimes be criticized
for not doing that but what those people
don't understand is that in the stories
that I'm telling all that theory is
there if you can see it when it's not in
the prose of theory when it's in the
poetry of story you will see it but it's
that recognition of seeing these these
principles and these patterns in life
and then living into them or living into
them and then seeing them or some sort
of I don't know where the beginning in
the end of those two processes are but
but it's a big shift from the whiteboard
and the PowerPoint and the the
competition and the
the forming of an identity that has
status in a particular set of
communities - look this is we're just
living life and when you live life and
you you know you're looking at these
principles even right down in your
sexuality or your you know it's not it's
not really how you do the easy moments
that counts it's how you do the hard
ones
how much complexity are you bringing in
then yeah that's very very beautifully
put something that's come to mind as a
way perhaps we can orient this
exploration is in virtue of the
appearance of fear in experience in our
bodies because I'm interested in many
things but I'm interested in what are
the psychological mechanisms we can use
psychology of course we know we're
talking about more things what are the
what are the stimulus-response
relationships what are the conditionings
which preempt or or have a slip into a
kind of well in the language of the
documentary I watched last night it's
emphasizing this relationship between
parts and then also relating to the
whole so what is it that has us come to
divide the world up into parts again so
that perhaps we can protect or keep some
of our identity a little bit more stable
so that we can be functioning in this
space perhaps the competitive batting
back-and-forth certain intellectual
terms as they apply to a particular
subculture that may be doing some very
good theoretical work in a
particular set of content in a
particular context which might be
bridging many different levels of
analysis but has somehow just removed
itself a little bit from really
including the observer in that just for
the purpose let's say of a rational
discussion where I'm in this position
and you're in that position but it's
like oh okay
what am I predict is are we protecting
something is like it seems to me fear is
involved it like it's playing an
important role and we can break that
apart in so many ways I just wonder what
your response might be to a question
like to what degree does fear maybe
trauma but perhaps a kit anyway you like
to what degree does fear make it
difficult for us to be in a more
contextual relationship with being I
don't know in a word I guess the reason
I I want to just put that in that frame
of just I don't know it's because I
don't know where the edges are or if
it's worthwhile to make edges between
different emotional identified different
emotional states that's very interesting
and you know that we have a vocabulary
and a language and a culture that loves
to divide things and and remembering
that there are very different emotions
possible to describe in other languages
and also recognizing that I don't know
can you have fear without love without
joy without hope without hopelessness I
mean how can you separate hope and
hopelessness so there's you know there's
something about that sort of meme around
fear that I kind of get allergic to
because it wants to create a binary that
there's some land without fear in which
it would be more advisable to be having
your responses but you know
I don't know about that my feeling is
that that when I'm afraid of something
it's actually it's probably except
telling me something about what my
relationship is to that context that's
useful
so maybe the I you know it's all feeling
very very matrix very inception very
very we are the fish in the water very
you know how to how to get out of the
system when we are the system sort of
that whole that whole block of ideas is
is really I think it's tricky to get at
when we're dealing with this thing that
we call psychology because I don't I
don't know how to with any kind of
complexity in mind how do you know where
the edge of you actually is and you know
I just came from this beautiful mental
health conference that was on data and
mental health I thought I was gonna
probably die there because you know the
mental health system is so screwed up
and the world of data is so screwed up
and I thought oh my god we're gonna
bring these things together and this is
get like my version of a double-decker
nightmare and and actually it was
fantastic and it was fantastic because
there was sort of in the room this
question of how are we knowing what we
know about any of this and to have come
this far down the decades of evidence
and research and development of you know
this this institution and and science of
what is mental health and the great
minds that have put their work into it
and lifetimes and still be able to say I
don't know if we know what this is
and recognizing right now that in order
to deal with mental health we're going
to have to be talking about a lot more
than people's state of mind and and so
then you're back in context and and
trans contextual process said how do you
I mean you can't separate family and
economics and politics and media and
housing and culture and education and
you know all of this sort of world of
you know memes and identity and tonality
x' and you know this idea that I can I
have to stand up for myself in my you
know all of these things come in and
create these labyrinths of context and
then to think that we can somehow get
those grapes out of the wine look at
them and analyze I I think that we have
to always pause there and being around a
lot of self-help work and I mean I come
from Northern California and I've been
around a lot of that and with all the
best intention which is one of those
words there has really been a feeding of
the ghost in our culture that wants to
eat memes I would love to hear you
extrapolate on that that sounds very
very interesting and it's driving me
crazy actually it's just driving me
crazy
and you know I just feel that there's so
many places that I go working I work in
lots of different direction so working
with people in the climate activism
working with people in the world of
reconstructing what business and organ
could be working with people in mental
health like I was just saying working
with educators working with kids working
with people think about economics and
how to restructure economics and working
with communities working with race
issues working with gender issues and oh
my god that's all I can say it's just
it's a river of memes out there and I I
find it it's it's really difficult to
get out of the memes and there's this
punk rocker inside of me it's just you
know in the words of the Ramones I'm
against it and I feel like I go from you
know gathering to gathering this just
like this flood of things that have been
said before and thinks you know once it
starts to get traction it becomes a
Thing Thing and so in the car today on
the way over here we started talking
about collective intelligence and and
and I was just saying I you know I'm I
just feel like we have to be careful
because already this notion of
collective intelligence is starting to
Park it's starting to ossify it's
starting to become you know another one
is sense-making
now these are both terminologies that
I'm myself of use so I'm not criticizing
the terminology or the people using it
I'm just saying heads up the context we
live in wants to jargon eyes things and
when we jargon eyes them we don't look
around the corner anymore
you're not in that raw improvisational
space you're not off script
mm-hm and so that I don't know yeah yeah
I think you get where I'm coming I hear
you I hear you we've feels to me we're
circling around
this thing which is something like
actually what matters is being here now
and showing up as we are and as we can
for the second we begin to say for what
all of a sudden then we're going to do
something that's going to look a bit
referential with respect to the story we
take ourselves to be a part of and
perhaps a vision we might suggest is one
worth moving towards so we are trapped
here and I would suggest perhaps even on
this point it might be something of a
double bind I was just gonna say damned
if we do and damned if we don't we are
in a double bind and but what's exciting
is the tension okay that creative
tension in this double bind is filled
with possibility so you know to to take
that that frustration and let it show me
what it is that I'm wanting to express
that the that somehow the meme culture
or the the scripted referential
processes are shutting out that that
that that's this moment of if I can look
look work it's rigorous okay so this is
about being there but even when we say
show up it can sound kind of passive and
it can sound kind of scripted yeah
it's not easy it's a really serious
attention and it's an attention that is
not just intellectual it's emotional and
it's physical and it's cultural and it's
it's it's nonverbal as much as it's
verbal and so that's what I'm really
calling for is to develop that attention
to the kind of information that we are
and we are within that I would call warm
data that that is actually not on the
page mm-hmm so what does it mean to work
with that clay right to be in that to
transform yeah
times one and what it transforms is not
the ideas mm-hmm but the space behind
the ideas where the ideas are bubbling
up from what is the the petri dish from
which these ideas are bubbling what kind
of aesthetic are they and they're your
question of fear comes in again right
what's what is that that place from
which and it is scary you know I mean I
I look at the world right now and I have
a bunch of kids and I'm scared for them
mm-hmm and I don't think that I don't
think that that fear misson forms me
because I also love this beautiful world
took a walk in the forest yesterday in
New Zealand and it was just the vast
beautiful interaction of all these
living processes across time and
so hmm again it's coming back to that
notion of isolation isolation of the
individual isolation of the emotion
isolation of the idea isolation of the
intention isolation of the even
isolation of the aspects of myself from
which I'm speaking and trying to drop
into that place with you here now where
I'm still seven years old I'm in that
you know I referenced the 80s and the
punk rock version and I'm still that
that person who was pre kids who had all
sorts of dreams and horizons and then
I'm also this person now and recognizing
that if I can be present with that if I
can be with you which is really about
being with me too right because I have
to be okay with it but we are complex
mm-hmm and that is not just fodder for
the groovy meme machine hmm yes
something that came up just towards the
end
that you are the punk-rocker you are the
mother you are the mother you are before
you had children you are seven years old
being here in the context of all of that
if that is I mean I suggest perhaps to
the to the extent that that is presence
and embodied out and it feels to me very
much that's the case that is what that
is the potential that I can relate to
and be inspired by I can switch on
things in myself things in me are
switched on when I witness or I'm in the
presence of an elder or someone who is
simply really a the way we're talking
here presencing themselves in that
complexity without just getting it's
this perspective right now and they're
coming at me like I need to be that
thing it's like we'll hang on there's
something behind there's something
behind the eyes there there's something
behind this I'm not quite sure if this
is this is happening now is it does it
apply to me moving away from here it's
almost like there isn't there's
something deep that it kind of enables
what it does is it enables that which is
perhaps less developed or wants to find
its voice but might feel vulnerable does
not feel as though it can presents
itself it's like oh no there is there's
something strong here there's something
that is yeah that's it's like it's it's
it's fertile it's there's potential
there that's nourishing somehow
something that I'm very interested in is
is present seeing that which is of its
of values of people but quite like I'd
quite like to be a good person that
seems like a reasonable goal right what
does that mean it seems to me
we're in developmental relationships
with the world and each other and we are
all winding our paths and we are all in
some sort of continuity with each other
and we are all in different places
you can't change anyone
you can't wrestle someone along although
you can wrestle someone along but not
all of them come in with you and you
might be having to silence part of them
that really wanted to just dance their
way there and perhaps go in a different
direction but now you're yanking them
and so they're having to switch off part
of themselves and been sort of forced
along in that direction it's not it's
not appropriate it's that top-down not
really being open in some important
sense to the developmental capacity and
needs maybe of those around you and so
it seems like we can maybe do something
like hold out a hand and perhaps it's
taken perhaps it isn't perhaps someone
feels an intimation that there is
something loving there somewhere they
might part of them might feel as though
they might want to be certainly might be
where they might want to be and perhaps
it's just like that little light it's
like something on the horizon just
shimmers for a second and it's like oh
there's a mom there's a space to move
into somehow there's a space over there
to move into and it may be it goes you
know maybe that falls away from
attention again but there's something
that's been opened up about the
complexity that we can participate in
then feels like oh there's maybe a table
there for me one day to sit at and I
think that I'm remembering this moment
where when my ex-husband and I were in
the process of separating and we went to
a counselor because everyone said we had
to go to a counselor and this counselor
it was me that was leaving and this
counselor but we both needed to you know
we had 20 great years together but it
was it was time and this counselor said
to me why are you leaving and for a
split second I started running down the
possibilities of why I was leaving I
started to go inward and to form
ideas and language and rationalities and
justifications around why I was leaving
and then I recognized that if I did that
I was actually going to concretize a
story that I would then have to live
with him and that if you asked me in
five years or two months I will have a
very different understanding of this and
so what's what's important about this in
terms of our conversation is the
recognition of I could not bring my
complexity to that question she asked me
a question that was an invitation to
reductionism and it was so culturally
justified that I almost fell in the well
okay but at the last second I said I
refuse to answer that question because
we need to have those those
understandings that will occur have room
to occur okay so this is what I'm really
getting at about how how it is to be in
complexity right that's an example of
that moment of recognizing I can't be in
complexity in this question and how many
questions how many surveys how many
discourses how many laying outs of four
different aspects of the five different
versions of the technique of the
methodology are all gearing limiting
thinking into particular pre grooved
possibilities and how are we going to
get out of the mess were in if we don't
start to pay attention to the limits
that get prescribed by the way and the
things that we express right so when
we're when I'm engaging with you I want
you to feel like your complexity is
welcome in the
conversation we're not gonna have a
competition I'm not here to judge you
I'm here to explore where we are
together okay and that means I have to
be really careful the because the
dignity that I can offer to this
interaction has to do with watching out
for exactly that kind of question why
why are you doing this well now if I
give you an answer
what will I not be able to say right
what have I prohibited from coming into
the conversation by the very aesthetic
of the conversation and and so that's
where for me there's it's really
important to go into a lively loser but
still very attentive hyper rigorous deep
poetic metaphorical exploration space
mmm-hmm and and I you know I I I want to
have that be something that is something
comfortable something but not so
comfortable like a soft chair
comfortable like good hiking boots that
make you want to go somewhere mm-hmm
right and that's really different than
us being in competition or generating
aesthetics of discourse that are you
know based on criticism or polarity
we're gonna have to go a whole lot
further than we are going right now and
so you know in this process of thinking
about sense making
part of it is I'm just listening to the
baby cry in the background mm-hmm and
the expression of love and frustration
and plaintive Ness and disappointment
and eagerness and exhaustion right I
mean that's where we are and yeah and
it's complex mm-hmm we've all cried a
lot maybe some people don't cry as much
when they get older perhaps to their
detriment I don't know I certainly feel
there's some times where it tears come
to me and they pass before they have
their time and sometimes they don't but
to be that baby crying and that
particular one then I'm not sure if the
mics were going to pick it up but that
baby's just warming up
yeah that baby can detect that those
needs can be taken care of
let's hope they are there's a sense in
which we have all been that so deeply
have all been needing love from a space
of whoa I have no articulate capacity to
name what it is that's characterizing
this state of it like an it's like a
negative effect ation and all of a
sudden everything's up for grabs my very
life before I'm aware I'm a separate
thing it's just being itself it's like
wow something's wrong something's wrong
here and it's like who are we us we are
terrified of that space there's a chaos
in that space and and and it's it seems
to me that rather than it's it's not
what do you do in that space although we
can name certain things about it we
might say accept it or we might say
various different things but but it
seems to me that the cultivation of a
community of relationships with people
who have who know and have been to those
depths have been to those places and
realized that there is love there
actually that there is a way from there
that that that that that that the
negative effect of not knowing and
there's a positive effect of not knowing
too but as soon as we step into
potential complex do all of a sudden we
are unsettled and it's going to trigger
various parts of ourselves that would
have quite like to be fixed at that
moment you know if they were pretty
comfortable and secure and and of course
we like to have walls around us at night
so things don't come and eat us and so
it's again needing to fix the world just
for certain times perhaps to attend to
other aspects of ourselves you know but
but we get back into that double bind
territory where I'm feeling this link
just to reference this notion of elders
or this kind of developmental
relationship it's that that presence of
love is stronger love is there actually
at the bottom and that you don't need to
know exactly how but that in that
shaping up that mode of orientation that
breath return to just a being with it
and to it's in some sense to use a word
sovereignty and of course that is a meme
that is a very helpful one I would
suggest at this current time although we
might say if that gets crystallized into
something too tight and someone feels
like hang on a second
how these people are being sovereign and
the practices they're doing seem somehow
to be missing out something authentic in
me here that needs to come along and now
I'm stuck between sovereignty this and
now am I what is that does that get to
come along too it's like whatever we're
referencing there this capacity to know
through believe through trust through
breathe through the not knowing as some
mode of orientation that's really in
this in this context that's what feels
appropriate for me to say this something
there there's a glint behind that
person's eyes they're part of my setting
and just in how they look at me it's
like
they know what they believe in me I mean
I could not be anywhere near where I am
if I had not been loved as I have been
by the many people who have loved me and
knowing what that is in an articulate
sense I'm not here to try and do that
I'm not interested in in saying it was
in this particular regard but just in
that there is a presence that there's
some worth and not worth as in a value
we can displace from the being of it
it's this notion of soul almost it's the
last the language I'm driven drawn to
use it's like in this in the negative
effect of not knowing and fear it's its
BB with it and you are that which
transforms through it and from here we
can begin to be with the complexity and
perhaps move forward move anywhere
I'm thinking about how we say what we
want okay and I'm doing so a sort of a
new project of Community Development in
several parts of the world right now and
this wonderful project called people
need people and I'm so excited about it
but that's another story but one of the
things that I'm really noticing in this
process that I think ties into what
you're saying is that this this
conversation turns out to be about voice
about what it is to give voice and to
have voice to share voice and this is a
community question it's it's within the
process of being an individual within a
community but it's only possible to be
in community within a particular set of
possibilities that are be a relationship
right and they're in the community all
right so one thing that I'm noticing
with this work that I'm doing right now
is that there are all these communities
that are so deeply fragmented and
they're in they need all kinds of things
I mean all those that list of everything
from you know whatever it is in terms of
environmental work to mental health care
to education to dealing with housing and
you were you know saying we just need a
roof over our head and we need to be
loved and okay essentially all of those
things as it stands right now are
handled by different institutions and
organizations so the experience of being
in community is often a process of
having you know the the health person
come in and offer their advice of how to
improve health systems in your community
the education experts come in and they
talk about how they're going to develop
curriculum and you know build better
facilities and blah blah blah and the
housing Commission's come in and they
start to develop housing for people that
need housing or work with you know
runaway rents or whatever that thing is
they're the experts they deal with
housing the employment people are
dealing with employment etc doctors
psychologists and when dealing with this
one of the things that we're noticing
with this people need people project is
that if first of all nobody ever asked
the community what they want okay so I'm
just gonna let that sit for a second and
feel the meme just feel the meme because
right there is one of those things and
what happens is this ask the community
what they want and they have absolutely
no other possibility than to respond
based on what's on the menu okay and
we're back in the same epistemological
double-blind trap of everything that
they can ask for being already
compartmentalized fragmented and siloed
you see so this is what I mean about
what kind of voice what kind of
communication is given to offer a
different kind of response where there's
an invitation to go beyond the
expectation of what's on the menu I mean
if you sit down in a restaurant and I
say what do you want to eat you're good
I mean you're gonna look around and
think what do they have here right
what's on the menu if you're in a you
know a noodle shop in
on the beach in Vietnam you're probably
not gonna say hamburger because you know
it's not on the menu right so this is an
important sort of way of looking at how
we are with each other and and how much
generosity we can afford
mm-hmm toward getting to a new dimension
of questions and communication hmm
because right now it feels like there's
we just keep driving ourselves back down
the same holes because the patterns mmm
drive us there hmm
and you know it's that that question of
what do you want and you know in the in
the notion right now of what is your
vision for a new future what is game B
and and part of the the beauty of that
question is the tension around what's on
the menu what could game B be and how do
we begin to think about that in ways
that are loose from the existing
structures yes it's not trivial this is
not a trivial matter no no because it's
about where the expression and the
imagination can even be developed and
you know what it isn't mine and it isn't
yours it's shared its contextual so the
what's on the menu question is really a
contextual question what can this
context do yes and that isn't about the
particular silos it's not about the
particular departments it's and and so
that the the need to defragment as
individuals to bring that personal voice
into the professional
realm to bring that that seven-year-old
here with the you know mom of six to
this conversation about complexity in
the future of the world that we live in
and the extreme urgency mmm-hmm to get
to another we have got to get to another
you know get a little peek hole out of
the epistemology frames that were in so
that we can even see another possibility
what we do is you know yeah mmm-hmm and
so the love in that is about loving that
rigor because it's rigorous that is not
a relaxed love that is a rigorous hyper
attentive very tender super alert love
to catch yourself okay I will not
because I love this person or this
community or this world I will not ask
those questions that drive it back down
in the same rabbit holes or just I'll
try not to write I mean I might not get
it right right
odds are pretty good that I'm not gonna
get better but even the the tonality and
the humility of trying is big yeah I
think it can be so difficult to
articulate questions that take into
context this extreme complexity and then
to do that in such a way that reference
is also the double bind of really
necessity because the thing is we can
look here at what we're doing we have
cameras we have microphones and there's
a sense in which we are being here
together and we can explore as we are
yet this particular moment did have
despite my
in tension a certain artificial
beginning to it which was I picked up
the microphone and I began to pose
something and I'm conscious that well I
I'm actually less conscious than most
people of what's engaging to watch right
I died I put this first nevertheless
there's a sense in which I am in
beginning by posing a question to you I
have already cut the world in some way
ya have and and so it seems to me in
fact necessary to break the world up but
in so doing to take to allow through
that the part of ourselves that is not
cut that is there for though is
therefore the opposing and is therefore
that space between and it's there in
what comes afterwards it's an
identification perhaps with the whole
process and not identifying crucially
with one particular part of it it seems
like there's a dance we're doing at
least developmentally I can begin to
dance and perhaps if I am good then it
looks like one cohesive flow but you
know as I know from experience sometimes
I might lose a bit of balance and all of
a sudden there's a disjuncture there
that if I'm in front of other people I'm
going to experience as a I might say Oh
someone's seen that or it might be like
I'm not quite with it and that's partly
because well it's just how much of what
what within is not as ready for the flow
as it could be
it's and so it's so much forgiveness for
ourselves for ourselves you know charity
for ourselves and that's of course what
you're you were referencing there at the
end it's it's not clear to me though
given the context of our world as one
that expresses itself so much through a
fracturing or at least the combination
of its expression and our perception is
one that has a dis fracturing feel it's
there it's like that's maybe maybe we
can swim in the ocean but there's some
wreckage where within and swim whatever
way we like we're going to be hit in the
face by some sort of board right so we
sort of have to enable that and the a
world in which there is simply
some flowing harmonic just solace to my
being in the world conducive with this
whole making - we cannot almost by
definition name that state and so it's
it's like I think about these things as
deeply as I can and already using the
word think from a particular perspective
is already cutting the world because we
know that's referencing a certain type
of cognition that might not be so
feeling toned in the moment and embodied
but everywhere I turn in my attempt to
stay with you and be smooth and be
honest it's like I'm peppered with what
comes forth that has a lineage of that
which is not as open to complexity and
so I wonder how deep that goes when I am
thinking about this is it's there's
there so my dissertation and of course
we don't know each other my dissertation
that I wrote about three years ago was
called part making hole making and
process and I was not familiar with so
many wonderful thinkers I had not heard
of you I I wish I had and in so many
ways I mean work I've encountered after
writing that is like oh well look all
these amazing people saying what I was
beginning to bite my teeth into with so
much more articulate you know and and
depth to them the metaphor at the time
that I found closest to express what I
saw as an image I'm interested in what
you feel about that I'm not proposing it
as anything other than something that
might be helpful might be not but it was
this idea of a water wheel a certain
kind of water wheel and I haven't said
spoken about this in what feels like a
year and a year and a half now it sort
of falling away and I've been following
other terms
but there's so you can imagine the wheel
it's being borne along by the water in
the stream pushing through it and these
kind of tasks or kegs that are being
pushed by the water sort of pick it up
as they are submerged and then they lift
up and they're lifting the water and as
they come out and are you know emerged a
hot in their own holes but other sort of
parts call that kind of part making and
the whole making occurring when the
streams pushing it
and then the whole process itself
requires both parts or the balance of
the water will won't hold it won't be
moving properly and so we have the whole
making here we have the part making and
then we have the whole process which
characterises both of them together and
without one there cannot be the other
it's absolutely a relationship and we
are all of that thing happening all the
time and it's just stacks of water
wheels on top of one another as far as
this metaphor goes and so how it and and
whether we are being one more than
another part making your whole making is
to do with this how we pay attention
it's where our attention goes and then
we can speak about meditation and
contemplation and various mystical
States and perhaps psychedelics and
various things that enable a kind of
being with the full Gestalt without
looking to cut it up and seeing and
feeling yourself as the other which is
self in this non dual kind of way Aldous
Huxley speaking about seeing himself was
it in a chair you know it's that it's
that kind of notion but we slide between
being more distribute you sort of
distributed and everything and then
coming back then into our own kind of
singularity for what we can talk about
the importance of optimization once
something's being cut out and then we
can talk about the imagination and
creativity and being more on the pulse
of the sort of entropic creative pulse
of our world as it emerges forward and
there's certain metaphysical things we'd
have to say to enable that to we'll work
together from an intellectual
perspective but when I attend to my
experience it's it's these moments of
deep listening and being with and then
bringing as much as I can to bear of
what it is I have been with articulating
that knowing that I've destroyed the
thing almost as soon as I've spoken but
I'm not this I am I'm I'm aware that I'm
dropping back in again I I wonder what
the Gestalt of that kind of waterwheel
type feeling how does that feel to you I
like the image of it I mean I sort of
refer to this as the paradox of agency
mmm-hmm that on one hand you have agency
you are you
your own frame you have your own
experience your language your you know
everything the way that you experience
life is so you mm-hmm I can't taste the
tea the way you taste the tea it's your
the way you know it's this from biology
to culture to personal history to
experience and heartbreak mm-hmm you
know those times you fell on your knees
and when you were a tiny baby and you
you know ate the carpets like all of
that is part of your way of sense making
and those are specifically your
receptors okay and so in that sense you
have agency you are you mm-hmm but if
you ask that question again and you say
where did those things come from well
they all came from context so in a way
you're not you nothing of you is yours
it all came from your contacts so this
is an interesting paradox and it's a
it's I think a wonderfully productive
paradox as long as you keep the tension
mm-hmm
and it's what's not productive is to
claim that agency and Trump around like
you can change everything and it's all
up to you and it's your fault and it
doesn't work and so on and so forth or
to you know the flip side of that is to
abandon all notions of it whatsoever or
agency is a fallacy I'm just my context
and society made me do it man and
there's nothing we can do and the thing
is just flowing along and I'm just a
bubble in the ocean and I'm just gonna
blow with it but there is some tension
between those and I love the the Harare
was talking about free will in his
latest book and and that you you know
you if you think you have free will you
really don't have any free will
you're really delusional but basically
we've been you know we are
contextualized what's on the menu is
sort of the the the the neurocognitive
response to every moment we're in what's
on the menu of response for this and
where do those menu items come from and
so if you think you have your free will
your kind
under an illusion and it's an illusion
that particularly has no free but the
minute you realize you don't have any
free will paradoxically you get a little
mm-hmm and and so that's a really
interesting sort of part of this and my
daughter a couple months ago I called
her up she's 23 and she's in San
Francisco and and I said how you dealing
honey and she said Oh mom I'm kind of
shitty and I said why and she said well
I'm trying to figure out how to be a
good person mm-hmm and I can't figure it
out and and I said well what do you mean
and she said well how do I be a good
person when every single thing I do
every article of clothing every time I
get in a car or a bus every time I use a
piece of technology every single thing
that I do links me to this violent
exploitation and extraction of our world
so how do I be a good person mom and
this is a really important question
because what it reveals is something
significant which is that there has been
a veneer that has been lifted for her
but I think for a lot of people where
there was the assumption that the
structures that we lived within of our
justice system and our democracies and
our you know care systems and our
language and our education systems and
our ideas of success and our ideas of
self-esteem and our ideas of what health
is and what love is and what right that
all these things we were in that these
structures provided the structures
within which you could be a good person
mm-hmm we were the good guys
whoever we is but but that
man behind the curtain has now been
exposed and so how what do you what do I
say to my daughter okay what does it
mean to be a parent in a world where my
daughter's asking me this question
and speaking of memes there will be no
replying to that question with any of
those you just got to follow your heart
or it's not all up to you or you know
did it at a those responses with a kid
that's that awake you can't come back
with that or you lose credibility and
they lose companionship most importantly
hmm right so how do I remain in
companionship in the process of going
into a very unraveling future together
and so you know the only thing I can
really say is as long as you're asking
that question we're on the right track
mm-hmm keep asking the question mm-hmm
there's not going to be a easy response
to that there will be moments when you
know the loss that your generation has
of having those structures within which
you can be a good person you know we had
that that was part of the and when the
world I grew up in that was part of what
was on the horizon mm-hmm and even
though I grew up in the household I grew
up in where it was certainly questioned
at every moment of the day even I felt
the low and the comfort of being held in
those structures that I could do that
now there's certainly great things that
can be done so and she's doing great
work working with addiction and the the
trials around addiction especially in
the Bay Area and the opioid crisis and
so on so it's not like she's not
doing good stuff but that's not enough
right she's seeing the contextual
processes that we are with him and she's
recognizing it's not enough and here we
are in an intergenerational moment of
exploration around this which is that's
really important too
this is not just about a particular set
of people carrying forward this is about
this this new fiber ring of
relationships mmm and what is the
language that we can even talk about
these things in this making this tissue
between us where we are going forward
and it's not okay it can't be
 and and that's really important
so I'm thinking also about what it means
to go into a situation in the minutiae
of the details but in also in the
perception of the context and what is
what a muscle how do we begin to work
that together and and and help each
other to go there mm-hmm
because that's what we need is the
ability to respond to the detail with an
understanding of the context yes and you
know if you're just in context that's
that's missing a lot of the picture -
mm-hmm you have to also be in the detail
there's this story in my book about the
hitchhiker did you ever read that this
story so when I was a little girl my dad
picked up a hitchhiker on the road one
day we were driving along the highway
and highway 1 on Big Sur coast which is
like mountains and then
a little two-lane road and then drop
down cliffs and back in those days they
were virtually no pullouts and he picked
up a hitchhiker because he loved people
and this young man jumped in the car
with this rook Sakon we closed the door
- you know - VW van right 1978 or
something and I was ten nine in the
backseat no seat belt we didn't happen
you know whatever we didn't have him
back then so so and my dad's driving
along and he's just as an aside he was
maybe the worst driver ever
he was constantly looking for whales and
hustling text focused enough on the Tusk
so but but in a moment this guy pulled a
knife on him and there was a knife
pointing at his side as we're driving
down this road and significantly what
happened here is that I never really
thought about this but someone asked me
did you ever see your dad in an
emergency situation and the reason
that's an important question to our
conversation is it's about how we are
responding in the moment to the detail
with the complexity on board on bone in
blood okay so it's not just about the
podcasts right it's about can you do
this when it counts oh yeah and so he
and I said oh no I never saw my dad in
an emergency situation and then I
thought about it and I thought you know
maybe somebody would actually think that
that was an emergency situation so what
happened was he's driving along and he
looked at the knife and he said well
hello what have we here and then he
turned to the guy and he said how on
earth did you get yourself into this and
a conversation began and there was never
a moment in which there was a spike of
adrenaline
in that car the spike never happened
which is why I never recognized it as an
emergency because his fluidity with
complexity was so onboard that when
there was someone sitting next to him
with a knife and his side on a two-lane
road with his kid in the backseat
he still responded to the the the nest
of stories that this young man was
living through and so he didn't respond
to the knife he responded to the person
he responded to the person in in all
these different contextual ways
simultaneously you can't game that
mm-hmm that's not a game that is you
can't script it you can't pretend it you
can't make a methodology for it you
can't have a strategy you can't plan it
it requires deep and lifetime dedication
to looking for contextual material in
every detail every detail and and then
that's what it looks like so that's
important that that's what it looks like
but in that story there is so much
theory there is a lifetime of
communication of physiology of of you
know not only psychology but of studying
systems and cybernetics of looking at
responsiveness of thinking about
calibration of right a until you've
thought about it and lived in it and
studied it and studied it and looked at
it in several different contexts and
folded it over and over on itself until
in that moment that's how you respond
hmm and we drove another 45 minutes in
the car and then as we pulled over when
we got to where he needed to get out and
my dad gave him a big hug and
a little money and our home phone number
right and said you know if you need
anything I'm here and so I think that
also ties into this thing that you were
talking about about love hmm
because it's not love in the sense of
Hallmark cards or or or you know pink
puffy projects it's it's love in the
sense of brokenness and capacity to be
in your own brokenness and be with
somebody else's brokenness and go
forward together and what what what does
that feel like what does that feel like
how do we you know if we're gonna script
some stuff let's let's think about what
those stories can tell us about what's
even possible who it's possible to be
how it's possible to be and what
difference that might make personally in
our communities and the you know general
scope of global politics god forbid in
the way we think about economy etc and
you know certainly gender and sexuality
and and religion and spirituality and
all these things that we can pick apart
and pick each other apart over I mean
there's plenty of reasons to chop each
other's heads off or not
to love so that you value enable Co
reciprocate the dignity in each other in
that brokenness and in so doing that
very valuing of that the capacity for
there to be some continuous valuing
between that which can be so experienced
as broken this seems to me as far as you
can state with language to be on the
pulse of the movement towards wholeness
a necessity of of the whole making so
deep a deep belief a deep knowing is
deeper this deeper than belief it's a
it's a deep knowing of the dignity and
the reality the unique indispensable
moment duration essence soul of that
which you are with that which you are
and ultimately that which is continuous
between you and is beyond the words and
is totally off the script and it can't
be hacked mm-hmm right so that's the
thing so this is where I feel like our
community of clever people talking about
complexities and game B's and this isn't
that that this is something for us all
to be so careful with every moment is to
think about how we're gonna go forward
without hacking the process of going
forward mm-hmm because then you then the
capacity
for a response to those details and
where they might lead becomes obscured
and so it's it's really important that
that there's a lot of care oh yeah
right so in if you think about the
parenting that happened in that moment
so let's not think about that thing as
how you deal with a guy with a knife
let's think about that story that I just
told you in terms of how you parent what
did I learn about life in that moment
what world was I invited to live with
him in which that was the communication
possibility right that's the question
so it's I feel it yeah and it's a it's a
really significant difference of what is
this world and so when I'm dealing with
these questions around fear and the
unknown they're not dangling meat hmm
right I'm not out on the edge of a
precipice because when I was little I
saw it held in contextual affection and
extreme rigor and there was humor and
there was you know the pain was never
diminished but neither was
the folly of humanity right and so so
that changes the the positioning to
begin with and maybe that's something to
be really working on like if we're gonna
work on something maybe that's what we
really need to work on is how do we
shift the baseline from which we're even
talking about the unknown poor and to
presence that to presence that quickly
without taking care in the presencing of
that would strike me as very dangerous
then very dangerous but totally
dangerous not to we are far more
dangerous it's again it's a double bind
it seems something that's come up for me
a lot recently and I don't think it's
quite the right language to introduce
and play with but it's something to do
with this notion of that which opens and
that which closes something which came
up also there was with this young man
who had the knife there was a sense in
which what there was in him which was
involved in him making that action was
not it wasn't repressed whatever was
real that caused that situation to occur
was not repressed
so it's an openness enabling of what we
are in our fullest extent it's not to
shut our eyes to what we may have the
potential somehow to be yes and this is
why the memes are driving me crazy
because there's this sort of need to
present this possible future where we
get it all right
and we're suddenly whole again and that
wholeness is beautiful and I'm thinking
you know actually this wholeness and
this capacity for complexity and the
capacity to do trans contextual
understanding and to sense make in this
space and to have collective
intelligence right there they all are
stack stack stack stack stack that all
of that
is actually gonna be really messy and
it's gonna be kinky and it's gonna be
weird and it's not gonna be it's not
gonna make sense it's you know one of my
favorite complexity thinkers on the
planet right now is cardi B Wow Wow
she's nailing it mm-hmm and it's messy
as hell
mm-hmm and it's funky and you know she
when she is expressing herself
take a look oh yeah oh I don't mind
taking the odd look at stuff like that
from time to time yeah and and that's
but that's where I'm really seeing the
what the future looks like it doesn't
look like something clean and clear hmm
it looks like the ability to have hold
each other in the mess and to have fun
with it and to get funky with it and not
be afraid to get pissed off and not be
afraid to get you know stop tampering
with the sense-making
and saying which senses are okay and
which ones aren't and which which
modalities are okay and which ones
aren't
but like you said that that guy with the
knife there was no repression there it
was simply what have we here mm-hmm yeah
I I feel that I feel the complexity of
that I also feel that we're coming to
the end of this recording I also feel
that we're coming to the end of this
recording and um yeah Nora thank you so
much for being here and speaking with me
and dialoguing with me it's been a real
pleasure it was so fun I really enjoyed
it and you know what we had no idea what
we were gonna say yeah yeah that's right
you