[Music]
[Music]
I'm here with my old friend Stephen I've
known for for many years and Stephen is
a baker a singer-songwriter and a
philosopher I would say and we've been
having this very long conversation over
extended time and influencing each other
in various ways and I wanted to have a
conversation because I think Stephen has
a few things to say so we were just
talking off mic and you were telling me
that there was something particularly
you wanted to say and related to let's
say some of the discussions that have
been going on about about religion and
about Jordan Peterson about the
intellectual dark web and some of the
ideas that are in the air today so speak
Stephen tell me what what is it that you
have to say to us first of all hello
Andrew even though we just spoke the I
want to talk about small groups first of
all I hear 20 years ago I read Bern Asia
rare too shocked me into realizing that
there was no such thing as collective
intelligence and that we had to figure
out and I was on a new island on the
political left and I had to it was a
embark on a process of trying to figure
out how how we were to optimize
well-being for you know the so called
lower class for people who don't
necessarily fit into the world of
success and and and then that was a long
that it was a very long journey and then
it it was a very confusing one but I I
came up with this idea about 10 years
ago now which was that it was a sort of
an idea of democratic reform and so
you'll have to sort of bear with me for
a minute
and you're in imagine Election Day is on
May the second and it's it's November so
Election Day is in six months time and
you have you have as a pass to form a
small group so you may former small
particular you already know or may see
with people you've never met before and
you you get to know them you talk you
could you agree and you disagree
it might and you might hang out played
darts or whatever or watch sports games
on television or way just get to know
each other and you you you know that on
Election Day you have one track and that
is to choose a leader out of that small
group but the group is small enough so
that each member of the group knows the
other member personally and so that's a
pretty small group actually my feeling
is that once you get above I don't know
eight or nine it just gets too big and
people have a tendency to split a group
into two and to not make an effort to
get to know everybody in the group I've
been thinking about this as well and I
think you can see this in you know in
all kinds of different models like a
football game or a rock concert or you
have a small group and and this small
group is is dynamic it's and everybody
is in relation to each each other in a
in a real way rather than an abstract
way and if it gets bigger than that then
it's uncomfortable or does that make any
sense oh absolutely
like I've imagined like a big arena or
some sporting event has happened fifty
thousand people in an arena my feelings
that the arena is full of small groups
and so 50,000 people kind of doesn't
make sense and often it they filed in
just stupid collective behavior you know
I think mobs and hooliganism and stuff
like that but but in when it's coherent
it's basically a bunch of small groups
going to see a match and so there's
actually this deep clarity inside this
large crowd and they and and and there's
a there's a potential for that large
crowd to actually relate as small groups
to other small groups and then there's
this deep there's the
we have this into intuition for behaving
in that way and we tend to but I'm
skipping I'm skipping our I'd like to
get to that later that's kind of a
that's more complex things but anyway so
it's Election Day is coming up and you
have one tab and that's to choose a
leader and what happens is the level one
election has just occurred and so a
level one leadership let's let's say for
argument's sake and just for
mathematical simplicity that the groups
have to have ten members so so you've
just chosen leader leader everybody in
your society on Election Day has just
chosen a level one leader and that means
that think the the group has ten members
that means that 90% of the population
has just made there only
ninety percent of the electorate those
who vote have just made their only vote
and what happens is this is in my Oh me
of my imagination doesn't exist anywhere
the level one leaders move up to the
level two and then form another small
group of ten and they have an extended
period of time they have the former
small group gotta get to know each other
argue agree disagree and their whole
purpose at after a certain period of
time level to election day is to choose
a leader of that small group and so on
and so forth the level three leaders to
a level two litre represents 100 people
level three and out of these and level
six represents a million etc and so when
you think about you know if you think in
terms of groups of ten it only takes ten
levels to represent the entire planet
and you know it probably even less
because not everybody votes you know
like chill kids don't both and other
people don't vote anyway so so can I
just stop you for a sec so I understand
so you want your drink you're talking
about reorganizing democracy based on
small groups in some sense right right
but not only that it's at the bottom and
it's it's a matter it's a it's a vision
it's a it's a vision for optimizing the
enfranchisement
in other words optimizing the voice of
everybody so that everybody who votes
both for someone they know personally
and nobody ever votes for someone that
they don't know person it's always an
interpersonal folks know still a
secretive both you know because you know
you there's often there's often serious
conflict inside these groups you know
there's it can be it can be very took me
about attention a lot of disagreement
inside these groups is especially at the
higher level and can because people
people that really are at each other you
know disagree very strongly about thing
then you might so it was just it was an
idea for optimizing for for optimizing
in franchise in other words giving
everybody a voice so that everybody vote
and they always vote for someone they
know personally so they really feel that
the boat is valuable and then we feel
that it counts now the only vote want
this amazed this would be out of my
little vision so you want to go for your
level more leader then at level I for
level six might be the mayor of your
City for example and level seven might
be the leader of you know I'm in Canada
so the cream the cream your of your
products you know that is reaching up
your country and you know level shook a
few levels higher up it would be the
Prime Minister you know Mike I think
we're gonna and if so you've only only
vote once but you see that certain
levels represent different different
jurisdictions at political jurisdictions
anyway this was just it so just just let
me stop you there maybe this would be
easier to understand if we talked about
the problematic right of how the system
is today like why is the system not
working today and and why are you you're
offering this alternate model
what are you criticizing in the system
as it is today in order to offer this
model is it is it that the lack of let's
say I guess this this whole problem that
of people being left behind or being
having not having a voice or being let's
say vote becomes something so abstract
that it doesn't mean anything and people
become completely cynical about about
their society this is something that I
think I think all of Western democracies
right now are heading towards
oligarchies which means that there's a
there's a an elite group at
let's remain this elite group there is
that you know the corporations are in
are in bed basically politicians and
there's this there's this exclusive
group who and it's who run things and
it's very difficult if you're not inside
that group to access and and there's
sort of a privileged and and there's a I
think we we have over the last few
decades developed a deep resentment of
over this and the and I think the
ultimate reason this just happened is
after beginning and I think in the 1940s
and you know really beginning early in
the 20th century the unions became
increasingly powerful by the time the
fifties arrived they were established
and there was a period of where we had a
we had a sense that the lower classes
had a voice through I think primarily
through the Union but the Union was
basically broken in the 1980s I think by
reaganism and it was even more so it was
even broken more progressively by
globalization in 1990 things to me and
so people have had this sense of
economic vulnerability ever since but
that book got me thinking right so
that's that's that's saying that there
needs to be a strong voice on the Left
which is sort of you know when you hear
Peterson you you get the impression that
we need to reinstate hierarchies or
something and hierarchies are important
then we have to go back to hierarchies
and respect hierarchies or respect to
balance at least between you know chaos
and order in the society whereas you're
saying something different you're you're
you're actually you're actually trying
to let's say Brit valorize the left-wing
politics in a way that is different from
the left-wing now which is all the
identity politics and let's say you know
resentment politics and that kind of
thing absolutely well the small group
the small group circumvents to identity
politics because we we have to get along
with it with with the people in the
group and we have to choose a leader and
the leader moves on moves on ahead and
we do so I mean we can I'm not saying
it's not foolproof it's probably
corruptible and it's only in my
imagination
I want to insist that this is not this
only exists as an ideal and the reason
why I want to talk about I wanted to
introduce because it actually accessed
me to a larger potential understanding
of how the world works but but anyway
back to when you mentioned Jordan
Peterson he I think his view on I don't
think if he thinks we should return to
hierarchy see I think he thinks
hierarchies are just something very
basic to us and the other to him he's
not he's not proposing our keys she's
simply saying well the left sort of
feels like he's valorizing hierarchies
and they hate that because the
hierarchies in their opinion are the
root of all evil right and hierarchies
can be extremely evil obviously but what
he's saying there they're deep they're
part of the structure even of our brain
right so we're gonna have to work within
the hierarchies to solve these problems
so we can't just do away with them right
okay so given given that I've accepted
that Peters Peterson's arguments that
are keys are inevitable then what do we
get what is the left do with them and so
that's ours that's what the left does
with them is figure out a way for people
at the bottom of those hierarchies to
have a voice and and so no that's
exactly right and it seems to me that
what I what I just articulated at least
in ideal form now when the problem with
ideas it's the same problems utopianism
you know if you try it it just might be
an absolute disaster so I know damn well
that this only exists in as an ideal and
and if it if it is to be tried it can
only be tried in small pilot project
well on one hand it's an ideal but on
the other hand it's also perhaps a
return to forms which are quite old you
know yeah well you know for example a
church is a very small group of people
it's not a big group of people so
everybody knows each other and you know
they shake hands in church there's an
insistence that there's a relationship
between the people in the church right
that and when it gets too big it loses
its soul so to speak like it loses its
you know meaning and identity
so so so I think probably if there's
something true and what you're saying
it's probably there's probably some deep
you know structures which mirror that
does that make him say that exactly I
just want to get on with that and you
basically anticipate it what I was going
to talk about so I was really excited
about this as a vision of economic
reform and then I stopped thinking about
it and I and and it's just it disappears
from my mind and probably for a long
time maybe couple years something with
it and then I had this other idea I own
a bakery and I was and I had I had at
the time I think seven employees and I
remember I was working one night and I
was thinking gee if I had any more
employees and this I probably couldn't
manage it now that's just me I mean I
think might someone want a little more
practical normally someone's more
practical and his personal maker
probably handle a bigger place but not
me and that buddy then I had this moment
this inside which is that business is
run it small groups and so the reason
why the reason why I couldn't imagine
myself running business with more than
seven points because that's a small
group it's an interpersonal group and if
I was get any bigger we'd have to divide
into it have to hire a manager that kind
of thing in other words it has to be two
levels but instead there's just spacious
he's one left and and and basically
running no I realized that that that a
business is a is a form of private
property and property is essentially not
really managed by an individual but by
groups and and then it hit me that
that's the whole world his only ever run
in small groups I started thinking that
about the kings of the past and the king
you know the or even going way back into
prehistory and I'm only imagining
nothing with this fact this is only and
but imagine the alpha male of a tribe
he's driven he's driven to be in control
well how did he exercise control of a
given tribe tribe well what he does is
he first of all he he demonstrates his
dominance inside the tribe but but he
also picks out in the try
other dominant alphas picks them out and
he exhibits to them that he is dominant
over them but he only picked out a small
group Authority he chooses a small group
just under him so that he can control
this mongrel and that's all he needs to
do because what they in turn do is they
do the exact same thing they choose
another small group just beneath them
and they control that small group so the
world has only ever run in small groups
and it it is probably only ever one from
the top for a time immemorial well I was
talking about I was talking with this
guy Tom I'm knock about the intellectual
dark web and there a small group and and
he was saying that he was talking about
artistic movements and each artistic
movement is always a small group like
any anything in culture that anything
anything that is new or added to the
culture always begins it seems with the
small group right what's that if the
group gets too big it divides into two
then it gets watered down and it loses
its original force but there's always
these original guys in the beginning who
who started the happening you know like
the beatniks or you know the people in
the 20s and and in Paris or you know any
any kind of well I any kind of movement
is always it's always a few guys right
it's always yeah even like while we're
talking me and you you know and and I'm
in communication with other people in a
sense where we're forming sort of groups
of people with with similar ideas we're
doing that right now and and you know
the main group might be beater scented
as gang and then there's all these
little subgroups and hoping around them
and because of this revolution with with
a whole new set of information
absolutely
no no that's and the the thing about
small groups is there are disagreements
with in small groups and they have to
work them out and and I believe there's
that every small group once it really
becomes one things develops a strong
identity you develop an intuition for
who the leader of it is and and and the
importance of that is the leader has
to override the small group and we if if
it's just a bunch of people who agree
and disagree it's not consensual put it
that way and this I think that basic
there's something very basic to the
human condition which is that small
groups have meters and and and the
members of the small group they express
themselves and they may express strong
disagreement with the leader but the
leader still overrides and if he if the
if someone who disagrees too strongly if
someone disagrees too strong even that
person is at risk of leaving the group
so there's a kind of a what holds the
group together in many ways is the the
knowledge of that set it has a leader
mmm-hmm I think so if we let's let's
look at the intellectual darkweb as a
sort of test model you have Peterson
he's obviously the leader right in the
sense that he's the most he's the most
powerful of the group and then all the
other guys have different you know often
there they radically disagree with them
they have different points of view but
they're all kind of a group right and
then if you get a guy like sam harris
maybe he was an atheist and he's
supposed to be part of the group but
he's not really part of the group
because he wants to be a leader himself
you know and he has his own ideas which
are much you know and he won't you won't
he won't adhere to the conversation
fully even though he's sort of a pseudo
member of the group or there's a there's
an organic leader but there isn't a
there isn't necessarily a dominant
leader there isn't like that this
dominant idea doesn't really work it's
more like the leader isn't a isn't an
alpha the leader is is the guy who can
now who can deal with all the other guys
I think we get an alpha leader might get
killed right because because everybody
might gang gang gang up against him and
he might be kicked out of the tribe
[Music]
now I but also let's not forget that
we've been slowly developing democracy
so we have a deeper Democratic sense of
how a small group should run so we're in
this evolutionary we're you know we're
involving is we're in this historical
process where we're striving to make
democracy work better and it seems to me
whether or not what I just articulated
is is right that nonetheless the small
group is the way around collective
stupidity and collective stupidity seems
to always end up recollect collective
identity seems to always end up pointing
fingers at people in other words those
who are not one of us are you know
something that you need to blame this
for or whatever searching for a
scapegoat we're about to Gerard again
right and so we have to how do we avoid
that and how do we how do we rise above
our our collective identities and it
seems to me that that that that is
that's anyway for me that that's the
only that's the way that I've you know
found so and I'm pretty excited by that
in other words we can probably Institute
Institute this and and think and and
sort of understand it more deeply and
I'm sure there will be all kinds of
problems is it being instituted or
organically through through new
technology that's a real question I mean
I do think that we have an intuition
first of all I really think that
everybody else and like I say groups are
friends when groups of friends become
too big when you have a group of fifteen
friends and it just automatically splits
into two and what happens is people feel
like it's not interpersonal enough and
and oh this is this is something you
know I wanted to say that they got me
thinking about what it means to be a
person and I think arguably what I mean
to be a person is to be interpersonal so
the making of a person is an
interpersonal process now this I think
I've been playing with the idea that
this is the female counterpart of
individualism which is arguably
derivative of sovereignty which is you
know quintessential email in its origin
so we have individualism comes come
there's individualism is male and
personhood or personalism if you will
it's female there are two sides of the
same thing and personal it seems to me
really is much more aware of the
interpersonal dimension of becoming a
person well that's that's great because
that's kind of what I've always you know
Peterson is
on individual sovereignty all the time
he's saying individual sovereignty an
you almost can't get past that
conversation with him and and and then
you want to say groups but you don't
want him you don't want groups groups he
always views in the negative and a
negative and a negative light even
though he himself is dependent on this
uncertain you know on his group right
he's you know he he he made his name
based on you know going to certain guys
and creating this kind of group and as
the group sustains him but he's so that
you could say there's a there's a co
dependence between the group and the in
and the individual all right so the
individual can't be the individual
without his small group right he's
fragmented he's yeah that what you mean
is he's isolated he's in his he's and
without his group right without our
group no I agree completely and I'm also
inclined to think that the more you
could lower you go in and out in a
hierarchy the more you it's the more its
its benefit it's useful to think in
terms of persons but the higher you get
into a hierarchy the more it becomes
it's more articulate to think in terms
of individual so at the highest level
you have these people you know the first
of all they're not they're on this
somebody got the together and so
they know they're not sinners explain
now I'm not that clear about that why
are the people in the lower hierarchy
persons and the people higher on the
hierarchy individuals well let's take
for example children children don't
become persons they don't become you
know a whole human beings as adults
unless they're supported by all these
people these groups the people around
them and so it's an interpersonal
process of becoming a person and this is
what I'm coming an ego and you know in
Newman's terms as society develops and
the ego kind of develops right and
develop an ego right huh he says the ego
develops you know we can only have
rationality you know and science and all
these things when the ego has has
developed when the person can become
reflective enough to you know to
otherwise otherwise otherwise we're just
part of a you know we're just part of
this collectivity the collective mind
right my feeling is that that exists in
degrees and
so the ego is a variation on the
individual there's also variation on the
person and so since there are many
levels if you think of small groups and
you think of MIT like like I just talked
about my electorate my democracy
Democratic hierarchy there's many many
Latin many many levels and with each
level you're you're you are
individuating more and move and so we
have this and and it's also I think in
terms of human development it's very
difficult to move from one level to the
next which is why we often there's a lot
of fear and suffering and stuff on when
we're when we're transferring to another
level here's an idea and and and and the
reason is there they they have different
languages say there they're actually
different cultures they so at the very
highest level I was just thinking about
it we treated the injured God oh you
don't know much about the integral model
but the integral model is that you move
from orange to blue to green you you you
are it's blue to orange to green it's
you move from a let's say a national
society where it's really the tribe and
the clan and the nation into an
international society where it's all
about business you know into individuals
and then you move to a green society
where it's all about you know it's all
about you know more larger you know it's
all about you know it's you more
universal and in its ideas you keep
moving up and then you get to a certain
level it's called second tier together
above second tier you're able to
integrate the the previous levels rather
than just judging the world from
whatever level you're at in deciding the
people at the lower levels are back yeah
so anyway I just it sounds like what
you're describing is similar to to to to
this integral idea where the previous
there's like previous level integrates
the previous level and then after you
get a certain point you're able to have
you're able to integrate all the pre the
the lower levels and understand them and
I guess maybe that's when you become
more an individual in the sense that
you're talking about
well this Democratic model is actually a
reflection of what really is anyway
and then it said then with each level
numbers are reduced exponentially if
there's a relationship with negative
exponential as you go up in other words
you know well you can think of it the
opposite way level one day to represent
ten people level two later represents
100 a level three average of encryption
mm well if you think of it in reverse
and the numbers are going down that's
the same rate at the same exponential
rate and so whether you know you think
about these different levels of
integrating than the people at the top
are very small numbers and and then the
people at the next level down are a
certain exponential power you know is
there whatever you know it keeps going
up the number of people that is every
given level keeps going up by just how
do you avoid that becoming a stratified
kind of medieval kind of kind of society
poverty what democracy we voted the
voting business the board would the
people the fact you have a decision in
and who's the leader and stuff and okay
election you're sending up new people
that are election right but the thing is
there's movement through the hierarchy
it's not it's not stuck static stable
fixed fixed world there's always this
circulation yeah and my guess the change
is just a guess that the change of power
would be more radical to change if you
know decision decision making the
payment people the change of audiologic
changing body odds of a perspective will
would happen more rapidly and you would
have it would be more dynamic so you
know my money imagining person so you
did you it would fix you know what
happens is societies entrench themselves
in one way of being for too long and
then it's like turning around this
massive shift and it's just it's what
you know it's a huge huge amount of
suffering but if we're turning the ship
a little bit all the time then then it's
you know there's way less pain and way
more benefits it seems to me and we
address you know we're less much less
able to ignore problems so if you have
these this more dynamic electro system
which sends up people who are better
able to dress
the problems that we have and then then
anyway that's that's just it was just an
idea about small groups which have which
kind of accept which I thought with the
solution to the collective problem of
first of all identity politics but also
the idea that people people are this
almost everybody's at the bottom of our
you know where if you're a song writer
I'm you know songwriters never sell a
song you know they never they never make
a cent with their song and that that's
normal it's not and so how do we how do
we how do we make it so that that those
hierarchies actually make make sense how
do how do they actually provide people
and also maximize people people's
potential at the bottom right at the top
there they got there because they
they're better at measuring the
potential probably there's too much dead
dead weight up here you know people are
just up there for no reason they're just
you know and then there's there's
probably too much potential down here
you know there seems to be the problem
is is that you know a guy like you who
writes these sublime songs you know you
know who's gonna who's gonna take you on
and then how to get your songs to you
know it's like it's like it does there
doesn't seem to be structures in place
that there are structures but there
doesn't seem to be structures that
valorize quality or talent or or well I
think I don't think Peterson says this
really clearly but he kind of says it he
says basically you know harpies are
inherently conservative and so it's
conscientiousness is rewarded is reward
at the higher levels of hierarchy but
but you know the left winger is fine
openness and loan conscientiousness
which is not particularly conducive to
riding a bike or Keke's yeah that was
actually a fair bit of intelligence down
at the bottom of hierarchies people are
not rising up not succeeding between you
know in quotes I think it's because of
their temperaments and and so in other
words well it's because they can't be
two things at one time they can be the
effective you know promoter manager and
the artist at the same
so yeah you do need the group you know
yeah it comes back to our discussion of
groups so you do not you do need the guy
that's going to you know whose goods
gonna do that it was high in
conscientiousness you know to help
clowns like me and you who are low in
conscientiousness if I open this you
know to to actually find you know to
take that and bring it into a embodied
form in the world or something like that
so the small group brings together these
they're different yeah I never thought
of that but that's true
no no that's absolutely true I was going
to take something else yeah the wall I
mean that it's that five the five traits
thing just that that's kind of blog blog
blown mine that kind of well in my mind
because again it's it's it's I guess
it's ten it's again it's that number
again you said ten and ten there's
actually two parts of every trade you
know there's an openness there's there's
there's the more mathematical type of
openness and the more you know lateral
thinking type of openness and you know
so there's there's about ten different
traits and maybe running around you know
qualities or styles of person you know
and if you have the right balance of all
those then you have like what you know
you would call in Buddhism a mandala
would be with like a complete a complete
world right if you have all these people
are in in different places sort of
working working their asses off but not
really succeeding because they don't
have the right people around them or
support right yeah absolutely yeah
that's pretty much all I have a stable
Sangha so I'd be tempted to like I have
this this what I consider to be a
threefold theory about getting us out of
our fix because one is one of one one
big thing we have is environmental and
the other is democratic reform and the
third I think is is this huge sphere
which may not happen but the huge fear
of mass redundancy which is encroaching
upon us in other words oh yeah
reason numbers are going to be put out
of war
because of robotic ization and what I
want us and and so this I've been
thinking that this is a this is three
sides of the exact same problem so what
I just articulated was economic
democratic reform and and and how a
small groups is a way out of that but
another idea and maybe maybe I should
get into it now because it's a longer
journey but no it's about it's about
what I call the reusable economy like in
environmental law environmental ethics
there's the the three-step process of
reduce reuse and recycle you pretty good
I'm sure you've heard that Regents use a
sec so we do reducing your consumption
of packaging and a stall is bad thing
and reusing is is the next best thing so
if you have a plastic bag first of all
the best thing to do is to not consume
plastic bag and then the second best
thing to do is to reuse your plastic bag
if you are consuming them and the third
best thing if you if you're if you're
not really if you're not reducing and
you're not reusing is to recycle in
other words to put them into into the
city recycling where they will be turned
into something else you know so this is
a standard established ethic for
environmental and I've been thinking
about this and I realize wow if I
realize but I'm Olivia right can I stop
you just for a second there see there
seems to be two modes of thought right
one is extremely pessimistic right we're
we're on the Titanic drinking our
champagne and we're gonna go to hell on
it very soon and then the other motive
father's like the Steven Pinker motive
far is where we're getting better and
better every day and there's less
poverty and and all not except the
problem with that view is not the long
view it's it's it's like because in the
long view it looks kind of caught at
catastrophic but in the short view it
seems it seems to be everything's
getting better so so I just wanted to
throw that in like so so so
so so you're kind of that's kind of what
where you're going and in terms of like
to be optimistic the idea I mean the
great technological revolution was just
made us made us rich and is making the
whole world we really fast is arguably
it's just a mark me it may be just a
learning process might take fifty years
maybe a baby a big hundred years and
then we'll figure it out how to how to
how to live alongside nature and allow
nature to thrive how to not you know to
not be rendering species extinct you
know at the Grady rate that we're doing
and we could probably figure that out
over time and it's all brand-new in
other words we're Brett we're new to
this and so we haven't got clue without
reading what we're learning very very
quickly
so those realtors are very optimistic
argue that this is just going to work
itself out in time just because we're
busy working it out and and so there's
lots of lots of reason for optimism I
think now that doesn't mean that's going
to happen it could be a disaster but
what I was this this idea in mind about
environment and I don't know much about
but I've been thinking about mass
redundancy here's the thing
the imagine you're in a neighborhood and
in some time in the near future and
there's a the new law not only much more
than a law a new ethic is deeply in
place in your neighborhood and this is
the ethics no garbage is allowed ever to
leave your neighborhood
imagine all the garbage that gets put
out once a week gets picked up no not a
good sewage by the way everything gets
flushed down the toilet is not allowed
to neat leave your neighborhood nothing
is allowed to leave so what what happens
in so what happens then is people
organized in a very serious kind of way
so you know glass and plastic and rubber
tires and car wrecks all these like
things have to be organizing they have
to be looked at they have to be
repurposed one form another and I'm
willing to I'm interested in the idea
that this in and of itself may be the
solution to our problem of mass
redundancy because we produce so much
 we
it's in crates how much garbage is the
work just the work of recycling our our
stuff yeah well we're forced to
repurpose it it's very easy for me to
imagine all this garbage being used to
build houses it's not it's not it's not
a difficult thing to imagine well now
that you can your car engines can be
used to run all kinds of mills so you
can do all kind I'm a man taking my hair
into an old neighborhood trade type
thing with seamstresses repurposing
clothing and tailors more lot and
blacksmith and melting down metals and
and people taking windows from houses
that are being torn does not like what
people do in like in the favelas in in
Brazil and in some way like how are we
going to do that with our with our you
know with our types of lifestyles that
we have I mean one way and one way to do
it this is where the right-wing frenemy
is to one way to do it is to have a
something like a 30-year plan where
people know that it's gradually over a
30-year period we will completely and
utterly eliminate all forms of social
welfare that means no socialists no
monetary social systems no employment
insurance no workers compensation no
alone cook no income housing for those
who need it and so they know that his
process is in place and they're going to
have to spend the next 30 years learning
how to repurpose every single item of
waste so as to make a living and I'm
convinced that's kind of different than
a bit different than the what's called
the guaranteed income with people I was
thinking a lot about guaranteed income
and I was attracted to it for a while
and then I began to think of it as the
hell on earth you know we're just going
to become you know we're going to become
something very undesirable
I already we may and I you know have
become something quite undone desirable
haven't we in some sense like do
you've heard of the black conservative
thinker Thomas soul right yeah I have a
little bit talked about this syllabus
that the introduction of social welter
in the 1960s was very a very negative
impact on black America they were
basically progressing generally in a
fairly organic way through to in in the
first half of the 20th century and and
and the introduction was what was known
as the war on poverty basically set them
back it is okay and turned them into it
turned the black black American identity
into something you know like welfare
recipients which they were not and and
and it was was unintentional
and and it basically it costed them in a
certain pocket of society where they
were they had not been before
that's only that's only one thought here
I mean it just seems to me that that's
not even like when your best intentions
create a hell on earth or something
you're you're trying to make everybody
happy create a you take away their like
a sense of responsibility or you know
Thomas all has a really interesting
argument he basically said that in the
late 19th century there were very very
deliberate policies put in place very
deliberately racist policies put in
place too in the American salad too to
keep black people down and it was
delivered and it was it was there was no
there was no hiding it it was explicitly
racist and it didn't work
he showed that the black American black
American people they actually did fairly
well they they got they prospered during
that period they did pretty well and
they progressively did well right
through the twentieth century on Hill in
his view until the war on poverty and so
in other words there was a deliberative
polishing he put in place to deliver
Liam please black people now it had in
his opinion possibly the reverse effect
and then in the 1960s there was a
deliberately a deliberate effort to to
mitigate racism and to to to improve the
lives of those considered to be the
portion also had a negative effect and
the reverse effect in his
so he's basically saying social policy
does not have what what we intended to
be so be aware so which is why you
became a conservative I think into it
was kind of wise you can well this may
be something that's I've been thinking
about is I've been thinking about
conservatism right and it seems that the
most intelligent view is that on one
hand very progressive and very
conservative at the same time I was
thinking I was thinking of musicians who
are good right and they always have a
attachment to tradition in some kind of
way but also they're also way in the
future in some kind of way you know like
William Blake or even Bob Dylan is a
very he's a traditionalist like he's
always and he does the most radical
thing so the most radical thing is is
it's like this I don't know a double
arrow thing of looking forward and
looking back at the same time you're
you're you're very aware of the
tradition but at the same time you you
you know you can see beyond it or
something like that I totally agree
completely agree so I was always very
negative about conservatism somehow and
somehow I I'm understanding it more it's
the rate because progressives tend to
run away with everything and and and
again they end up making everything
worse through it through that they end
up gritting making a hell of their best
intentions well the very basic principle
of conservatism I think was articulated
by a Sir Edmund Burke I've never read
and butter for HP he's been explained to
me which was that basically this be
careful when you go about changing
things because you may see all these
problems but that doesn't mean you see
you may you see how things are not
working maybe things are not working
but but it but it may not be one big
tear to you how things are actually
working so there's there might be all
these dimensions that you don't see and
things work and when things are working
well you don't recognize it because it's
working it's really only when you when
you you know you don't you don't think
about your knee into your knee into your
knee starts to hurt you you know you
start thinking arthritis in your knees
then you think about it all the time so
and so all these things that are working
that so if you're going to go about
changing society then you have to you
better damn well be open to the fact
that you might make it out of a lot
worse and that's kind of that's facing
the basic principle looking services
don't change what works but the problem
is quite often we don't know what works
we don't know yeah well yeah that just
keeps us stuck in some kind of mode
whereas you know we also always have to
jump out into the unknown and an
experiment or learn I guess it's just
where you where you put the parameters
I've been thinking that the word I hate
the word progressive it's a it's a self
flattering word to be a progressive I
think the real the real word for
left-wing people is experimental so the
opposite of conservatism is
experimentalist I think we would be it
would be a good idea if we changed the
term the dichotomy the political
dichotomy between the in that way
conservative conservative conservative
it makes perfect sense the other side is
experimental you don't know what your
does not religion was is that what you
would call liberal is that I don't like
the word liberal I think the word
liberal really belongs in the center I
don't like the way in the in the United
States for example they they have this
division which we conservative liberals
now the word Lemmo gives me freedom it
means free so when you're free you're
free to try stuff you're free to do
stuff I suppose there's a centum which
is little bit out there but I think it'd
be more Texas will be more technically
correct to call a left-wing an
experimental it makes an experiment or
it doesn't work you have to think of
something else it's not punchy enough an
experiment it won't stick it doesn't
stick until it has this resonance
I mean a new name for the left for the
left progeny in Canada technically it
means a centrist and and you're writing
generative means it's interesting on
that's true
so that's confusing but anyway so at the
back to the your psych back to the
reusable thing it seems to me that all
of these products all
the products clothing if you tear down a
house all this would that's an ounce and
sliding the tin cans other stuff you
know we've we've gone throughout this
great effort to take it out of the
ground or harvest it from the trees or
take it out of the ocean and we've
transformed it into all these product
products and and then and then we just
throw it away or we give it to charity
or something you know
apparently 75% of clothing that goes
that goes to a charitable clothing
source they don't get they don't get
used in as clothing in the stores don't
get sold so in other words it makes way
more sense that takes a big pot of
clothing that gets produced in a
neighborhood on a fairly regular basis
and to repurpose it they can be
repurposed in all kinds away so I guess
my point is you have this many step
process before a product ends up on the
shelves and we buy it but all you're
doing when you're repurposing it from a
product is going back one step so this
great effort this great process of
taking it out of the ground or
harvesting it or whatever and putting it
in a factory work where it gets
transformed in some within the packaging
all of this difficult capital capitalist
process is done for us and all we do is
go back one step and in a sense we
remanufacture what what all this this
waste that we have so when they're not
innocent in a way that's in the way that
they're in the way that's sort of
beginning to happen isn't it I don't
think very small and rather you know
token ways but I don't think we science
recycling to me is very expensive and
very energy and it consumes an enormous
amount of energy for work for one of
those you know cars get crushed down and
smelled in stuff now maybe that make
sense but maybe I'm wrong and and all
packaging you know our cereal boxes and
stuff they just get you know they just
get the crushed down and recycle is
amazing things to me that we could be
more intelligent with the way we use
this stuff and not only that it could
potentially provide a lobby for the
bottom base of our site in other words
you're talking about
being returned to something like the
economy except you're using the using
the leftovers of capitalism in order to
do so now I know that in poor countries
they do this anyway well you could be
more organized the government could be
involved so it's creating a more
sensible infrastructure so to encourage
this right anyway that's just an idea so
there was my so yeah we got we got we've
we've together we've managed to
repurpose democracy and and work I think
yeah democratic reform figuring out ways
to make the bottom of our society more
viable without looking for handouts
so in other words this makes perfect
sense and then also the release of
negativity of the social welfare society
all these hand up yeah well again this I
don't know I guess we talk probably too
much about Jordan Peterson but this this
this shift from a rights you know this
is my right to this and this and this
isn't it's like an adolescent it's like
an adolescent society right he demands
rights from everything and won't give
back right so so then so then
discovering that what people at the
bottom what people who are in hell or in
bad shape or you know are just in
poverty what might bring them back what
would be you know some sense of
responsibility but then the tricky thing
is how do you do that without just
hurting them into some kind of you know
you know more and more and more of these
but you know programs fix people or yeah
I mean one of the things that attracts
me about this reusable economy idea is
is it's kind of free people are just
people left alone you're not telling
them what to do you just think you do
there is a vision a larger structural
vision but you're not telling people
what do you know you know
you're not if there's a kind of this
free it's kind of like the bottom it's
like a subsistence capitalism they're
still to see you know I don't know a lot
of people don't realize this but the
word capital simply means tools that's
all it means
so one of the why we think of capitalism
being centered around money is because
money is such a powerful tool really but
all basically everything we use is a
tool and everything we use is a tool of
production so if you think of a plastic
bag for example that we repurpose well
that's a tool so it's like the bottom of
capitalism that's capital and a tool is
capital anything the technical term for
capital is tools of production but when
you think about that when I was well I
thought about this and I think that's
actually redundant the term tools all
tools are productive at least
potentially because the term tools of
production is a is a redundant term it
has it had the same meaning twice in us
that's what we've done it to me no so it
all tools are tools of production so
basically tools so capitalism is an
ideology which is based on tools
that's a template that's how I
understand and and anybody who thinks
that we you know tools aren't whatever
what has made things really work for us
that's obviously extremely important you
know not getting around it's simply a
part of who we are so so so we have to
integrate tools or what you know
capitalism it's in some sense in a
society we have to have this this
dynamic creative force without without
it without it being run by gangsters or
yeah so that's sort of a anyway that's a
simple way of talking about
well I'm thinking the bottom of I mean
we're going a bit too far now I think
what I think the bottom of my vision of
the bottom of all economics is
subsystems in other words it's not very
monetary it might be a little bit
monetary but it's not very at the very
bottom of place for example when you
live in your house you don't pay some of
them to to wash your dishes you wash
your own dishes and that means that
you're doing
for which you don't get paid and you're
doing work which does not entail the
exchange of money and so that at the
very base of our unit we have two
children at the very base of our
economic lies the enormous amount of
work is done without the exchange of
money and that's arguably the most
important economic work and it's just to
me I think that it's only when you start
to rise up in the hierarchy of economics
that money gets involved and at the
bottom there's all this work that being
done which which is it's totally
non-monetary and that you know the sex I
think I call that subsistence economy
you know in other words my definition of
subsistence economy is economics which
does not entail monetary exchange so if
you think about this repurposing idea
this reusable idea then you're engaged
in extremely drag everybody doing it and
if we're haughty organized in
neighborhoods so that for example the
travel in this big slot and the the wood
the lumber goes here the wood near the
car tires go here the heavy metals go
there these windows go here and then the
glass and all of this absolutely every
scrap of it is necessarily reused
because it's not allowed leaving the
neighborhood although you know just pile
up there unless you means it so people
figure out way to do it they make
foundations they build houses use the
wind they use car windows to do put
windows in their houses they do all kind
of things they build their houses for
free they figure out ways to green
houses they grow their own food they in
other words this develops progressively
in a manner which they say here's here's
the environmental side of all of us
there's a real bigger argument that the
real trick to the environment and to the
biggest problem of --an damaging the
environment is containment
we're not we throw our away we push
it away and let it let it so instead of
instead of containing absolutely
everything and reusing it if we contain
it and reuse it then it won't go it's
not going to affect nature so to speak
you know what I'm saying there's another
idea about the future I've know if
you've looked up indoor agriculture
high-rise army yeah
that's probably going to take off in the
next few decades and cities are going to
vertical firming you mean and things
like that yeah Oh food is going to be
built in heart in skyscrapers in cities
and and that means that the all this
land that's being used for agriculture
would return to wilderness so the
animals are going to get their habitat
back I think then this may happen very
quickly and it may just be the the free
market dynamics which will well have you
seen that video as when they
reintroduced wolves to Yellowstone
National Park the entire you know that
it is amazing the entire ecosystem
regenerated because of the introduction
of wolves oh really
there's this amazing video about that
and you know because because and it
turns out that it turns out that it's
not just you know it's not just the
plants it's you need to have these
predatory animals to have a completely
you know sound ecosystem and anyway yeah
that's right that's oh yeah that would
be that would be the future I think is
yeah we why for this rewilding idea
seems to be yeah but I do think I'm much
more I'm really scared about mass
redundancy about the fact that people
feel not only that they they don't have
work but they have meaningless work oh
yeah yeah well well I mean the
optimistic thing is the meaningless jobs
will go away right you know because
there's people in China who are working
for Fox carnot and they had to build a
net around the around the building
because they were committing suicide I
mean imagine the work conditions there
and then the guy replaces them with
robots and the robots you know do all
these manual jobs you know they were
getting crippled and but then they don't
have jobs so what are all these are all
these hordes of people you know I'm not
going to do precisely was putting
together computers and iPhones and
and and that sort of thing and they had
these people living in these little
dormitories with ten people you know
that again the company you build a net
around because people are jumping out
the window so that's just like okay
then then so the robots they go the guy
says oh we're gonna play we replace that
with robots well that's nice but then
all these people are gonna be out of a
job so so you're you're you're
either way no what are people gonna do
yeah I don't know I've heard statistics
like ninety even the engineer jobs so
that people are studying for right now
like are gonna be done by other rhythms
but so what the hell are people gonna do
you know take acid or go to Burning Man
festivals or I don't know what they get
to do yeah I'm inclined to think Society
of leisure or it's not likely because
you know people people need new
challenge and difficult and struggle to
so you're repurposing all the time
and then the more the more people become
unemployed the more they get end up in
the repurposing economy so to speak
including food and and and you the use
of sewage to create compost so it's
growth etc and so we there's this real
like anyway I kind of feel that
neighborhoods could work again become
Michael regionalize result and extremely
beautiful because people are crafting
their neighborhoods much more in a much
more individual way because of
everything they're doing with all the
 that they have to do anyway I think
that's pretty much all gets they Andrew
okay yes