welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
nice to see everyone's faces still we're
still growing here
you
so welcome to the stoah today I am your
host the stoah is a place to cohere in
dialogue about what matters most at the
blades edge of the moment
so just a little check-in about where
I'm at today
yesterday I had a very difficult day I
woke up and I watched the new movie the
planet of the humans has anybody watched
that and
I realized that it must have been at a
low you know I didn't have a lot of
resources to watch it usually I can
maintain a certain amount of empathic
distance yeah so that film really
affected me and I was fortunate to have
four community calls yesterday where we
helped each other or the community
helped me kind of process that so
there's a little bit of I think that
hangover for me today and we'll see if
that weaves into what we are going to do
today so we've started this series last
week about a new way of thinking a new
way of trying to think through the weeds
and get very clear one of the things
that's happening in a lot of our
information ecology is that you know
it's really crazy so how can we step
back start thinking from first
principles and go forward so we did a
metaphysical exercise just to get to the
the bones of this way of thinking last
week and if you weren't here last week
it doesn't matter you'll you'll get the
sense of it with a new exercise it turns
out that the closer you get to actually
you know we did we derived the universe
last week that actually happens to be
easier than thinking about real issues
so the closer we get to actual lived
experience the more nuanced the more
difficult it is to cut through the weeds
or to find you know weed seeds that are
actually very useful so we also talked
about how when we think in these ways we
are building something what I call a
cognitive widget so the cognitive widget
for the universe had those three parts
they need to be some
they need to be self differentiation in
their participation and today in the
next week we're going to work with
cognitive widgets the ACOG the cognitive
widgets trust power and something I
called action threshold
um and these this is the cognitive
widget for self-organized collective
work right so we know for a team to get
together there has to be some kind of
trust there has to become some kind of
there's a negotiation of power and roles
and who gets to do what and then there's
action thresholds you might work as on
consensus consensus a very high action
threshold if you need everyone to agree
if you have a lot of trust in the system
then you can have people making
decisions on their own action thresholds
go down so we want to look so why is
this important because we suspect that
as we try to move to decentralized
society as we try to build emerging
cultures from you know micro
solidarity's from these little we need
to kind of reassess what it is to be in
a human collective because we our habits
are conditioned by our the institutions
that we've been raised in right so we're
trying to get back to a source code and
build from there trying to get down to
first principle thinking around these
things so that's why the exercise
hopefully don't matter so today we're
going to start with trust and I'm just
going to show you this actually maybe I
could do it right here you need a piece
of paper and you're going to just draw
out something
you
you
yeah so
like do another one that's one okay here
oh sorry about this I had it set up and
now I don't have it so
you
you
okay so you want to draw something that
looks like this sure
so can you can you see this here
and basically you're just drawing three
concentric you're drawing some
concentric circles and the dot in the
middle is you and then the people in the
circle next closest to you are people
who you trust the most and the people in
the next circle are people who don't
quite make this inner sanctum and the
people out here I mean some people have
many many layers I just usually
represent it with the three the people
out here are people that you trust but
you actually don't know all right so
they're kind of they're kind of in a
different zone right you you're gonna
find that there's different mechanisms
so you know you don't have to put these
little guys there but you just need to
have your in the middle these are the
people you trust the most and we're
gonna write out some categories about
this these are the people that for some
reason I mean you trust them but you you
just know there's a difference there's a
there's a boundary some kind of boundary
you might have another layer of that
that's fine you can you can do as many
layers that you need to represent your
internal compass this is your chart we
would call a trust network but then you
want one out here which are people you
don't know that for some reason you feel
you trust and what I mean by people you
don't know
could be people like me but it also
could be people like you know I trust I
don't Bill Gates or something like that
you know I trust Madonna or Lady Gaga
something like that so they're actually
they're more symbolic in your in your
trust network than they are you you
haven't actually engaged with them
so you just want to take a few moments
and build out your truck now one of the
things about this is you're not
measuring if people are trustworthy this
is not about the people you're you're
like that what trust is is Trust is an
emergent pattern that emanates from you
through your many many many micro
relationships in ordinary everyday life
itself it shapes itself so you know
sometimes you can have an experience
that I trust somebody really well and
they really trust that person but I
don't trust that person so obviously
it's not whether this person is
trustworthy this is not the it's not a
judgment like that we just want to
illustrate that there's an emergent
pattern that is a natural part of being
a human being
you
you
yeah there's some symbolic deep symbolic
trusting what we have in our in our
society we are just writing names that
correct yes
you could put initials you know just so
you cuz because if we make it specific
then you get more information out of the
exercise
you
you
you
and of course notice that you're
trusting your body some of you might
actually know that's not true some of
you might might be more of a conceptual
exercise but there are some compass
that is evaluating these
these these levels it's what really
that's what we're after we're after what
is this compass
you
benita yes does it yeah someone
mentioned in the chat trust in what
context and I I'm also wondering now on
come on people if I think like like
someone I trust to honor and respect me
but I know that their information is
going to be bomb
this is what we're going to talk about
okay there's multiple contexts so just
put down so what you're going to use the
lines for is to kind of we and we don't
have to do that we alone but we're going
to try to figure out whether you have
just one context or you have multiple
contexts like and and this is exactly
what we're going to learn there's a lot
going on right there's a lot going on
and so some people there's not a lot
some people are very strong a couple of
principles and that's that's their
reality too so this is what we're going
to talk about as a group because we we
take we think Trust is a thing or you
know coaches teach it and it's just so
much going on and you have to be careful
not to teach what you think Trust is I
did this once the first time I did it
was in Berlin outside of Berlin and we
didn't we didn't even start the exercise
and someone said well that's easy the
families in the middle and the other
people are in this on the other side
someone said none of my family makes the
middle circle so there's a lot going on
in the human condition
you
you
so start to write those of you that are
noticing context start to write out some
of the context that you see your you're
sliding context depending upon your
thinking about someone who has the keys
to the office versus somebody else in a
different situation
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
okay I'm just gonna share the diagram
again somebody hadn't seen it you see
the diagram now it's really just
concentric circles you're here in the
middle this is your inner trust sanctum
your your closest trust zone and other
people you trust notice how you make
this boundary what's happening here
notice context so these are all maybe
people you trust but they're trusted in
different contexts and then these are
people that you trust but you don't know
so they're really really function more
symbolically like someone said I trust
Keanu Reeves and I get it you know like
like you get it right because he took
the what the right pill was I forget
which color the one the right one the
correct pill is but okay so we can now
we're gonna open it up for some
discussion some people for example
realize they're in a very strange
situation that they have more trust with
more people they don't know
then the people actually know this is a
very precarious way to live your life
doesn't always have to be people oh you
might say how trust in a particular
scientific principles or nature or
something of that nature this is people
that's an interesting question
I was thinking the same thing about
institutions or collections of people it
gets to be an interesting edge case yeah
so there's a version of this diagram
where you'd what you do is you can let
so so if you know like you trust this
whole there's 12 people in this company
you trust them all you can just put them
12 at this company you know saying but
if you like trust the whole institution
then that has to be in the outside
because you don't actually participate
it's more has a little bit more of a
symbolic function there may be a
noticing in here of how skewed we are to
trust institutions and organizations and
maybe how small or a person-to-person
trust network is I mean if if I if I'm
reflecting on my own experience I see
like if there was just a boundary
institutions authorities science I trust
them and then people I see I see a whole
lot more on the other side and this is
this is interesting this is an
interesting phenomenon also yes so if
you trust a book or an author that also
would be in the symbolic category um
yeah I'm noticing that there's there's
people that
particularly people that are close to me
that you know I go oh yeah sometimes I
really trust that person and sometimes
or trust their thinking and then other
times not it depends on what's happening
in the dynamic and yeah the mindset yeah
it's not static right these things it's
it's like watching the co vid statistics
you know the u.s. is on the bottom and
China is on the top and then then
Italy's up and then you know it's like
that right I mean this is a porous
network of course happening on the other
side of the equation also right this is
the complexity of human collective
participation yeah
I'm part of a independent facilitation
or person-centered facilitation movement
I work with people with developmental
disabilities and we use this tool and
we're following what who they put in
those circles like who they think are
closest to them and sometimes yeah it
isn't their mom or person who's closest
to them and and that's who sits in their
circle yeah this is interesting for
young children if they're if their
parents aren't in there in this inner
circle that that could be a flag
[Music]
you know and do you have any like a
question that you sort of ask yourself
to determine whose gets to be in or like
a hypothetical situation and like when I
think about to you I trust the most of
you as to each who gets to be on the
inner circle I kind of go through or
feel through my body with different
situation
situations that I placed these people in
like for example when I I don't know
marry my daughter to them or something
like that yeah yeah yeah yeah so you can
use prompts to get a read in your body
you know and then and then like there's
so I'll just start populating but please
share some your context like some people
notice that they trust people who are
because they're predictable other then
other people say well I get that there's
some people on my trust that iight rust
cuz they're predictable but I really
trust my sister and then she's just
she's like out of control like literally
she's like a loose cannon then it is
like okay so now you have predictability
that's a certain compass and then you
have this other thing that's happening
that maybe because a family or a
relationship where you've been through a
lot or something some people especially
a lot of people in organizations
predictability is very big part of their
compass it's they can almost be
one-dimensional bull of a
one-dimensional about that and so what
we what we will
is if that that is actually someone who
has lives in a very low trust
environment if you trust based mostly on
predictability you're actually living in
a very low trust environment it's like
when you first you know have your
boyfriend I need that you know you have
to call each other every five minutes
right this is actually a low trust
environment so I'm beneath I'm noticing
as I think more and more about context
that different people are in different
circles depending on context right and
so you know I've got the same name
popping up in different circles as I
think about them in different contexts I
might trust their decision-making but I
wouldn't necessarily trust them to be
particularly reliable you know I might
trust their I might trust them to be
capable but not necessarily great on the
decision do you know what I mean there
there's there's so many as you've
already said there's so many dimensions
to this that people keep jumping in and
out of particular circles I'm finding it
a little bit confusing now that I've
really started to think about it really
confusing
does anyone have a different experience
I've noticed that my circle and the
different contexts actually forms a bit
of a continuum with the people that are
on my inner circle it's kind of like the
flavor as people that I trust care for
me and it's like that deep interpersonal
trust versus as I expand outwards it
goes into I don't think they care about
me but I really trust like they're
domain-specific knowledge and so I trust
them in the more limited capacity and
the people that are in between are
actually in between those two feelings
one one thing that comes up for me
that's really interesting is I have a
deep circling practice that I've had for
several years and so that what Eric was
mentioning about the context is apparent
for me but it actually shows assumptions
that I have running all the time when
something shows up where I noticed that
there seems to be conflict or a sudden
disparity my my curiosity goes to what
assumption had that show up and what
that changes in an example of something
that the people that I don't know that I
trust are drivers on the road it's clear
that I'm driving and trusting a lot of
people to follow this but if I see
somebody doing something that suddenly
can't challenges the trust I can quickly
reassess the situation so there's
something of what Vicki talks about with
relevance realization and salience
landscape that is affecting this trust
we're at where it's running on kind of
autopilot and suddenly oh wait a minute
I actually do need to do some manual
processing to see what what's alive here
in the context that makes me change my
opinion yeah so this is a very important
insight that you're bringing up here
that we want everyone to pay attention
to we experience breaking trusts or the
anxiety around lack of trust a billion
times more than all the ways in which
Trust is operating in our lives and it's
actually we need to train ourselves to
experience the enormous amount of trust
is is part of our lived reality every
day because we are becoming hyper
vigilant hyper judgemental I mean you
know if your trust based upon whether I
make the right decision as though this
or that and untrusting you for the same
reason you're building psychotic
individuals you're basically making each
other rats in a cage of whether you're
gonna get a shock or not this is how our
system actually works so we need to
counteract that by making salient maybe
that's what you were saying all the ways
in which the simple ways in which trust
grounds are collective you know they
tend to be simple ways and also you know
you trust that the power companies out
there fixing the power there so much
giving giving for you giving for us
there's so many reasons to trust you
won't see this on social media it
doesn't make it but making that salient
is part of recovery in in our in our
world there's a experiment done by Karl
Weick who wrote the he's like the
founder of sense-making in organizations
and they what they experienced and
organizations and they saw that at every
time you build trust that becomes the
baseline expectation right so maybe he
took you a long time to have this level
of trust but now this becomes the
baseline of which if someone moves out
of it then you lost you lose trust you
no longer experience what you
experienced this trust before because
it's not you not have a different
baseline and it showed that the
natural erosion of trust in
relationships over time that we have to
work uphill against I'd like to comment
on that I just remembered something that
is kind of a part of my experience that
it is helpful to actually have some
breaking of the trust and then
rebuilding it in terms of it seems like
I can trust a person more if if we
failed at some point and then we
establish the trust I'm like that with
the person where it seems just there's
everything going well because sometimes
it seems like it's a more shocked more
shocking thing to have that
suddenly break rather than with the
person who just seems kind of more
volatile for me but able to kind of
reestablish the connection so it's like
maybe that's relating to that that
there's not a formation of this such a
strong expectation of a baseline because
I do expect that well with that person
it's valuable it's possible to trust but
it's also somehow requiring more
patience from my side and therefore I'm
not so fixated on expecting them to be a
certain way and trusting them in in each
and every case yeah so this is also
another good insight so in the animal
kingdom in all pro-pro social mammals
the this the collective constantly tests
boundaries to build increasing trust
there's so we tend to see it as like
deviant behavior but it is actually a
mechanism for increasing trust not but
as humans we have made we misunderstand
what Trust is it's something that you
know is a line or it's broken or
whatever predictability or some kind of
guaranteed assurance we think Trust is
like the dollar you know it's it can't
be it's it's either real or it's not
Trust is a living it's a living dynamic
system that we can learn how to expand
our trust network and we need this skill
in order to build the new new society
people who understand as just as you
said that
breaking trust you know having a
situation where you see where the
fragility of the trust is is a way then
to increase that trust increase that
relationship to understand that
relationship more to have some insight
into yourself and in general we're
taught you know I'm very early on don't
trust that person oh you know one strike
and you're out
hmm beneath know what's coming up for me
is that the people closest to my circle
were people who distrusted me in the
right way say a little more like some
contexts so people who don't just gobble
up anything I spit out and call me out
on my when they see it but in a
loving way so I'm not walking into that
relationship expecting them to just kind
of give me everything I want yeah so we
can we can like parents need to learn
how to build trust in their children and
has to do with wiggle room you know the
more trustworthy you are the more agency
you're given right so do you give your
16 year old son the keys to the car well
there's there's a a dialogue in a
relationship and there is trust that you
know how you know they may he may make a
mistake does that destroy trust you know
how do you how do you constantly build
character between each both of you
because you're building your own
character - as a parent and to
understand this dynamic
that that happens
I feel like there's something Ryabkov
two days ago about falling in love with
potential and when I feel like someone
is lovingly as you said Peter holding my
potential my learning process then yeah
it's like I they might show me reflect
back my patterns you know that are
getting in my way and in the way of that
potential yeah so yeah how many people
have in your trust work Network someone
that you trust so much
that you know not in everyday ordinary
situations but you will believe them
despite the fact you cannot see what
they see right so this is this is kind
of like a spiritual friend you know it's
like a lot of times it's our partners
and you'll say you know first you fight
back and you push back and then it gets
like no I'm telling you you can't see it
but I'm telling you and at a certain
point you realize you can't see it but
the other person sees literally see
something you can't see and you trust
them this is this is a also a very
important part of being
multi-perspective evil in a group
because you have many different
perspectives and we were you know we
turn them to see which ones are valuable
which ones maybe have more holes in them
but at a certain point you're not going
to be able to see or enter into the
experience that everyone has and then
you have to trust it you have to trust
something something in your felt sense
gives you that trust I was just going to
say that I noticed that the the people
that I would want to say that I trust
the most actually get to spend
comparatively little time with and I
worked a nine-to-five so the the people
that I work with I trust and towards
toward the edges of the people that I
know and I wonder if you could comment
on like whether or not there's like a
such a thing as performative trust like
if I should recognize that I actually
trust those people
or if I should recognize that I that I
actually don't get to spend very much
time with the people that I trusted most
well I think that's common it's not true
for everyone you know when I first
started doing these and organizations I
really thought there'd be a handful of
ways people experienced trust and
there's literally you know lots but this
what you described is very familiar to
me
and it seems to be the case for some
people this is the case and it seems to
be something like the people you trust
the most become some kind of ground they
withdraw they are who you are there's
some kind of complete integration
you
you know once said to my partner we were
kind of it was a difficult time and but
it was like then we're like well then
why are we together or something you
know like bottom-line it and I'm like
well it's like you're my my my left arm
I don't pay much attention to it you
know but but it'd be like cutting off my
left arm and so there is something that
happens where you know of course there
is also a potentially just avoiding
ignoring or pretending but there is
something where like this person is
always there and they know you're always
there but it anchors the possibility for
you both to take that and expand trust
in a larger group which requires more
participation there's something really
interesting in this because for like the
great apes they trust each other because
they they lose their trust connection if
they're not grooming each other they
require touch to maintain these bonds I
don't think it's as exactly that as the
literature does but but in general
there's a lot of behaviors that have to
be maintained to keep a band of the Apes
together so much so that for example
there's not a lot of crossover in terms
of like you know if you take like the
cat's cats have interesting social
groups but if you take a female cat that
you know had babies and as part of this
family and you bring it out of the
territory for a while when it comes back
into the territory it's not recognized
right so but humans have this ability to
do exactly what you said which i think
is is it's like a superpower really if
you think about it it's like the ability
to feel anchored in community despite
there's no evidence to that you know and
sometimes you meet people that you
haven't seen in five years you just it's
just you take off where you left up you
know there's something you don't
sometimes you don't even really like
them anymore you know like wow he got
married and he's doing that but there's
this point at which you know if you were
down and out and vice versa
there's without a question there's
there's community there you know and I
don't know if other like elephants might
do some of this some of these these but
in general this is a human superpower do
you think that that ability to sort of
diffuse or elongate trust like that
could give us an opportunity to instead
of instead of diffusing trust out from
our inner circle into people we don't
know as well or into institutions and
then losing the overall amount of trust
in our lives that that could give us an
opportunity to do both the defusing and
kind of double down on the people that
that were close to or create more close
relationships and this has like more
overall trust
yeah now you see it's very interesting
because why this is different than other
models and what were this excellent
conversation so the old structure was
like you trust your family or
Confucianism you trust your family and
that's a circle inside this other circle
and that's a circle inside of this other
circle and when we do this exercise we
see there's something more interesting
going on
they're not just concentric circles
right they're like I'm always a mime at
work now I'm inside this circle and the
people I really trust are somehow the
background and then I'm over here this
is a much more fluid has a lot more
potential to build a very deep web of
trust in society but it's more complex
right that's why we have to like look at
it and think about it
so what's interesting is to you know
spend some time going about your
ordinary life and think about oh I'm
under now in this context on the dot in
the middle and there's this trust
pattern that's emerging around me and
about everyone else too ripples within
ripples and those ripples are
interacting in certain ways and then you
know really be conscious about
that this is a this is a skill that we
need to practice
the question that's coming up for me is
like I'm seeing that based on where I'm
at I think in my emotional development
it changes like I am in a period where
one of the things that's really
important to me is emotional safety can
I trust that whatever I bring to you
you're not going to judge you judge me
for and but there's been other times in
my life when that hasn't been the case
and I can see that it's that it's
starting to change it's like I want want
you to challenge me more so it's you
kind of as your demotion aliy moving
through developmental stages what you
prioritize changes in terms of trust
yeah and the other thing is if you
become more conscious you know you're
certainly conscious that depends upon
what state I'm in
right and of course this is why we put
the people in the middle because we're
not saying people are more or less
trustworthy it's just how this ripples
is is emanating from us but one of the
things you can do is consciously think
of what your trust network feels like
when you're in a stable State
and then don't give up on it when your
state changes
so like you know the movie A Beautiful
Mind is about this mathematician who
could see patterns but then he got to
see patterns everywhere because he was
kind of crazy and they wanted to put him
on medication or something and do you
remember how it ends you know his wife
says how can you use your mind to watch
your mind because your mind is the thing
that changes states and becomes paranoid
so what does he do he uses her mind
right so this is the power of trust that
when you're moving in and out
there's and you know you don't need it's
not about quantity but if you and I'm
sure this is what you do but when you
have this this conceptual understanding
in your stable state of what is trust
your trust network then you can know
that you feel disoriented
but keep some kind of intact environment
keep yourself in place inside that trust
Network you know it's a power
visualization you know we're going to
rely on the conceptual map we made
before we kind of got that disoriented
you
okay say more about this Shawn this is a
this is an interesting one final
question on that when you say that you
mean you're sort of observing yourself
as a pattern and you try to build a
somatic sense for what does your trust
network feel like I feel like that
destabilization might have its own
purpose so if you are moving away from
being stable to unstable it's
potentially due to some sort of
interaction with someone in your trust
network so there's a sort of
reorientation of the entire map so
trying to hold on to that previous
somatic sense of the network might be
misleading it would it not yeah so this
is the other side of the coin you know
the movie the plan of the humans just
shows how so much of the green new deal
is is just an illusion you know and so
you have this environmentalist doing
some research and it's like he can't
trust anyone you know like it just goes
boom boom I mean I was a pretty much a
skeptic anyways just this thing blew my
mind how deep the irony let's say goes
so we don't want to be naive we want to
build a certain capacity because there
might be a worm in your trust Network
right and so this is a funny thing I
don't know if any of you have been in
this experience but you might be like I
was in an organization did a start-up
turned into a large landscape firm but
was it was the owner had a small company
and anyways it was one of these
companies where it was started with this
woman she was the bookkeeper forever and
you know she had all the power because
she just when you're a small company the
owners don't know really they don't look
at the books and this and that and I
knew that she was crooked but she was
such a nice person and
she was always bringing in lunches and
all this stuff you know like like so
people think you're crazy
they literally think you're crazy
because you have this intuition that
this person is not trustworthy I mean
this has happened many times in my life
too so I mean she ended up killing her
husband when you know when we started to
realize she was extorting money but it's
like the when when the trust in the
system is built on illusion this is a
kind of a crazy the collective can
become you know you can drive you crazy
and Noor Jinnah lies people have this
problem they can see that people are
lying and they appear to be crazy and
they actually start getting crazy
because what's self-evident to them
yeah people trust trust people where are
other people can see it's self-evident
that this is just a predator really you
know so
was that something you were talking
about yeah a moment that specifically
how kind of stigmatization of anger and
similar expressions could be
contributing to that because I think
very often people even resort to kind of
angering others in order to gain more
honesty because it's kind of more
difficult to fake stuff while being
angry so it's kind of a litmus test if
you can say things in a very kind of
angry way it's it's more reliable and
when anger and aggression are
stigmatized not that they are it should
be accepted but it's like it's a kind of
a no-go zone altogether then this also
becomes like kind of a less actionable
way of checking because if you're angry
with with your honesty it's also somehow
already bad that you are angry that
you're expressing it in somewhat
aggressive way and I think there should
be space for that but if everything is
so PC in our cultures that it's no
longer possible to just be angry or kind
of dismissed then and then what would
actually help as a kind of a sign of you
sharing honestly something that is
really important to you is lost exactly
and and the more they relate the more
trust in the relationship the more
energy it can tolerate without without
breaking and so then you start to build
like these fantastic capacities and
small teams I haven't seen it in large
teams but you know one of the things
that erodes trust is is pretending you
know this like this surface way of
relating and a lot of people think
they're doing it so that to preserve
trust you know oh my god then you know
but this actually
we have a you know signals to the the
collective that the trust is is is
really very fragile and weak or
non-existent and many people work at
this level you know all day every day
this level of fake trust its semantics
there's implicit social rules of what
you say don't say nobody talks about it
but some things are sanctioned and some
are not you know and all these kind of
underlying games are not our very low
trust environments you know what's
coming to mind is I'm doing check-ins at
each time I start these sessions in my
emotional state and when people are
asking me how am i doing right now I
just want to tell them how I'm doing I
don't want to say good because this like
that is like the prison right there is
just saying good yeah yeah someone's
just reflecting back about how there is
this is this is something that's in in
our society you know there's some
there's some the erosion of trust in our
society and the relationship to mental
health is a big deal
[Music]
there's a Daoist we say there's a it's a
cop-out okay
but when you're a taoist you look at all
everything that doesn't make sense all
the cognitive dissonance and then you
remind yourself despite all the evidence
to the contrary the dowel is not broken
right so this is a kind of mythopoetic
move but that this is this is what we're
trying to build and it reminds me of
that anchoring the people that you don't
maybe spend a lot of time with you spend
a lot of time in the world that needs a
lot of help for trust but you still can
be come from a place of wholeness
because you're held by this this small
intimate group there's something that's
always there you know and we can we can
go on and on I know some of you people
are part of game game be game be as
serious trust problems serious
and it's not really addressed
now can I be able to there's a lot of
secrets there's a lot of performative
contradictions when people are online
and offline there's a lot of like
there are a lot of breaches where the
whole thing breaks down there's a lot of
proprietary information that people hold
pieces that's not that's not circulated
this is done strategically the feeling
that relationships are being strategized
is gives you is a low trust environment
I'm not saying that anyone's doing
anything wrong I'm just saying if you if
you can be members of groups which are
important but to notice that you you're
certainly not capable of doing very
complex tasks together because the trust
environment is very low
would you say a bit about this in
relation to what Zacks time says about
like teacherly Authority like if someone
says hey in my developmental process
I have gaps in myself trust can who can
teach me how to trust myself but then
they don't they are admitted they're
saying that like I don't know how to
find a teacher that I trust and that
gets very complex
yeah so trust teaching trust or
mentoring trust is interesting it's
different than this what we're doing
because to tree teach or mentor trust
you just have to trust
full-stop
and you're not even naive you know that
you're you know you lend money you're
not getting it back and but to mentor
and teach trust you just have to trust
full-stop
you
we're capable of that yes so the only
person that I've actually had this
amazing experience with is do you know
soryu he runs the maple but he says
my job is to love you
that's it and that course that II didn't
use the word trust but you know it's
just a simple phrase but when this is
this really lands so this is not someone
who has the same kind of trust network
we're talking about right this is just
something beyond that so I think there's
a lot of fragility in the work we do I'm
concluding myself in Zack we're not
there yet
you know like it's very I was on a
workgroup with him and we were talking
about my question was can the modern
mind I mean our minds actually separate
interiors from exteriors
can we actually separate the spin-around
kovat from what is actually real and I
don't think we can so these are
psychotic psychotic tendencies in the
modern collective that that makes trust
not not that stable when we were just
being honest so it this is just trying
to be honest about this
so so part of what he's writing about is
also coming from that place you know
he's reflecting that back on so so if
you have for example teacherly authority
I have to be able to make a case that
this is real and that's not real I have
to make a case for whether vaccines are
good or not or any of these things and
it's not possible to make that case
right now so then you could say bruno
latour said that truth is going to be
anchored in trust not like scientific
validity so that you will trust the
infra will think you will believe what
is true based upon the trust networks
you have built which brings us back to
the exercise that you in and of course
many of you did notice that you believed
the laws of nature you believe you know
there's this independent objective truth
that you trust but this is starting
these lines are starting to blur
and it seems that and Latour talks about
the the root word for truth is trough
which means trust so they're very close
they're very very close we trust the the
laws of nature because they apply to
predictable things but now we're asking
questions about nature to have no
predictable answers what's the
relationship between trust and truth in
those situations so this is all part of
so this was just trying to get at you
know the source code of trust as we
discovered last time it's not a
conceptual activity somehow we're using
our body as the
the abstractor of the essential elements
of the essential core meaning right
it is conceptual obviously but unlike
conceptual reductionism or we're we're
doing what I call source code work which
is always the the body is part of
getting to the protocol benita yeah it's
being cognizant at the time and I sure
I'm sure
a couple things that were happening in
the a chat been messaging people
privately here so yeah started happening
yesterday a raya who who does the
oxytocin parties on Sunday she zoomed to
me and my wife and she started crying in
front of us and then me and my wife
started crying with her and then you
know there's the connection there and
the trust just built and I don't know
Ryan here he has something on that good
sob squad I don't know what they do but
they cry together and so I'd like him to
come in to do a session there and then
Tyson messaged me that we should have a
trust gym maybe we can do these
activities where we just like you know
find our way to each other's hearts
without you know getting too abstract so
yeah those are those insights that came
forth for me for this session so I think
that was pretty pretty awesome so I hand
over to you for final thoughts and then
maybe I can close with upcoming events
yeah just Pig ping off of that so wait
what you know we do very similar things
with the horse workshops is people here
on the call can attest to
I mean basically there's something about
horses and being in nature that opens
your heart and then people cry and then
there's this really beautiful
consequence of building the human system
but also extending that to the natural
system which which which is really
powerful and when we did this trust
network thing when you are feeling into
your felt sense you're tapping into some
of those you know
you're tapping into the the way that our
effects system organizes reality for us
and I think the reason why we cry is
because we wrote were pretty much always
repressing and suppressing that
component of our primitive mind it's
actually quite complex mind and like the
energy gets built up so that's a whole
nother that's a whole nother
conversation so yeah so yep
it's time to move on would try to do
power next week so we did trust this
week and then we have to talk about
power and yeah we're trying to build
skills and capacities to think
collectively and you want to talk about
what's going on yeah I'll talk about so
if you go to the store dad CA you know
then coming up but was it an hour you
see 12 p.m. Eastern Time collective
presencing by Reebok and so we're
actually gonna practice her collective
presidency in practice so definitely
check out that my favourite trickster
Alexandre Bart is coming in at 2:30 p.m.
Eastern Time swimming in a digital
swimming in the digital during a
pandemic and then tonight then we have a
Socratic speed-dating with Raven
Connelly suppose like the speed-dating
method just a credit inquiry and that's
at 7:00 p.m. Eastern Time and we ending
up the night with a big party a stoic
meaning wave with a Kira that dawn oh
that cannot be missed he's gonna come in
and drop some uh stoic beats so please
check that out if you're interested and
remember the show it runs on the gift
economy and you are now part of the gift
economy and we hope that you find value
and can contribute in any way
you can and you benita forgiving your
gift today thank you all for coming it
was you know you could go you I've done
these whole day workshops on this so
just give you a taste of it but
hopefully it was powerful and meaningful
to you thank you very much thank you