howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
rut show.com that's Jim ruts show com
today's guest is Howard Rheingold one of
the founding fathers of writing and
thinking and analyzing deeply the
network world phenomena and he goes way
back to about the beginning of it he's
written numerous books several of which
we'll discuss today and as usual any
books articles or organizations we
talked about on the podcast will be
available on the episode home page at
Jim Rutte show calm that's Jim rut
show.com Howard has a very long and
interesting career which will hit many
of the points along the way but one
that's quite distinguishes he is a
distinguished fellow at the Institute
for the future he's also taught at
Stanford at Berkeley and as we'll talk
about has done many other interesting
things I'd also like to call out that
Howard listed as Howard Rheingold
is on patreon I support him I suggest
you do too he's one of the treasures of
our age so Howard long strange journey
huh
as I read on your bio and you got your
first computer in 1981 I think I got
mine at night a fact I know I did I got
mine in 1980 and it said you plugged it
into the Internet in 1980 or nine to the
Internet but into the telephone in 1983
and got sucked into the net why don't
you tell us a little bit about that
early use of both the computer and then
the net and how the two things kind of
work together for you well you know the
whole thing started because I was tired
of using a typewriter I at the point
that I got a computer I had been using a
typewriter for 10 years I had graduated
into a career
ding electric typewriter which meant
that you could type white over the last
line that you typed but you know if
you're writing articles you're writing
books you mark up your page a lot and
then you got to retype the whole thing
and I heard a rumor that there that
people were using computers to write
with and that you could move words
around on the screen it wasn't easy to
find it I actually I went out to Apple
which was like two buildings in I guess
the late 1970s early 1980s and there was
a fellow there by the name of Jeff
Raskin who actually was a person who
initiated the Macintosh project a little
bit later and he said well you're
probably not going to be able to use an
apple because the founders believe that
that that people are only going to use
it for programming and basic and playing
games and and you don't need the
hardware for lowercase letters but then
I read an article it was in the 1977
Scientific American called micro
electronics and the personal computer by
Alan's hey and I recommend that to
everybody to see what the original
vision of personal computers was and
Alan Kay had been working at a place
called Park Xerox Palo Alto Research
Center and I was living in San Francisco
about a half-hour drive away so I bugged
them until I got some work writing
articles about them and that's sort of
another story and at Parc I ended up
walking around finding interesting
people to talk to an interview and then
Xerox would find ways to place those
articles and I ran into a person by the
name of Bob Taylor it's not a name
that's extremely well known but he was
extremely important in the creation of
the ARPANET and personal computing and
he was the person who had funded Doug
Engelbart and so I interviewed him and
for if people want to really hear an
interesting story by an interesting guy
go look up the interview he did at the
University of Texas and and Austin with
John Markoff it's on YouTube anyway
meaning
Bart really completely turned my life
around I realized that these machines
were not just better typewriters they
were mind amplifiers and his article is
1962 article on augmenting human
intellect really connected with me I was
not that interested in electronics but I
was interested in kind of an overarching
look at technology I was very interested
in the mind and in mind expansion on
this connection between this new
personal computer technology and the
ability to enhance the way you think and
communicate was very exciting to me so
at that time of early 1980s a lot of the
talk was about the young Bill Gates and
the young Steve Jobs and people really
didn't know about Bob Taylor and Xerox
PARC Alan Kay Doug Engelbart and and
even you know Alan Turing John von
Neumann the result a whole story to be
told that the the old saw about standing
on the shoulders of giants these are
giants standing on the shoulders of
giants standing on the shoulders of
giants so I wrote a book called tools
for thought and in the process of
writing that book I got a modem and I
started exploring the online world which
at that time consisted of BBS's which
were mostly in teenage boys bedrooms
they took their one telephone line and
plugged him into it and one person at a
time could log in and and type and see
what other people had written there's
always just one thread and it was pretty
exciting and at that point I read that
there were tens of thousands of BBS's in
the United States and I think that that
really influenced the online culture
there were a lot of people who were
already turned on to communicating this
way even though it was really really
slow and all you saw were words on the
screen very slowly I experimented with
the source but it was something like $20
an hour it wasn't quite that powered I
actually worked at the source in the
beginning oh yeah I tell the story about
the source quite all
but on this show I'll talk a little bit
about it right now we can hop back in as
you said it was text mode only but had
most of what we have on the web today we
had email we had bulletin boards we had
chat we had by 1981 we had a precursor
to social media called participate we
had shopping we had stock prices but
yeah it was expensive and it was slow I
would say it was more like $10 an hour
but that was ten dollars an hour in 1981
dollars which would be about the
equivalent of 25 or $30 an hour today
and you know people sometimes ask me why
would anybody do that for 30 bucks an
hour for you know the Quillen $30 an
hour but $10 an hour and the current
currency then for character mode only
maybe 300 baud or 1200 baud if you could
afford it and the answer was because
there was nothing else like it it was
the only you know Network email in the
world then CompuServe came along there
was that very interesting pre-internet
era of which of course bulletin boards
were also a very interesting part but it
started hopping on man let me get you
once you get back to your story well I
actually hung out on participate and
there was a guy there binding of source
void Dave oh yeah
Dave Hughes he was daily iron day of
course we later encountered him on the
well and Dave Hughes was an older guy he
must be in his 90s now I'm sure he's
still alive because I haven't heard that
he's not and Dave was a pretty pretty
vocal voice online so then this thing
called the well got started in 1985 and
it was started by the same people who
had done the whole earth catalogue
Stewart Brand and Larry brilliant had
started it and I joined oh I guess about
four months after it started and it was
tremendously exciting to me again just
words on a screen it was really slow
these are the days of 24 baud modems and
the server was so slow that you could
log in go make a cup of coffee and come
back and you would be ready and the
words went across the screen very very
slowly but it was very exciting
as a writer it was exciting for several
reasons for one thing I was alone in a
room you know places like New York
I guess writers hung out in bars but
suburban Marin County California that
really wasn't an option for me but here
I could write for a while and then I
could go hang out with these people
online and it was like writing as a a
performing art and it was like writing
as a group performing art and I was just
tremendously interested and also
interested in the the network of people
one of the things that I think was
useful about the well was that it
started with the whole earth network
which was kind of diverse particularly
for the time most of the people online
back then were were men but on the whole
earth electronic link a good percentage
of them were women and it was mostly
white but not entirely white and it was
schoolteachers and engineers and writers
a lot of people who later turned out to
be technology correspondents like John
Markoff of the New York Times Steve Levy
from you know Rolling Stone and wired
all hung out in the media conference
there was like a watering hole fort for
people who were interested in what was
going on with with technology and so
that's what got me really interested in
in following what was happening again I
wasn't really a technology guy but uh it
seemed to me that this was a new
communication medium that had some
characteristics that no communication
medium had ever had before so I was
excited about that I wrote a story for
whole earth review in 1987 on virtual
communities and I talked about how I
could get to know people and know what
they were interested in and if I came
across things that I knew would interest
them I could I could send that their way
and that if they knew what I was
interested in they could send things my
way and this I think one of the more
interesting characteristics of online is
that if you
cultivate a network of people who you
think are interesting and who think what
what you have to say is interesting and
you and you feed that network by giving
people information that you come across
that might be useful to them they will
feed you back and for every I have found
that for everything I give away online I
get ten times back so that was exciting
to me it was writing as a performing art
but it was also this kind of online
think-tank in which we were all kind of
consulting to each other you know I
tried to get a book proposal I mean I've
got a book proposal but it took me four
or five years to get a book contract and
I was told that publishers believe that
only electrical engineers would use
computer networks to communicate with
but I wrote the virtual community in I
guess 1992 is published in 1993 I had
not really traveled very much before
then but I went around the world and I
hung out with virtual communities in
rural Japan and England and and France
it was really something that was
happening around the world and and
published that that book you know quite
a long time before this term social
media came into being in fact the year
it was published was the year of the New
Yorker cartoon that said on the on the
internet nobody knows you're a dog and
so that was really the start for me yeah
that was a very interesting book if
people are interested in the early
history of online that's a great one to
read and that was that was published in
about 1993 something like that yeah yep
very very entering goes into the
experience of the well and a bunch of
other things one of the things that you
talk about in there which I think was
prescient there's so much that's
prescient in your work as I've gone
through it here the last week or so
getting ready for this podcast is you
had a section that you called real-time
tribes now the technology that they use
IRC which was a long range multi-room
chat kind of protocol lots and lots and
lots of channels and it's become sort of
obsolete though now we have whatsapp
very very similar conceptually but what
I thought that really jumped out at me
as prescient was the idea of
the online world from that time forward
and actually going back to the 80s was
organized in many ways in many many many
many groups of specialized interest that
one could think of almost as tribal and
they formed their own culture they
formed their own language you know we
hear about you know some of the sort of
tribal aspects today like over on the
Chan's where the people have their own
language quite interesting what can you
say about the idea of tribes online and
how relevant is it today well you know
so uh I I mentioned that I thought that
this medium had some unique
characteristics one of which is many to
many it used to be that you had few too
many you know that a few were a
newspaper editor or you had a television
station you could broadcast and then
millions of people wouldn't listen to
you the thing about the internet as a
communication medium is that anybody can
communicate with with everybody whether
they will listen to you as you know
another story the other characteristic I
thought was interesting was that you
could connect with people who shared
your particular interests whether or not
you had known them before and even if
they were on the other side of the world
and and that could be anything it could
be you know raising dogs or horses or it
could be your political beliefs your
religious beliefs if you had a rare
disease you could connect with other
people who had that disease or you were
a caregiver you could connect with other
people and of course these days we can
see that if you're a Nazi or a a racist
or a terrorist or a criminal you can
also connect with others and I think
that that's a kind of an illustration of
a general characteristic we've we've
noted after all these years which is
it's the the Internet is kind of a
rising tide that lifts all boats and
some of those those boats are hospital
ships and some of them are our pirate
ships and and the people connecting with
each other around affinities have found
that not only can they connect with each
other and talk about things but they can
organise action they can organize
collective action in the the physical
world of
you know we'll have to loop back to that
idea when we talk about smart mobs but
you know back then the idea that you
could find ten or twenty or hundred
people who shared your particular
concern and spend all day talking with
them you know I remember one of the
things that that got me interested in
this idea of tribes was the Usenet you
know uh there's a certain percentage of
people who don't understand that there
were social media decades before
Facebook but using that you know
originated on college campuses but at
one point they were like a hundred
countries and you know thousands and
thousands of messages every day on on
different subjects and when I was
researching that the virtual community I
I found that people in the
harley-davidson motorcycle Usenet group
gathered in the u.s. to ride together
and they came from Australia they came
from from Europe so this medium that
connected people even though we couldn't
really see each other back then from all
around the world often led to people
meeting in real life and so I think the
lot of that tribalism comes from that
connection of connecting with people who
share your interests and values whatever
those might be and then doing something
with them we're meeting them yep
remember back on the well in the early
days you know I would think I joined the
well in 1989 I was actually at a
business meeting in Boston chatting with
Mitch Kapoor about a project that we
were both interested in and he had
joined the well like the week before and
I said you gotta join the well right and
so I did in December of 1989 and you
know I was taken to it quite quickly
one of things that was quite interesting
about the well particular in those early
days is probably a third of the people
on the well had been recruited via their
tribal affiliation with the Grateful
Dead the so-called dead heads and they
had numerous I frankly have not a dead
head I've been to dead concerts but they
had various conferences about various
things and they swapped you know bootleg
recordings of sessions and things of
that sort and it was a mega tribe that
had multiple
subcomponents and everything else yet it
was quite significant on the well back
in those days well in fact I think the
Grateful Dead people on the well really
kept the the well alive financially you
know it was I think two dollars an hour
at that point and Grateful Dead fans met
at concerts and would hang out in the
parking lot before and after the show
and during the show but but then they
dispersed so they were really a
community looking for a place where they
could hang out all the time and they've
got lots of things to talk about set
lists and endless arguments you know I
guess any any fan group that does the
same thing and in fact I had gone to a
Grateful Dead show when I was in college
in 1968 but had pretty much forgotten
about them but the people I met on the
well brought me to to Grateful Dead
shows so I got back into it in the in
the 1990s but definitely the well
probably survived as a viable business
because of the deadheads and and one of
the things when I was researching the
book talking to Kevin Kelly about the
design of the well was that they
designed it to be a a business that
would stay in business that they would
bring in enough revenue to pay the bills
but they weren't after a profit one of
the interesting events I don't know
maybe before or after you had joined was
that so many people had joined the
server was really slow and the users of
the well-organised
to buy a new server we literally pulled
our money gave it to the well and said
look well we will buy our $2 an hour in
advance so that you could go buy a new
server it's hard to think of any other
business in which the customers buy the
equipment for the business and because
most of the people on the well in the
beginning were in the San Francisco Bay
Area we began to get together for
parties so
you know marriages were formed and
marriages broke up and people died and
people sat by the the the bedside of
people who are dying we passed a hat
when when someone had medical bills
that's what got me thinking that this
was very much like other communities
it's interesting they mentioned the
server barn-raising I was a bit before
my time but you may know that in the
later days the well was owned by salon a
online magazine essentially and they
totally ignored it after an initial
flurry of interest and let it run into
the ground and they were about to close
it when it was bought by somebody else
or had they had some financial crisis or
something and the well members got
together and bought it so there was the
leaven of us I was one of them actually
that each chipped in and bought the well
from salon and we've run it as an
independent company ever since and
frankly just as you talked about with
Kevin Kelly you know it's cash flow
positive but not very nobody bought into
the well for its financial cash flows
that come out of it we all bought in it
because we care about the community and
as you said so many things I mean I
still recall this was so eerie and
essentially an online wake with Tom
mandal remember Tom yes you're new yeah
he was a real active member of the and a
good friend of mine and you know we got
to know each other in real life too and
he was dying of brain cancer and the day
he knew he was gonna die
he started up a online wake while he was
still alive using the send function on
the well which is kind of a very
rudimentary chat and we were all
chatting with him and with each other as
he actually was going in to the end game
of brain cancer and it was
extraordinarily moving and deep and I
had cried for hours afterwards it was
you know one of the more you know deep
and profound experiences of my life
intermediated on text on a command line
but about a person leaving the scene of
this fear first or wherever else they
may go
yeah I remember the name of that thread
was my turn which still gives me kind of
chills up my spine as you know tom was a
futurist at the Stanford Research
Institute so a lot of what he had to say
was really interesting and you weren't
hearing it anywhere else and I think
that was one of the the great values of
the world because you know you had to be
one of the the sponsors of SR i's
research to get some of that that info
absolutely and actually tom was the
number one poster on the well I know if
you remember I used to write had a
program I wrote that analyzed well usage
in various ways and one of the ones was
calculating who were the heaviest
posters on the well so I post every
month or two and Tom was always number
one and he asked me to not put his name
on his user name because his bosses
would fire him if they knew how much
time he was spending on the well and so
I said okay well anonymize it just
slightly but yeah he was quite a
character to say the very least we got
to move on here Howard's on a little bit
of a time check today one more thing I'd
like to talk about from that book which
is again very prescient was you
discussed three risks to the future of
online and two of the three at least
have become to my mind very very
important in the current trajectory of
our online world the first one you
talked about as commodification that you
know this isn't just a bunch of happy
hippies running out of axe in the Bay
Area but you know somehow this is gonna
become commodified big-time you talk a
fair amount about prodigy and you know
it's attempts to get hegemony in that
world of course that never happened but
they tried you know and then you also
talked about risk number two
surveillance control and disinformation
well guess what sports fans what's life
on Facebook and Twitter but surveillance
control and disinformation and then the
third one I think a little bit less
important in the online world but
perhaps important in the gaming world
which is the hyperrealist critique which
is that the presentation of reality and
pewter could be so refined that it might
actually replace people's desires to
engage in the real world so again I
think those especially the first two
huge I'd love to get your thoughts on
you know what we were thinking at the
time and what you think now about
commodification first and then
surveillance control and disinformation
well um you know when I wrote the book
again
I was excited by this new territory and
I wasn't particularly an expert on it
and I thought about what what are the
major ways that this could go bad and
those were three ways that could go bad
I also mentioned enclosure back then I I
it was Bill Gates maybe Bill Gates will
take this over and sell it back to us
and interesting it was probably Mark
Zuckerberg wasn't born yet back then and
then the other one I thought well what's
the most important thing and and I felt
that our freedom the the health of
democracy will when more people when
most people are online will democracy be
healthier will we have more freedom and
that led me to discover this literature
I'd never heard about about the public
sphere so I want to circle back to this
idea of the public sphere because I
think that that is a contemporary danger
but this this whole issue of
commodification well now they call it
surveillance capitalism it's really the
marriage of surveillance and
commodification in that the business
model and you know I was really there
when the attention business model
started I was the founding executive
editor of hot-wired which was the online
zine of Wired magazine
I quit pretty quickly because of the
direction that that they were going but
we were excited by the idea that we
could put up a banner ad and sponsors
would pay us for that and then we could
go pay people to write and to create art
all you made money online was a mystery
and people laughed at you if you said
you were gonna make money on the the
Internet
prior to Netscape going public and then
things got really interesting so we had
we had the first banner ad and we had
real I did not realize what that would
lead to it's not just the ad of course
it's tracking what people are doing
online and using the knowledge of their
preferences to customize ads and then
sell that filter that that attention of
particular audiences to advertisers
which you know sounds pretty good
actually however it just it expanded so
much if you're talking about Facebook
not only do they record every move of
your mouse when you're on Facebook and
every like that everybody makes on
anything that you've ever done but they
follow you around the web elsewhere if
you log on to sites using Facebook they
know what you're doing and they also buy
information about people that's
collected by others so now they've got
what is it 2 billion users and they have
these extremely detailed dossiers that
enable them to micro-target advertising
which you know in in the advertising
business is really a great thing it used
to be you would put up a billboard so
that you know hundreds of thousands of
people would see it and maybe the people
who wanted to buy your commodity would
would see it as well
same thing with television you would you
know hope that millions of people would
see it and that maybe a few thousand of
them might want to buy something here um
if somebody was interested in blue jeans
and you knew that by what they were
doing online then you could send them
blue jeans ads well what we discovered
during the election of 2016 is that all
kinds of people can use that micro
targeting system so now we've got
computational propaganda where you can
customize your propaganda to specific
audiences let's say you want to
yup racial unrest for example you can
find the black people and the white
people and customized messages to them
and use of Facebook's micro targeting
system to propagate that propaganda and
then of course there's developed a whole
ecosystem of trolls who will repeat that
propaganda and and box that will do it
automatically the same same thing on on
Twitter I think the surveillance is not
as detailed but certainly the the bot
networks are we never really expected
that in terms of surveillance outside of
the online world I did write about that
I had a syndicated column in the 1990s
1994 1995 and and there were people who
cared about what was happening I wrote
about closed-circuit television cameras
going up and I wrote that they can't
recognize your face yet and they're not
networked yet but someday they will I
wrote about the the sensors we all use
when we're on the road and we go we want
to go across a bridge that automatically
collects art oh well that automatically
lissa digital breadcrumbs as every time
you swipe your credit card you're
leaving a trail and if somebody could
get all of those breadcrumbs together
they can have quite a great dossier on
your movements and your preferences but
nobody really cared it was you know a
couple of privacy scholars at
universities but for the most part the
public didn't care we and I include
myself in this we traded privacy for
convenience that Amazon knows what books
I've looked at and what books I bought
well that that's good because it
recommends things to me that I might be
interested in you know I think you can
see kind of a theme here it's that
rising tide lifts all boats thing is
that a lot of these things that are very
useful to people can
subverted and well the rising tide lifts
the boats of the wealthiest enterprises
more than it does of individuals so now
we've got you know so back in the days
of the well there was Usenet there was
iris IRC there was a well there were
BBS's all of these were smaller or
larger enterprises but they were nothing
like the semi monopolies we see today
you know you've got Amazon Apple Google
Twitter and Facebook so many people
these days don't understand that those
were all invented because we had an
Internet that was designed to enable
people to innovate on it no matter who
you were Tim berners-lee didn't have to
rewire the internet he just needed to to
pass some code around to people and and
the the Google twins didn't have to ask
permission to create a new kind of
search engine that kind of open
innovation I think is tremendously
threatened by this enclosure by these
these giants that if you really want to
innovate these days you either have to
work for one of those guys or you've got
to do something that's far away from far
enough away from their business that
they're not going to steal it and if
they're successful
you're gonna want them to acquire you so
we're living in a whole different
innovation ecosystem and now right now
at this moment so many people are forced
to be online because of the the Cova 19
quarantine were forced to have our
meetings online Oh people are
discovering things that that that you
and I knew a long time ago which is you
don't have to go to the office all the
time you can communicate online I do
think that there's a place for the
office and I think that the place where
the office is primarily social you can
get a lot of work done at home you know
if one in four people after this covet
is over stayed home one day out of four
think of all the
we wouldn't be putting into the
atmosphere think of all the hours you
wouldn't even be on the freeway
so um I don't know where I was going
with that let's move on we're talking
about the fact that the big guys would
control things in a way they never did
before though it is useful remember that
the late 80s and early 90s AOL was a
pretty damn dominant power and it had
its walled garden alternative to the
open Internet but in those days it was
still relatively small on the scale of
things that millions of users maybe even
tens of millions but it certainly didn't
have billions like the platform's have
today and it does seem from a social and
political perspective that we don't know
how to think about these platforms right
you know we have the current controversy
with the idiot and chief in his tweets
right and is Twitter a free speech
platform
no well constitutionally it's not it's a
private business they could be as
arbitrary as they want they could say no
goddamn Republicans if they wanted and
that's within their legal rights but
does a platform that's that ubiquitous
and in many ways become the public
square have some larger duty to allow
free speech I don't know it's a really
interesting and difficult question that
the scale I think brings forth that we
really have not dealt with it as a
society in the United States least of
all you know Europe has made some
attempts at least to bring these
platforms under governmental control
much or they've moved in the right
direction in fact my view they've moved
in partially the wrong direction parsley
right about privacy partially wrong
about censorship but in the United
States the platform's make the rules
period and for things that are that
ubiquitous that does not strike me as
the right model do you have any thoughts
about that about how we as citizens
should think about these platforms well
you know I mentioned the public sphere a
while back when I was 1992 I was writing
the virtual community I thought well
what does this have to do with democracy
and I discovered this this political
philosophy German political philosopher
by name of of habermas wrote these books
they're they're practically unreadable
and in my opinion but
he had this very potent idea which he
traced out historically which is that
democracy you know rule rule of the
people rather than by a sovereign was
not just about voting for your leaders
it was about having a population that
was a free enough to talk with each
other and be informed enough to have
some idea what they're talking about to
discussing issues of the day and to
argue about the issues of the day and
you know when the when the American
Revolution happened there were anonymous
op-eds in the newspapers that we now
call the Federalist Papers that were
arguing about things there were the
Committees of Correspondence so the the
idea that the entire population supports
the democracy that you know
representation and voting are the most
visible parts of it and it's very
important and Alber Maas had two fears
one of them was that the the nascent
science of public relations would enable
the wealthy and the powerful to to skew
the the public sphere to convince people
to see things their way whether they
they knew that they were being
manipulated or not and his other fear
was that that that journalism would be
overtaken by the profit motive and that
the role of journalists as informing the
people of a free society would again be
subverted by those who had wealth and
power well what he didn't foresee was
computational propaganda on the scale
that we're seeing and also the the scale
of things so let's say that that Twitter
and Facebook wanted to eliminate the
misinformation that was being broadcast
and you know there's there's a big gray
Arian political discourse you know ma
you may say something that I think is
totally bogus and we can argue about it
but you know something like if
Swallow disinfectant that make Ovid
that's literally life-threatening
misinformation if these platforms with
billions of users wanted to police that
they would be unable to so we're we're
kind of in a bad position here in that
you know we're certainly seeing with
with the in the case of Facebook that
they are reluctant to act as a an
arbiter of truth but you know even if
they decided to do so in the arms race
between manipulation of information
disinformation misinformation what I
call disinfo tainment and the ability of
individuals to find their way through
that I think that the democracy is
really losing that arms race you know I
wrote a book in 2012 about the the major
social media literacies that people
needed to have and I chose crap
detection as the first one well no I
chose attention is the first one in crap
detection is the second one the the idea
was that it well if more people could
learn to distinguish the good info from
the bad info then that would not only be
good for them it would be good for the
public sphere you know this happened a
long time ago before Google but my
daughter who's now grown when she was in
middle school she started using Infoseek
and other search engines to do her
homework and I sat down with her and I
said look you get a book from the
library
there was a publisher and editor a
librarian the teacher who assigned the
book all of them were kind of
gatekeepers that that will guarantee to
you that the information in that that
book is more or less accurate you can
put a query into a search engine and get
a million answers in a couple of seconds
and it's now up to you to determine
what's real info and what's bad info I
use the example of site called Martin
Luther King jr. org that is actually run
by by Nazis it looks like it's a
biographical site about the civil rights
leader but
you look at it a little bit deeper
that's kind of a dark story about him so
I showed her that you could use who is
and find out who's behind this was it a
guy by name of was it Don black
something like that and if you look him
up you'll find out that he was a Nazi so
you know what that was fairly easy to
find out but nowadays you've got
astroturf sites that look exactly like
they're an environmentalist site but
they're actually run by a chemical
company there is so much sophisticated
this information out there that the
education to enable people to sift
through it in it's much more important
and as far as I can tell
completely lacking in in educational
institutions yeah we'll get to that
we'll get we'll get to that soon when we
talk about net smart okay okay but those
are very very important things in the
interest of time we talk about some of
the negatives I also I always like to do
this because so much of our discourse
about the Nets today are about the
negatives on the net but there's a hell
of a lot of positives right otherwise
why would people be doing it and you
wrote quite a bit you know the end of
virtual communities you talk about the
formation of the e FF I helped out on
that my own little way around the edges
and then you talk to considerably more
length in your book smart mobs about how
people can use these online tools and
these platforms to do good things maybe
you could talk a little bit about your
perspective on those two things for the
e FF story and in virtual communities
and then transition into smart mobs well
you know one of the things that got me
thinking about community was that there
was a parenting conference on the well
and and although you know the arguments
got pretty hot in a lot of places in the
parenting conference we were talking
about our children and and although we
might have argued about things elsewhere
it was really a very convivial place
there was a guy by name of a Phil cat
was his online name who organized a
baseball game after a while so that all
of us parents
get our kids out and and meet each other
face-to-face and oh like you know not
too long after he started organizing
those baseball games a fill came online
and and disclosed that his 15 year old
son had been diagnosed with leukemia and
overnight night literally overnight a
support group materialized and you know
there were we did pass a hat and and
raised about $15,000 for medical
expenses but there was a nurse on there
who could could give him answers at at
11:00 at night when he wasn't going to
call his his doctor and you know his son
sadly did die and like the last two rows
of last two pews in the in the church
for his services were were people who
had known his parents exclusively online
the reason one reason I tell the story
is that ten years ago I was diagnosed
with cancer and I went to to daily
radiation treatments and I needed to get
people to drive me back and forth to
these radiation treatments and a lot of
people that I had known on the well
decades before just signed up
spontaneously to help me and by golly
one of the people who drove me was was
Phil Katz and you know I think I
mentioned before that if you have a rare
disease you know if you have a disease
that only one in a million people have
well there are 2,000 others on the
Internet you can connect with them if
you have a disease or you're a caregiver
for disease you know very well what I'm
talking about that there is support you
can find online there's support you can
find in the middle of the night when
nobody else is going to going to talk to
you and these people are going to help
you out
in the real world and many many
instances then of course you know I
started writing I started researching
smart mouths because I was I was
traveling a fair amount by that time and
I noticed that people in Tokyo were
we're looking at their their telephones
why would you look at your telephone and
then a couple weeks later is in Helsinki
and people were looking at their
telephones in 2000 there was people in
the US were not text
ting that really took off with the
iPhone in 2007 so you know that was you
know what futurists call a signal
something's going on here I wasn't sure
at all what it was but then I found out
about there was there are a couple of
things that happened one was called the
Battle of Seattle where there was a
World Trade Organization had a meeting
there and people were opposed to the
World Trade Organization really for the
first time used laptops and the internet
and mobile phones to coordinate their
actions that may not seem like a big
deal today but that was a big signal
back then I remember that that was huge
that was huge yeah yeah and it was it
seemed like that was a watershed of some
kind in terms of political power that
the state and established central powers
they had the radio telephones in their
cars they had the ability to coordinate
with each other suddenly citizens could
do that and then in the Philippines
there was a Joseph Estrada was the
president of the Philippines he was
accused of corruption there was a big
trial in Congress there and and and when
a lot of his political allies tried to
shut that down people in the Philippines
sent out text messages saying uh show up
in the main square where black and
within 15 minutes
millions of people started showing up in
the main square there and of course the
church in the military had a lot to do
with it but the Estrada regime fell and
that was really the first time that
people took collective action within
minutes people who didn't know each
other who really weren't in the same
political party were able to use their
telephones to coordinate collective
action in the in a physical world and
that to me was the final signal that
this was something really worth looking
into
and you know as a as a writer I always
try to do what any good journalist does
which is go find some experts and see if
they know what's going on you know when
I wrote the virtual community I found it
I didn't I couldn't find any
professors who would talk about this but
I found a graduate student at UCLA in
sociology by the name of Mark Smith and
I asked him why would people give away
information to strangers online and he
said knowledge capital social capital
and communion which I think is still
true and important so I turned to Mark
Smith again around 2000 2001 and he said
it sounds like the fact that people are
carrying phones and that they can
connect to the internet has lowered the
barriers for collective action and and
you know we saw remember that that book
smart mobs was was published in 2002
Arab Spring happened in 2011 so much
later that most journalists had
forgotten about that but you know the
Arab Spring was all about Twitter and
and Facebook the Egyptian revolution
started with a Facebook page and of
course that the Egyptian revolution was
hijacked by the military and you know
revolutions quite often are hijacked but
the fact that they were started
spontaneously but people using social
media was a a watershed and in fact um
for an edited volume for MIT press I
spent some time just collecting
instances of people using mobile phones
there weren't quite really smartphones
yeah and the Internet to coordinate
collective action all over the world
including the People's Republic of China
and there were hundreds and hundreds of
incidents and then uh again a disaster
relief after the tsunami in Asia really
again literally within minutes the Asian
to South Asian tsunami blog was set up
that helped coordinate people's actions
and remember one instance in which
someone said I've got 50,000 nails that
I can contribute to people who are
building temporary housing in Indonesia
I can get them to the dock if somebody
can get them over there it's called you
know emergent response happens in all
disasters before the
official first responders get there you
know it's the people in the neighborhood
who dig you out now we're seeing this
emergent collective response happening
worldwide and it's happening there was
the people finder wiki after Hurricane
Katrina so many people were scattered
how were they gonna find their families
they were using Craigslist they were
using Usenet so the Katrina people
finder I remember they put this together
very quickly and they scraped all of
these other sources so that people would
have a single place to find the
relatives and I remember talking with
people who set it up who said that
somebody had found a way to get their
data flowing much more quickly and they
located this person and they called him
and they said I'd be happy to talk to
you but I have to go to school now he
was 15 years old so we've seen so many
instances and we will continue to see so
many instances of what's called mutual
aid we're seeing it right now in the
United States with the the failure of a
government to coordinate leadership
around the response we are seeing mutual
aid organizations popping up everywhere
I wrote a post on it on on my patreon
and you know in order to give some
credibility to my theorizing I started
looking up a few and you know I said I
stopped in around 20 of different
efforts around to coordinate response so
mutual aid is as potent as all of the
negative effects we're seeing you know
again I think we need a more nuanced
discourse about technology that
recognizes there's a very big gray area
and we really have to talk about how we
want to act as users and designers of
Technology it's not just black and white
it's not you know I think until fairly
recently people considered the latest
technology to be a good thing it was
progress now people are asking questions
about it and and I think that's
important
yep yeah that's you know where we're at
today but I think it is important and
I'm glad we did this huge and you did
give some excellent examples that while
there are issues with the network
platforms there are great benefits I'll
tell you one here locally I live very
remote farm in the Appalachian Mountains
and we have a growing call it a neo back
to the land movement of young folks who
are buying or renting old mountain farms
and putting them into high quality
organic production and there was five of
these farms locally that had built a
great clientele with restaurants and
they were selling their chickens their
eggs their wine and cider their greens
and their vegetables and other things to
these high-end restaurants well guess
what the high-end restaurants are all
closed and fortunately one of them was
quite computer literate and put together
an online store that allowed all five of
the farms to offer essentially a
Community Supported Agriculture but
customized so you could sign up and but
you could get what you wanted each week
you go down to the more central of the
five farms and pick up your stuff and
has it been marketed mostly on next-door
and on Facebook and within a couple of
weeks these five farms were able to
replace at least a significant part of
their incomes which had literally gone
to zero and all these fine dining
restaurants closed by selling directly
to consumers and you know that would
have been impossible in the pre-internet
age so it's you know again I love to
point out and hear stories about the
good that comes from our platforms yes
we have to be wary of them but we also
have to acknowledge that there's a
reason they're so popular they do some
good things too yeah and I think we
ought to look at well what are the
characteristics of the bad things and
what can we do about it
and what are the characteristics of the
good things and how can we do more of
that you know one of the things that I
think we have opportunities now that
that have been forced we are forced by
the The Cove in 1900 in place to do a
lot of our social and business
communication
online teachers have been forced to
teach online teaching online is not a
replacement for face-to-face but it's
not worse than face-to-face if you know
how to do it and I think there's a huge
opportunity particularly in places where
you really can't afford a high quality
of bricks and mortar institution and I
think that it's going to put some good
pressure on universities to change and
it's going to highlight that the the
big-name universities are the big
businesses and the big endowments are
maybe not as important to education as
the community colleges and the small
liberal arts schools are another forced
opportunity is that transporting
thousands of people thousands of miles
to have a face-to-face conference just
isn't happening you can have a face -
you can have a conference with thousands
of people online if you know how to do
it and we're beginning to see that
happening so I think a lot of these
things were being forced to do could be
come permanent features the same thing
with Community Supported Agriculture is
happening in in my neighborhood these
distribution networks that are just
ad-hoc set up using online media to
enable the farmers to get their fresh
food to people I think that those are
going to continue when the restaurants
open again we have an opportunity to
understand what's happening and to try
to shape the outcome and I also think I
call it green space online you know you
can still start a BBS you can use
discourse or reddit very easily really
cheaply or or free to do that you you
can you can start a chat group there are
a lot of ways that people can start
their smaller communities of interest
online and
I don't think we're I don't think we're
going to overcome Facebook's monopoly
but I think we ought to preserve that
space outside of Facebook's enclosure to
create our own online media online
communities there are so many tools to
do it now and there's a lot of know-how
about how to do it and now we're sort of
being forced to do it
yep it's been a remarkable amount of
innovation and even Facebook you know as
much as it it's a shit show you know it
is almost unintentionally I think
created the group's space which I know a
lot of people including people I work
with and some my own projects are done
on Facebook groups and as far as we can
tell there's very little or no
advertising they don't have control the
order in which content appears and so a
lot of these are the real negatives
about Facebook go away
and yet you were only a single click
away from you know several billion
people so even within Facebook the
group's phenomena turned out to be of
value as I spent 95% plus of my Facebook
time such that it is in groups and only
in groups you know the the public
Facebook has become much much much less
interesting to me so yeah I think the
point that we can build our own worlds
can continue to do so is even true in
Facebook there's a lot of this mutual
aid is organized on Facebook and some
good stuff happens in Facebook groups a
lot of bad stuff you know Nazi law
enforcement have their own Facebook
groups my problem with Facebook groups
is that the way that a fairly large
group can have sustained conversations
that was solved way back in with with
the software we used on the well and and
software for enabling that kind of
conversation
asynchronous conversation as evolved
since then if you've got a group a
Facebook group and you you post
something that will be visible to people
until somebody else post something and
then yours is deprecated if you've got a
group of 500 people it's really hard to
have a conversation that's going to
sustain for more than you know
a day that way of course with with a
good conferencing software well the
software knows what you want to see and
which threads you've been following and
when you log in and it shows you the new
responses and the threads you've been
following again a problem that was
solved you know I was invited to speak
to the social scientists at Facebook a
few years ago and it's interesting
because Google where my daughter worked
for eight years I know of one social
scientist that they hired and he was
miserable there but Facebook had Jesus
group was must been a hundred people
until I ranted at them the same rant
about why can't you make Facebook groups
a little bit more like a good BBS or
computer conferencing system I don't
know why they haven't like you said it
doesn't show advertising so I don't know
what their business reason is for but it
must be a business reason anyway let's
move on yeah let's move on let's move
now to your most recent book net smart
which I believe was published in 2012
which must mean it was written in 2010
or 2011 and again pretty prescient about
the trends of the world you know let's
start with the first chapter where you
happen to hit one of my favorite topics
regular listeners of this show no I
basically say you are your attention and
your first chapter is called attention
and I think it's why and how to control
your minds most powerful instrument talk
a little bit about attention and you
know I don't know how much you know
about attention from a I do remember
actually in the book there's fair amount
about the cognitive science of attention
and how the attention economy has become
the world that we live in well I chose
that as the I had five literacies and I
chose that as a first one because
attention is the foundation of thought
and and communication but also it was
very clear even in 2010 that these
online media and increasingly mobile
media were making money by harvesting
our attention the more attention you
could pay to a site the more advertising
they could display
to you and of course we're now learning
that the the people who create a lot of
these apps understand the same
psychology that the inventors of slot
machines understood how do you how do
you capture people's attention and get
them to continue paying attention it's
it's like we've been captured in that
sense the good news is that your
attention is not fixed you can learn to
control your attention it's just that
you never did it's not something that
your parents teach you it's not
something that they teach you in school
oh yeah you got to pay attention to the
teacher when they're talking that
doesn't really mean that you gained
control over your attention that again I
did my research and and the good news is
if you look at multi thousand-year-old
contemplative traditions and and you
look at a lot of the cognitive science
and neural science about attention it's
certainly possible to train your
attention and my interpretation of that
is that any attention to how you're
using your attention is a lot better
than not paying attention to it at all
then of course there are a lot of things
that you can do you know one thing that
I asked my students to do was something
that I did for quite a while which is at
the beginning of the day when I sat at
my computer and you know nowadays you
might it might be a laptop or a desktop
or it might be your phone but I said
take a post-it note and and write two or
three things you intend to accomplish
with your computer by the end of the day
and just put that in the lower corner of
your screen and every once in a while
your your gaze will fall upon it and
that's time for you to look at the time
and figure out how much have you
accomplished and what are you doing
right now and it's really not a matter
of policing yourself it's a matter of
making yourself more aware and and I
something I called info tension I think
there's a whole lot of more room for
research and education about info
tension but you know I started writing
the book because
going back to the 1980s I was writing
about personal computers and then in the
1990s about what became known as social
media and then I started writing about
mobile media at every turn scholars and
critics would ask are these things
really any good for us as individuals
and and communities and societies and I
concluded by around 2010 that a lot
depends on what we know and how many
people know it it's a matter of literacy
you and I and a fair number of other
people we we know how to make our way
online
you mentioned AOL a while back well you
know unuse net every September a bunch
of new freshmen would get their internet
accounts and they would start acting up
on Usenet well the the regulars on
Usenet would enforce the norms that they
had developed by being kind of forceful
with the newcomers one day AOL cut loose
three million people on the internet
with with no instruction at all and that
became known as the September that never
ended because those norms weren't passed
along I think that's one of the things
that's missing from the the worldwide
social media are norms and what are the
most important norms that we need one of
the most important things that we need
to know how to do that if an individual
knows this that individual will do
better but also the more individuals who
know that the healthier and the more
useful the Commons will be so I came up
with attention crap detection
participation collaboration and
networking us and you know attention is
the first one if you don't have control
of your attention you can be manipulated
in all kinds of ways but again very
close behind that is crap detection can
can you on your own find the information
you need and guarantee that it's not
going to kill you or it's not going to
be detrimental to your social life or to
democracy you know that was an issue in
my mind in 2010 but now I think
an overwhelming issue I wonder if we are
capable as individuals to really be
excellent crap detectors considering the
level of sophistication that the crap
producers are using I'm currently
reading a very interesting book called
lie machine by Philip Howard from Oxford
and he goes into great detail about the
techniques and the money spent and the
skills that go into crafting junk news
as he calls that he is now abandoned
fake news it's been co-opted by other
people and one wonders is the average
person to keep in mind the average
person has an IQ of a hundred and in the
United States has maybe a year of
college is such a person actually
capable on their own of doing crap
detection or does it make sense for them
to club with other people and you know
what we call collective sense making and
together try to figure out what makes
sense and what doesn't what you think
about that idea well you know we have an
existence proof of that that works when
I started looking at people who were
doing research on incredulity and and
incredulity online they noted that a lot
of gamers educate each other about you
know what's real and what's what's not
online so you know I it certainly is
possible to me it comes back to
education you know when when I was
teaching digital journalism I came
across the elimin Dooley debates almost
exactly 100 years ago kind of the media
superstar that day was a young New York
Times reported by name of walter
Lippmann he wrote a book called public
opinion and his opinion was that the US
has become this industrialized complex
society and that Americans are too
uninformed and too gullible to to manage
such a society and he proposed that the
technocrats run it and john dewey who
was an older professor at columbia at
the time said well if americans are are
not well-informed we need better
journalism and if Americans are too
credulous we need better education and
so here we are a hundred years later and
I asked my students would you bet a
thumb on Lippmann or on Dewey and you
know I think that that argument is still
going on for better and for worse
education systems are very conservative
in the sense that it may take a long
time to change so we have a society in
which the technology is causing social
changes at a rapid rate but educational
systems are not really dealing with it
and and I think this is kind of
educating each other and you know tribal
education for better and worse is what's
happening today online yeah that's both
better and worse I mean if you have good
peers I mean I'm a member of a group on
Facebook called rally point alpha I
think it's like 1,500 people who are
really quite rigorous sense makers and
we collectively process what gets posted
by the members when they think there's
something that might be significant but
might have a subtext or the you know
seriously biased in a non obvious way
and you know there'll be some quite
serious dissection of these pieces and
commentary about them but on the other
hand if you're a member of you know
white supremacists of Missouri or
something the collective sense making of
that group while may be accurate from
their point of view it's hard to imagine
how that has social utility yeah so you
know I you talking about tribalism I
think you know it sense sense making
tribes are what we have now again in
regard to education I learned using
social media with my my students it's
not just about the social media but but
about the pedagogy that students are
used to not being trusted they're used
to the teacher delivers information and
you figure out what's going to be on the
test and then you do well on the test
that show that you got that information
it's called the banking model the
teacher has some information and the
it's the duty of the students to to bank
it trying to educate myself I
came across Neil postman's book on
education and in which he said societies
that change slowly it's the duty of the
older generation to pass along what
works in societies that change very
rapidly it's a duty of the older
generation to teach the younger
generation how to learn from for
themselves
and our education system has not been
set up to encourage people and learn for
themselves even though that's really a
human instinct and we are human in large
part because of our ability to do social
learning schools have had this monopoly
on learning since forever
but now if you've got a teenager ask
them how they would learn how to play
the ukulele or configure web server and
I bet they're gonna say well I'll do a
search on YouTube and they'll probably
find another teenager who will teach
them how to do it you know we've got
we've got YouTube we've got Wikipedia
we've got Google we've got you know the
Internet Archive we've got so many of
the books in the world online it's now
possible for people to educate
themselves and educate each other
without going to school of course what's
missing is well how do we do this so you
know I started a a project I called pure
gaji instead of pedagogy you know that's
like teaching the young paragon Jesus
like appears teaching each other and a
group this is 2011 a group materialized
online of educators from all over Mexico
and Japan and Germany and there's it's
still going I really dropped out of it a
couple of years later and and the
community took it on by itself but if
you go to peer Gogi org you'll find that
they they're in the fourth iteration of
a free handbook on how groups of people
can learn online let's say you and your
tribe want to learn a particular subject
and none of you are an expert how do you
go about finding resources and
qualifying and organizing those
resources and creating learning
experiences which media do you use how
do you how do you assess it so I think
that we we
of folks an educational challenge and
that our educational institutions really
can't keep up with learning crap
detection and attention management but
we also have the ability to learn with
and from each other online yep and if I
give you an executive out YouTube my
wife is starting to complain about her
hair getting too long and scraggly and
she said I bet you can figure out how to
cut my hair on YouTube and so I've been
watching YouTube's hair cutting videos
that I'm really interested in but I
think I have learned how to cut hair
with scissors and a comb and I'm gonna
give it a try tomorrow
and as I said well you know no matter
how bad it is it'll grow back in six
weeks so we shall see
we're getting close on time here there's
other interesting things in Nets March I
encourage people to read but I would
like to jump ahead a little bit to a
last topic which is something I didn't
even know you had done until I was doing
research for this podcast and I found it
extremely interesting and that is the
class that you teach on the literacy of
cooperation oh yeah
well um again you know I usually learn
things by stumbling across them and then
looking into them and when I was writing
smart mobs
this issue of collective action became
interesting to me and I discovered the
work of Elinor Ostrom in particular
Austin was a awarded the Nobel Prize in
Economics which which bugged a lot of
economists because she was a political
scientist and I think most people know
the phrase the tragedy of the Commons it
was written by a biologist at Stanford
warning about you know population growth
threatening the human population and
then the Commons he was referring to
were the common land in most villages
where that was no not owned by anyone
and anybody could graze it and
inevitably people would would graze as
many cattle or sheep as they could and
they would destroy the the Commons you
know the desert off' ocation of north
africa happens with people just going
for for firewood further and further and
this conclusion that's what the tragedy
is is that this is inevitable
um well Ostrom Jia took some years
Ostrom a swell isn't really inevitable
and so she studied people who were were
managing common pool resources fisheries
timber water systems policing and she
concluded that there was a core of
people of groups everywhere who did
manage to use common resources without
despoiling it or over using it and she
found seven design characteristics
around those communities that seemed to
be common one of them was clear
boundaries and other one was ability to
make new rules another one was fairly
inexpensive relatively fair means of
adjudicating disputes and I thought well
why humans cooperate and and and why we
don't cooperate in too many instances
that's so important to so many things
you know we've got this global
environmental crisis and and global
warming
we've got nuclear weapons we've got you
know disease management all of these
things are Commons issues wouldn't the
people who are dealing with this deal
with it better not that there's a
formula but if they understood more
about human cooperation so um I I had a
little course at at Stanford that I used
to start learning about this we had
Jimmy Wales came out and and and spoke
and certainly Wikipedia is a great
example of cooperation there was a
sociologist by the name of mine cor
Olsen who wrote about collective action
and pretty much established the norm
among social scientists that a group of
people who are not related and who are
not incented financially are not going
to create public goods of course
Wikipedia is a counter example to that
we find out that that people actually do
that so you know one of the things that
I discovered was that biologists work on
cop cooperation sociologists work on
operation economists computer scientists
political scientists but they don't
really talk to each other and so I
thought gee an interdisciplinary study
of cooperation how important that would
be I actually was invited to give a TED
talking in 2005 and that's what I gave
the the talk on calling for a new
science of cooperation I'm happy to say
that that's happening now there's there
are centers of Arizona State University
and an answer damn where they're doing
this interdisciplinary study I was naive
about the role of interdisciplinary work
in in the the university you are
rewarded for your specialization in the
university and every minute you spend in
interdisciplinary cooperation you're
really losing out it's an it's an
opportunity cause so those institutions
are not really designed well for
collaboration although you know they
certainly are are trying so I started
this online course and in which I would
introduce people to the literature and
again this is one of the things that I
learned teaching blended learning at
Berkeley and Stanford but also running
my own courses online was that yes we
had a weekly live session like like the
zoom sessions today I use different
technology in which you I
I gave short lectures but during these
lectures the the people who participated
they searched and put the things that
they found in them and the the chat
other people can can contextualize those
with a couple of sentences describing
them other people created a wiki page
for that session so again the the
pedagogy that I learned was to give up
some of my control as the teacher and to
to ask the students to become more
responsible for their own learning and
in my experience they react really
really well to that they haven't been
trained to do that but that's that's
something that humans naturally want to
do so I've taught a bunch of people a
lot of
them are like Peace Studies or in
studying housing and homelessness and
I'm hoping that having a kind of a
50,000 foot view understanding of what
we know about cooperation which is a
great deal and what we don't know about
cooperation the obstacles to it which is
a great deal that then people would be
able to do a better job again I think
this this ought to be a major in
universes people ought to do
interdisciplinary studies of cooperation
and collective action okay very very
good are you are you still offering the
course I haven't done the course in a
couple of years but I'll guess a year or
so ago I took the curriculum and I
turned it into an eight part annotated
reading list for that so I may give the
course again but if you want to do your
own readings on this I've got this eight
part it's open to the public on patreon
you know Patriot Facebook because I hate
what Facebook is doing to the world and
started sharing on patreon and what's
interesting about patreon is that they
don't have the surveillance capitalism
model they're not serving ads to you
based on your preferences they're
enabling people who believe in what
you're doing to contribute a dollar a
month or two dollars every time you do a
video or a podcast and and I've always
liked the idea of of writing for or
showing my art for or teaching for a
public rather than an audience an
audience is really from the broadcast
age they're people who read your stuff
or view your stuff or listen to your
stuff and maybe they'll send you a fan
letter or my something but a public and
again it's it's only the internet that's
made this possible a public can link to
you a public can disagree with you and
debate with you Republican can join you
for collective action so I like writing
for my patrons so about about half the
material I put up is only for the people
who pay a dollar month or two dollars a
month or whatever but the rest of it
it's free to the public and I
that platform a lot better I don't think
that the people paying each other
business model is going to take over
from the surveillance capitalism model
it's too bad we didn't have micro
payment technology so that we could have
started out with people paying each
other you know I would pay a fraction of
a penny to to read something and I might
read a bunch of things every day and it
wouldn't make a huge difference to me I
might even come out ahead if people read
my stuff of course that was would Ted
Nelson wrote computer lib and 1974 in
which that's what he hoped would happen
and patreon is kind of a step in that
direction yeah that's a good good
thought and again I think it when I
think back this long arc that we both
been on since the early 80s you know to
my mind where things started going in a
direction that I liked less though as we
said there's good and bad is when
advertising became the predominant
paradigm and I think we both know Chris
Anderson I think what are the founders
of Wired and he wrote the very
influential book free that essentially
supercharged the phenomena of all online
business models that could be free
should be free and well if it's free as
they say if you're not paying then I
guess you're the product and that is
indeed where we're at I'm glad to hear
that patreon is working for you as I
mentioned at the beginning of the show
I've been a supporter of you on patreon
for some time and I would encourage
other folks to check out Howard
Rheingold on patreon with that I think
we're at the end of our time I just
would like to thank you again for this
very interesting survey of your work in
the and the history of the online world
it's entirely my pleasure June very
great very good thank you
[Music]
production services and audio editing by
jerod Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space music com