doing great fantastic
could you just sort of the story of
crystal waters when it started and what
your involvement was you know you can't
consult any time yeah okay
we started crystal orders in 1985 when
the then owner pop sample approached me
and I had a trainee at a time
Robert tap we're still living it just
taught us today to with basically
bit-bit tool vicious one to find the way
for a large number of people to live
together legally as we have approval
from Council the second one also to do a
land use plan we had it took quite some
time to convince Council that's a longer
story but it basically took three years
of design observation and design and
submissions to council until we had
approval and people could start the
moving and so since about nineteen
eighty seven eighty eight people been
living at Crystal orders and they've has
steadily grown is still growing to the
point where we today are about close to
about twenty fifty people and there's
always bunch of visitors there as well I
think that the key was to be able to
convince council that in a rural area it
is a rural village as it was the right
way to go I think was such a depressed
in recession area of they were willing
to give it a go nothing the important
points now is be fulfilled all the
requirements by the council and we still
do we pay council rates but we are
self-governing we maintain our on the
road within without on right
we produce some of our own energy as
well is asked today they produce more
food as an eco village than it did as a
farm and we are a catchment so the water
running off crystal waters goes into a
catchment which is used for water for
living populations and is a WoW life
habitat at the same time I think to me
that's the aspects which I'm really
happy right and and you said that
there's a lot of visitors teaching
programs could you say a little bit more
about the courses here on it there's a
number of people offering courses by
Paracelsus ecological solutions the
mainly the programs are doing mainly in
connection with universities from the
United States Japan and Korea the liver
with these universities to provide
programs from about two weeks a little
bit more in two weeks 17 days to about
seven weeks that's the longest one we've
done so far which fit into their
curriculum so each one each of our
courses is actually different each time
we produce a new handbook which is from
a core handbook we put together and it
allows students to get credits and also
it allows the universities therefore
plays which continues in a way with
education which I can't really do at
university and that part is mainly the
hands-on aspects but we do also teach
the theory aspects as well but really we
don't want to duplicate what they
already done at university we want to
continue and see in a write a purpose
for the theory why they need to go and
put their heads in the books and then
see how it's applied out in the field in
nature
and you've been teaching permaculture
since since when and how how do you see
permaculture contributing to a shift
towards a more sustainable society I did
the first permaculture course with Bill
Maher's in 1979 and the second one with
him in 1980 and then I started teaching
1981
so that's 26 years yes and I've been
teaching continuous in that time and
some years I'll be teaching
10 courses and last year I think 20
weeks of teaching but more now through
its eco-village design I've passed on
the purely permaculture teaching two
other people at crystals which have been
able to turn it into an income stream
for themselves as I see permaculture is
a very important way of thinking of
looking at things I think their
observation aspects are really important
people often fail us under the botanist
or another farmer how can I really ever
be good at designing using permaculture
and I think that's missing the point
as people still see as permaculture
being permanent permanent agriculture
but as it has always been much more and
to me it has always been permanence in
culture and by doing that it has the
design element which is really important
the baby put things together and it has
an element of food growing it has an
element of spirituality also people
mostly try to deny that very having a
very strong aspect of spirituality of
social awareness of structures like we
see them around here as well
experimentation but now after all this
time I think we have come to a point
where I see eco villages or their
abilities on education which we are
offering as part of the lease as an
umbrella and permaculture is an
aspect of that but other parts are also
important that like the economy aspect
and is really important to governance is
an important one too I think you have a
pretty holistic approach and
permaculture is part of that holistic
approach I think mainly now with youth
and we do a lot of work with very young
people there haven't got the muscle
memory they haven't really got
grandparents who can tell them what food
really used to taste like and I find
that a critical period of another
generation and the memory will be so
distant that it can't be probably
captured anymore if I was in Japan very
recently and a Japanese person stated
that in another 10 to 20 years 3000
years of Japanese agricultural history
will be gone will be buried with the
last farmers who still carry that muscle
memory and the world should be concerned
about
I know Japan is concerned about it but
it's happening around the world as you
know my generation I grew up learning to
milk the cow was just a fuss growing up
or planting a garden or harvesting all
this aspects of recycling of being
frugal was part of growing up in a post
Second World War generation and I think
that's being lost so I think there's a
lot of things at the moment it's just
happening which we I think are doing by
teaching these bees we may be not even
quite aware the contribution we can
making I think a historical conclusion
where do you see equivalence designer
education go in the future when legacy
if you sort of visioned a perfect future
for and the impulse spreading and how
would you holding I think we'll be
getting better and better at what we are
doing at the moment and I think I could
see this at this meeting with
here as I was involved in three programs
last year and I could see personally the
gaining experience in the growth and
improvement but and I think that will
happen I think that the next generation
of teachers will pick up from where we
have been going and will be more
professional they maybe have sometimes
backgrounds which are more suitable to
what we are doing there maybe are better
in teaching the material personally I
see a great need to strengthen this
program but also to link the program and
what I will be working on for next year
2019 my plan is to offer a four month
program which will be people called an
apprenticeship it's basically a semester
term for many universities where
students and I'm looking only about
eight students mixture of male female
north-south at crystal waters where they
don't have to sort of leave off but it
really gets interesting as we really can
do the hands-on and we also can see and
harvest the fruits of our Labor's that I
speak as we can do designs and
implementation we can plant and harvest
in the gardens we can get into a routine
where we can solve our differences if
they are such as people can get involved
in the day-to-day life of a community
and see the weather the Dark Side of the
Moon I mean it's it's not all love peace
and happiness in a community and I think
people need to be aware of that too our
setting can advise and enter into a life
of being part of an eco village a bit
openness and how would you define design
sort of a few if you speak a bit about
the central role of design in both
permaculture and polish design education
I would say the important point too may
be dishonest as it is a product of
observation so we will never take it on
just on its own us design it is an
outcome of observation and the feedback
loop where we can observe again and
absorb really what we've seen on that
piece of land we want to design but
design itself I would say us place and
time as the typical example our use in
permaculture people say no goats are bad
they sits follow goats
it sort of won't be first in the
permaculture story and then we then look
at it a bit deeper we find goats can be
very very useful I grew up in
Switzerland and goats had that very
important part we play the nullcline
regions but it is the place the right
place for the goat at the right time so
for me it's placement and timing both as
a product of observation the observation
this example would include of the code
is action not a grazing animal it's
surprising anything so what will the go
to do in the place where I put them how
long can they go period and that it's
basically true also in the case of
designing human settlements there we
need to be more aware of what people's
needs are and behavior are and maybe
think you know but really have to
constantly be aware of that and in many
cases in the situation of land use of
human settlements occur images we find
we know more about the carrying capacity
of land for goats or cattle or sheep we
know about the carrying capacity for our
streams has really been a lot of study
there we really know then is the impact
of humans too great when do we need to
put a cap on the population we know that
some cities have a field to me some of
the big cities the fail of internal
decayeth I remember I was in Mumbai and
walking from my place where I stayed
where I was working walking past and all
that all that remain lying on a little
platform very was living in his last
week and I've watched him day after day
dying on there and would leave some food
or some water for him and other people
exactly he was quite aware of that was
the process which was happening but the
system the social structure did not
exist anymore to really truly take care
I think we have to be aware that there's
a size of a city even mighty modern seas
that is likely to happen and nothing
Iike villages are a good counterbalance
to ease the burden on some of the cities
okay and also I think make it maybe more
acceptable and more exciting for young
people to stay in religious like leer in
Thailand when I go out to Thai villages
I find lots of older people my age and
very young people where are the ones
which are 20 30 40 all there in Bangkok
or there in Chiang Mai or Chiang Rai
varying hotels or in businesses where I
can earn a dollar they will not go back
to the farm to live there what's gonna
happen to villages so we need to find
ways where you maybe should go and ask
these people
what would hold you back in the village
what would make it possible for you to
save images sure Lanka that's been dealt
I think much better and while on the one
hand there's the role of holding people
back in in the villages do you also see
that the ecology design education
Killam has has something to take into
the cities to help cities transform or
become more sustainable and also like
where do you see the role of
mainstreaming touch it touching the part
of society that at this point doesn't
want to live in any corner to you but
yeah actually now living in a rural area
village I can tell you us it's not the
easiest place to build technologies my
personal belief is that when we talk
about not 50% now living in urban areas
this is actually not true at all a very
high percentage of people now are living
in suburban environments not believe
that the suburb is in ideal place to
occur village choice whatever we want to
call it because we have the
infrastructure and the water energy is
provided there what we have done is
through often many cases through current
planning we have taken a suburban area a
fringe area of a city and we ripped it
apart and they made it into light
industrial heavy industrial into
commercial educational areas and then
residential areas and so we flipped our
lives into many parts and to be able to
fulfill our needs on a daily basis we
have to bring in the water bringing the
food we have to pump out the device
which we creating there's no cycles
anymore and we have to travel to and
from work this is huge shift every day
and I think we should look at some
European much smarter as we can bring
together our needs a lot more I'm not
planning that we could feed ourselves in
suburbia that we could make a
contribution we've done tastes and other
people have done tests to which show
that in a climate of Melbourne so a
temperate climate or a suburban climate
like Brisbane it is possible to provide
most of the vegetable needs required for
him on four
in square meters that is very intensive
gardening multiple clocking but that is
possible so now we can start looking at
wasted spaces Virender roofs so there is
actually possible this for food
production I wouldn't say we should grow
rice necessarily all that's done in
Japan in suburbia or we should grow
large crops of potatoes or wheat it's
not what I'm saying
but the vegetables our daily vegetable
needs it's definitely possible to do
that with in suburbia and it is possible
with today's available technology to
absorb the human wastes of the people
living there bidding the footprint of
that suburbia in parks and gardens and
urban forests and so on we don't have to
invent anything new to do that wait
today's knowledge today's technology we
could do that
and in the process bring people closer
closer together
they've been surveys done by Bill
Metcalfe and others which show that a
very high popular percentage of the
population would actually lie like to
live close together with a relationship
to neighbors and but not necessarily
Nico village or suicide but I think we
could create suburbia in something which
has all of our village flavor to it and
qualities in a suburban environment and
how do you see the growing problem of
water scarcity be ameliorated by some of
the design approaches within eco village
design are there ways that we can better
preserve our waters and yeah I mean I
don't quite know where people see that
to that problem in my own house I've got
a roof area of about 250 square meters
every time it rains one millimetre
I collect 250 liters of water in my
rainwater tank now but I am in a rural
area I can actually drink that water
it's clean
but if you live in a city and it's
polluted acid rain whatever and you
cannot drink that you can at least use
it for washing or for showering or for
many many of the users other than may be
palatable use they only need about 2 to
5 liters per person per day of potable
water that water could be filtered
through ceramic filters again with
today's technology quite easily once
then it leaves my house it goes through
a biologic system which cleans it to a
standard today to a standard which would
make it possible to use that order to
flush toilets without thinking as well
or to wash your car or very very soon it
will be possible you to wash your
clothes as well or of course it could be
used to water gardens or