welcome to your shell yeah it's good to
be here yeah I would imagine just with
your with the listeners you could just
give it a little bit of context about
what's maybe a little bit different than
the normal than the norm for the other
podcasts that are happening yeah so the
essence of this podcast is sort of
exploring another person's sort of
cognitive space what I like therefore to
is like their map of reality their ideas
of how the world works and how it should
work and I come into the podcast with
sort of what I like to call performative
agnostic I act as if their worldview is
true and I'm just here to understand it
and then kind of explore together and
and you and I had that when you're on
the last podcast and a lot of people
really resonated from both our audiences
in the circling community and
intellectual explores community really
resonated with that episode and so I
just intuitively felt right for us to do
something else
and it kind of like we were chatting
beforehand we're like hey let's just
let's just circle me and and I guess
people in the pre introduction recording
I'll kind of explain again what circling
is and then also reference to the
previous podcast that we had but the
idea now is for you the founder of
circling to circle me mm-hmm
great well what would you say first of
all it's good to see you again it's good
to see as well as such a good like time
disappeared when we when we talked last
time and it was like that because we you
know we chatted for a while before we
leave pressed record there's some thing
is it's too real um I just noticed very
little hesitancy and me know like like
from the moment that we met there's just
kind of a very um there's a very Laguna
I have a very reflective open response
to
and I find myself just not being so self
concerned right it seems like that
that's it seems to me that as a that is
a lot to do with like the way you're you
meet the moment hmm it's interesting
because the the feeling I get with when
I'm relating with you and and we haven't
even met in person we're just kind of
met like twice on zoom' but it has a
similar felt sense of someone I've known
for years and it's that kind of a weird
feeling because I have that feeling but
then like I'm just like I don't know
much about you in your personal life and
know that the facts of your life yeah I
mean it's just interesting to think
about what is that like what is that
sense of familiarity what are what are
we familiar with hmm what knows to feel
that way like it's like I think that
that's just kind of interesting like I
noticed I noticed with myself a lot of
the things where I feel like a sense of
a flow state that happens are usually
things that I find myself I find my
interest gripped and then it could be
years before I even comprehend exactly
what I'm interested in about that like
or why I was interested about that and
there's a that's a stuff that's always
been interesting to me of of like how
does my interest know to get to be
grabbed by something and before I even
understand what there is to be grabbed
about there's some kind of there's
there's some kind of nonverbal kind of
non-cognitive thing that kind of gets
gripped by the world and I think it's
something similar with you it's like
there's something my interest just goes
there and it doesn't stop there itself
and get self-conscious and that's
awesome oh say what it's a question I
have is all of our when we had the first
interview like what were parts was was
any of it like what you would call
circling did have any elements of
circling
yeah in the
since that okay so the I'll save the
note part the note part was that I
wasn't trying to sort of police myself
in a certain way when I do encircling I
write kind of really loyal to the rules
when I when I circle so to speak and but
the this process that was similar was
that mapping over my words to sort of
what was happening in my reality yeah
and then just sort of this like without
kind of engineering like especially when
I shook off the whole kind of podcast
host mode I wasn't trying to engineer an
outcome like okay we have to talk about
this we have to have this sort of
experience we have to have produced this
artifact for the listeners it was sort
of just kind of just seeing each step
you know taking it one step at a time
right and it sounds like it sounds like
that what you were letting go of was a
kind of a transactional nature but we're
doing this in order to achieve something
else that there was something about and
that's what I really felt I noticed that
you did a lot and I really appreciated
it
like we're just like oh god I want to
get the and you're like okay I'm just
gonna shake off you shake off the eye
yet right right right
and it would go into I thou and what was
interesting to me and this is one of the
things I I think it's a it's important
about circling is so there's a very
there to me there's there is there is a
forum to circling right and it's really
important and especially when you're
first learning how to circle because for
the forum like any kind of practice puts
a constraint around you like you know if
you're practicing tennis you know or if
like you know I remember I think it was
in rocky rocky belt like Rocky Balboa in
the first rocky he was he wasn't a
southpaw and he was trained to be a
southpaw and they had they show scenes
where he's like his is his hands are
tied up he's right so he couldn't use
his right hand any in he had to he had
to work within those restraints and so
he became a southpaw and surprised you
know the surprised everybody so I was
like any kind of practice or skills
based practice will always
of all usually constraining constraining
yourself so that you don't do what
you're naturally good at you can confirm
you're not that good at you struggle
with it and that's drum important but
the but also what that starts to reveal
is that circling isn't necessarily at
least to me is it necessarily about just
talking about what you're feeling or
talking about like you know or staying
within a certain language but there's a
kind of point where you can kind of like
circle with the person that you're
sitting next to in the bus stop right
without even using any of that language
but just the way that you enter into the
dialogue the way that you are and your
sense of spontaneity and like being
aware of like implicitly where your body
starts to get oriented to being with
another right in all of its complexity
and being present so that that person is
and you are and that there's something
happening and that you can even stay
within all the social norms but circling
is really that thing that you enter into
it in such a way that you invite that
which is most real right to shine for
and I thought that really happened with
us right um in that in the podcast even
when we were we were talking you know
even we were talking about like art or
maps of reality you know we were going
really really meta like we did go really
really meta but there's something about
that that it didn't occur heady to me
there's something alive to it right and
I would say that aliveness or that kind
of spontaneity where I was you know when
you're listening I was saying things I'd
said before but like in a totally new
angle and it was kind of aware of that
but then I became aware of the quality
of your listening and how that was like
a horizon that brought that in front of
me we kind of appreciated that together
hmm right so so there's a way in which I
want to kind of just really communicate
that because I think some
my some of my um my my beefs about like
the circling community you were talking
about this earlier is is I think
sometimes they think that it's kind of
like this it's like if you went to yoga
class right you go to yoga class right
you do these extreme postures you don't
walk out right and then just start doing
downward dogs on your desk at work right
in your spandex right really weird or
rather right doing though going to yoga
class has you and habit right like the
gravity that you deal with throughout
the day in a more open conscious way
right so you can do all the things that
you do just more elegantly more openly
and so there's a way where I think
sometimes like them because it's become
kind of a thing and you know things are
things and they have like an air to them
and instead of like a like a you know
like you know you're in something you
can become identified with it that that
there's a tendency to think that like
circling in the rules of circling or the
agreements are are instructions to be in
the world right I don't see it as that
is that at all I see it is like no the
restrictions in the sentence stems and
the attention to language and how we
talk about ourselves and reveal
ourselves are like yoga they're like
asanas that we do so that you can go in
not so they can go and like circle your
mother that's crazy so that you can
actually inhabit the conversations that
you always have with your mother right
in a way that's like a lot more open
more intimate draws out more spontaneity
and you don't even ever have to really
necessarily explicitly talk about your
feelings but you can bring that
awareness of our feelings happening and
have a relationship to them in your
bodies and all the micro movements and
the curiosity that you have with them
without having to
and weird all right and I know exactly
what you mean because there's a few
people that I've experienced and I guess
the broader circling north on tech
related community who do that where they
take those
those rules that exist in that container
of circling and they apply it to kind of
everyday life and it just comes across
in my opinion as awkward when that
happens and I was mentioning you before
we started recording about my as a
similar metaphor my experience with
acting when I was younger and it's like
you know in acting you could get to go
to all these crazy emotions and you just
go loud you go quiet and and I've taken
acting classes that actually use acting
techniques for social skills and when
you do that it's like a light dimmer
right your ability to go at a really
high emotional level a really low
motional level it allows you now to do
that kind of or it gives you the option
to do that in the wild in a kind of a
normal social environment but you just
don't do it you don't kind of take that
acting technique and put it in like
every day sending but you have the
capacity to so allows you to calibrate
yeah and I guess the way to do is like
if you can be successful in that
container that circling container or the
acting arena it is like it's
transferable skill set to have in a
different arena but it's not like you
you kind of are sensitive to the rules
that arena though you don't just kind of
disregard them and implant a different
set of rules yes and in the skills that
you practice right as you're practicing
them the real thing that's happening on
one level you're you're becoming a
better communicator and you know what
words to say and when to say them and
but but what's actually happening there
is what it takes to be good at that is
really developmental right because I've
noticed this that like you know in in me
when we when we teach the artists
circling which is our our facilitators
training program you know we we talked
we talked a little bit about this at our
last podcast where there's like seven
stages distinguished in circling and so
each weekend is on a particular stage
and the first one is sovereignty the
second one is
Laure the third one is warrior deep-sea
diver on the Midwife and then an
integration and it's interesting to
sovereign right is all about just
becoming being aware of self basically
like kind of knowing where your Center
is knowing where you end and someone
else begins and learning sovereign is
all about the language of owning your
own experience becoming knowing where to
put your attention
so like find yourself and then start to
articulate yourself right and that's
like that can be really difficult for
some people but it's kind of it's doable
like you're like okay what are you
feeling in your in your stomach like all
I've ever feel miss oh actually okay
oh I'm tight there oh I have to tighten
this thing right so like you can kind of
bring your attention to it and it's it
can be difficult but it you can do it
and then there's the Explorer stage and
people can pretty much get a get a grip
on that and there's the Explorer stage
which is all about like who are you it's
about asking questions it's about like
getting your world it's about like kind
of playing it back in such a way that it
makes sense and that you get that I'm
listening to you and deep listening and
there's deeper levels like that like I
think circling is really a deep dive in
explore ultimately all the stages are
about that but people can pretty much
practice that and get really good at
that but then when you get to warrior
right warrior is all about like naming
dissidents or being with dissidents and
welcoming it and looking at it and
sealing exits around what's most alive
right and uncomfortable right now that
when we start to get there that seems to
take a developmental level like that's
not like you it's not like you can kind
of know what to do with your hands there
are things that you can give it but
leaning into discomfort with somebody
and like especially for example if
somebody is let's say really I'm scared
of someone else's pain right if base
see it right they have to kind of like
they have to work through their issues
around like oh what's it like to are you
afraid that you're gonna get lost in
their pain and you'll never go like come
back I mean some people have experiences
like where they have tragedies and
trauma around that stuff so like that's
so there that's where it becomes really
developmental right and then it's like
then being with with your somebody
else's emotions you can only like be
with your emotions to the extent that
somebody else's emotions to the extent
that you can be with your own right and
so that's where it gets really deep
right or the process of learning
circling is actually kind of AIT's like
a psychological developmental I would
say even a spiritual kind of development
that when you practice these things
you're on one level learning the skill
but what it takes to become good at that
skill is actually developing the
capacity to relate and that capacity
right is something that's much deeper
and it makes so much so much more
possible yeah I like that
and I'm curious how and it's going to
kind of intellectual exploration mode so
you can kind of swipe this question away
but just this is the road out there I'm
curious how you develop this like I
imagine it organically kind of formed
after years of practice yeah that's the
trick I mean that's one of the tricky
parts of it would be is like when I
circle I never I never think about rules
I never think about really what I'm
doing because I didn't learn it that way
I learned it through just like it seemed
like that thing you're talking about
we're being hides itself and conceals
itself and something's revealed in the
interaction and like Jerry and I noticed
that thing caught us and we kept looking
at it and as we kept looking at it the
process of looking at it was the process
of this thing called circling which is a
being with what is in relationship
specifically
and it wasn't therapy and it was
different than anything else that we
were around or Jerry had done a bunch of
stuff I was pretty new to it he had done
a bunch of courses and like so he was
really like well this is this is
different and then it kind of like a few
months later they got a name called
circling and then like more people got
into it and like there was a whole
community that formed around it and
other people started doing circling and
and now it's all over the world but it's
really a kind of a bottom-up experience
and that way you know circling is really
fractal and then when when it was it was
when I started to grok that certain I
started to see patterns after doing
circle after circle after circle you
know I would notice where things would
kind of up
right where like it was like a scratch
record or something like that and it's
interesting I started noticing a witch
which is where like one of the leaders
would say something it was it's a
scratch record hmm but I'd also notice
that she would have said that like they
would have said that in the beginning of
the circle that would have been really
congruent I'm like oh wait a minute
there's a difference we're at a
different place now I was like that's
when the stages started to like become
distinct for me and then it like becomes
you know because that's what happens
when you pay attention to something is
attention um when you pay attention to
something you sustain it attention makes
distinctions and then you can only
relate to that which you have
distinctions for so though as those
distinctions started to show themselves
just through like gaining a sensibility
over and over and over again and I was
like I think we can we can genuinely
teach this now as we bought it but we
didn't know how we were doing it so it
was really difficult to teach others so
we were just circle people until they
bled right you know um but then that's
when I partnered with Alexis Shepherd
who she her and I taught together for
years and we got together and she's got
kind of a psychology background she was
she was getting her PhD at I forget what
it's like
that the kind of transpersonal Institute
or something like that okay she was
writing her thesis on the phenomena aw
she's awesome like she's just so smart
and brilliant and beautiful and you know
luminous and so we would get together
and grapple with it and like write terms
out and go like trying to distinguish
the things you know and we do this in
preparation for the year-long course
which was the first circling course that
was explicitly about training to circle
hmm and so we would like have the first
weekend and we would kind of come up and
bring terms to me getting arguments and
fights and like but out of this out of
this really committed conversation with
each other then those distinctions
started to form language right and you
know the the stages like I think we
started with there were five stages
right now there's seven stages and and
we've changed the terms at different
points
because what's and I'm sure it's gonna
keep probably happening right because
what when you get distinctions for
things right in some domain your ability
to make distinctions becomes greater
right like the more distinctions that
you have the more ability you have the
make distinctions and that feedback loop
right at least for me looking at circle
has the keeps yielding more and more and
more and more and as we were talking
about before there's this kind of point
where I'm like god I don't feel like I'm
I'm this is really not just about being
close to people this is about being
close to the universe hmm this is about
like oh there's a kind of a mystical
element in the sense of mystery that
this starts to I this starts to access
like the Wonder that's coming through
your eyes that is on one level it's new
and it's beyond you and it can be
concealed to you there's ways that we
can let it be revealed and in that
revelation that we share together in
order to conceive of that and grok that
I I have to become somebody who could
and I think for me this is
come although circling isn't explicitly
a spiritual practice for me it's become
my spiritual practice and because being
with what is everything is everything in
your life is so everything is a
relationship with what is and so
authenticity in kind of the high
daguerreian sense right is this kind of
way of of like like inhabiting
temporalities happening a moment right
and taking on the world that you find
yourself in with with such authorship
that one becomes as moments of
authenticity
and that happens everywhere that it can
happen work wherever there's anything
yeah wherever there's a you there's a
world and that world can be infinitely
complex and this is so so as I'm doing
this I'm also kind of setting up context
for us like circling but there's a I've
thought about this right about well why
is it called circling like it's so funny
because we were trying to figure out
names for it like really gonna greet
firms and it just actually how how it
was called circling was so random
like Jerry who is you know we're both we
were both like you know dorks you know
we're always with you we were
always with each other and like
 with everyone else and like we
were you know poking around and he
particularly was really pokey you know
and this guy um a friend who was kind of
the outskirts of everything he never
actually you know ended up being
encircling he was just kind of in the
general vicinity you know Jerry for a
long time and Jerry started to like kind
of like do you know with them and
kind of do the circling clearing and and
he was like hey hey you totally ratted
me so hey you're doing that that
circling thing on me
and it stuck hmm I always thought like
you know for the longest time I just
thought that was just kind of random but
I'm like well what hang on a second so
think that because it was so random and
it stuck reveals the sensibility about
it right cuz he he could have said oh
you're doing that like you know that
Darth Vader thing on me right or that
peanut butter thing on me and I I don't
think it would stick it's you know I've
been thinking lately about why is it
that circling stuck what's the
sensibility that it makes sense to have
it be called Circle it and then everyone
started calling it circling and then
before we know it there was this thing
that we're doing called circling is
almost kind of like we found out after
the fact and the thing I the thing I
think the thing to think how that makes
sense to me is in something that young
talks about right and you writes about
this but he also writes in this way and
this is why it's really something to
read young cuz do you read young get
ready because you will be you'll have to
become someone who could read radio
which means being horrified and
completely changed in the process of
reading a nice does this thing called
circle it's a way of being with
something or a way of understanding that
he calls circumambulation right and
circumambulation is kind of like this
it's like there there's it's a way of
knowing or a way of being with something
and oftentimes when we think about
knowing something there is a quality of
like I apply my brain or my attention to
an object and then I the way I direct
that my attention that objects that I
know that object but there are some
things that have that are have
intelligence at so many multiple levels
or dimensions that there's no way it'll
reveal yourself if you kind of come at
it straight on so rather than like
really deep things like people like
someone's life right like a like a like
a like a a piece of the Bible right like
has so many levels of intelligence
that to know it is to circle around it
right to circle around it and as you
circle around it right it starts to
reveal all of its complexity right cut
starts to shine forth that can't be
rocked like subject-object it's
literally almost like a non Cartesian
way of knowing and here's the thing
about that is that is that that
circumambulation that the one who's
circled circling becomes part of the
thing that's revealed right it's full
involvement where you're perfect like
your participation in it becomes part of
the way that it unfolds itself and I'm
like that when I thought about that I
was like yeah there is that sensibility
about circling around something right is
like on one level you're just the fact
that you're doing that you're you're
already revealing it and that the sense
of like oh it's something worthy of
circling around right and there's a
humbleness about it and there's like a
an involvement in it there's a like
being changed by it being mutually
articulated by it hmm and that very much
feels like as as I've gotten better at
circling with people it feels to me that
that's the thing I've got better at
right
of like circling around something and
being open to be changed by it this is
helping me kind of grok circling because
as I was mentioning to you I was using
this may be a it will advice metaphor of
my experience of circling sometimes were
it's like almost like I get blue balls
you know like this it's like I just want
to like get the answer I get the orgasm
you know I just want to go for it but
it's like you know that that patient
process that you're doing that's
deductive dance of circling but if you
just go straight forward you know it's
it's a bad move you're gonna lose it
totally that was very difficult for me
to get to to get the sensibility because
they you know it's first it's like you
know you're to get something you're we
go back and forth back and forth and you
just kind of zero in I mean I think I
think who is it
Jordan Peterson talks about that a lot
like you know we're always if you're a
human you have a name and that you're
orienting to it and everything that
you're doing is an orientation to
something transcendent right you know I
was in my early 20s right now it was you
know power lifter and bodybuilder and
like you know like low testosterone and
like and had the cosmic question deep
inside of me it wasn't my it wasn't my
tendency to circle around something my
tendency was to go and like hunt roughly
and like grab but but then I'd notice
I'd noticed like actually there's
another way of being with something and
that then that's when something shines
forth that I that I could've known was
even there
and so it's noticing that and us
everybody doing and getting a tune to
that quality of beingness is really I
think the thing that kind of drew people
to circling and and what still does draw
people to circling and and it's what
it's like when it when it becomes
something else you can kind of feel it
and that's like it's also kind of cool
because you can feel going to stray from
that from the spirit right
it gets to like therapeutic or people
trying to care take stuff like that yeah
that's so how's all this hit Nia this is
like uh we're really starting to go into
context with it I think part of it is
I'm aware of is just your stillness and
like your stillness and your listening
and I get the sense of like there's like
an open like there's an openness in your
eyes and like a like you're saying it's
having me part it's uh for me it seems
like the flow of my language feels in
relationship to that hmm
what's that what's like over there I'm
usually I get in this sort of state when
I'm podcasting just like a
hyper-awareness focus State and yeah I'm
realizing just kind of like now that
cameras on me usually the camera's not
on me I realized I'm not I'm usually
still in these moments so maybe this is
sort of how I get to the state I am a
little bit cold too the air conditioning
was on this is really hot here in
Toronto so it's uh maybe that has
something to do with it
into the stillness is it to stillness I
am experiencing right now yeah that you
notice that you have often like as I
brought a word to it you're like it
wasn't like you're thinking yourself I'm
I don't think you're thinking kept the
stay really still right now you just
read on on being still right
it's sort of like um readiness is the
word that comes to mind you know I am
ready to take in your words be
transformed by them and participate in
you know possibly transforming you so
[Music]
[Laughter]
see the I get the sense of that it is
that like the saying of because there
are moments where you know you'd move or
I just see like little glimmers on your
in your
and you're really still but there was an
animation there and I am imagining that
there's a way that your understanding or
is a way that you're listening it's
actually kind of having you see things
like you're not you're not just like
hearing my words and understanding them
you're seeing what I'm singing I get
this sense like we go oh and then
sometimes like there's so many trends
like which one to choose very tight
meant that kinda or like a bursting
forth yeah I think it's like you know
just to go back so go back to the
stillness it's like I'm really trying to
listen what you're saying because I
don't want to miss a beat of it and so
because I want to pass the you know the
like the ideological Turing test I want
to be able to articulate what you just
said in my own words so just feels like
so resonant what you previously said so
that's maybe sort of like the the
readiness portion of it and then those
glimmer of moments is that when like you
know a Damon inspired threat emerges
like oh yeah I think I could go
somewhere with that you know maybe is
this like I don't I tend not to like to
interrupt people in general right so I
usually come just bookmark it in my head
okay here's a potential threat to go
down a potential threat and then kind of
that listening still to what you're
saying and then holding those potential
topics so the thing I'm interested in
like right now with what you just said
you're like oh yeah
somebody's saying something and then
something kind of you said burst forward
and like and and then you have you know
you can you're managing yourself right
of like so you don't interrupt but
there's a spirit in you that goes home
right I'm curious about what's the bat
and what's the one that's like that goes
oh because not everybody in my
experience like listens for those things
to go home about but there's almost
there's something that just seems
president I would imagine what I'm
imagining is a particular disposition or
orientation to
life or the way that you sit in life
that makes what somebody says burst
forth right like like it's almost like
it's not in other words it doesn't look
like you're trying to do anything it
just looks like a state of being that
you're in that you're excited about
something right right you know what I'm
talking about am I am i well I'll see
what I come to mind when you say that is
that I am in an environment right now
with you and then when I have my
in-person kind of intellectual explores
clubs is that I allow myself to
experience that excitement and I'm an
environment that is receptive to
receiving it yeah but there's some
environments that I kind of shut that
down I don't even like allow myself to
go in that space and then because
there's a kind of an understanding that
it's not gonna be well-received there
yeah totally so there's an attunement
right where you can attune and so in
this space here because there's a as a
context right in which we're explicitly
doing that you're really free to
probably do what you probably want to do
most the time anyways and that's might
that's my hunch yeah I feel I guess if
there's a spectrum of freedom this is
high higher on that spectrum yeah
totally so the freedom portion so what's
it like so so we'll just be fluid about
decide I like I think what we like we
can we can loose loosely say that we're
certainly great we're circling around
circling and I just got I just got
genuinely interested in and you and what
what it's like for you and I'm so now
that we've now actually kind of put some
a little bit of context around us right
and a fee I felt like this shift right
some kind of shift and just kind of
happened for me there was just a sense
of like oh I noticed I was hesitant to
make it too formal
I don't know exactly why but I just
that's my what they just noticed I was
hesitant to make it too formal
[Music]
I think because I I'm like I just value
a kind of organic Ness the things right
but also there's a sense in which I feel
like we're already circling in some way
in some regard right right like and so
so specifically bringing attention to
the present moment with you right what's
just just what are you aware of just
right now in this moment now that we're
officially circling or the record
coldness I feel in my arms so a desire
to kind of gain clarification I'm okay I
we formally circling right now or are we
gonna do it in a minute are we like
sounds internal few times you've
mentioned I think three or four times
context right and an awareness of their
certain and I've stood out to be right
like an awareness of the room right
right right
you emphasize kind of like the rules in
the form circling right and what that's
like to you that that shows up for you
you also mention like oh I can't do that
all the time there are certain places
where I can't just get excited that
won't work right right and I don't think
I'm speaking necessarily to I think what
I'm speaking to is it seems to me that
there's a particular awareness that you
have of context and different kinds of
spaces yeah whether or not you're in one
space or not enough or not another space
and it seems it seems unique to me about
you or um clippety I get I get this
feedback from people who who seem a
sensitive about you know there's these
sorts of things and it's sort of like
even though you know I kind of have this
brand of being intellectual Explorer I'm
a pretty an intuitive person I say the
bulk of
my life and and so there's a great
intuition about the context and sort of
the rules of that context and sort of
the intuition of people and sort of
their intentions and maybe it's sort of
the implicit rules that they're playing
by huh steps so that kind of speaks to
doesn't that speak to a lot of what
you've kind of become known for isn't it
like with the youth that because you
have the whole thing about the memes and
the culture right pretty good all right
yeah yeah so there's kind of actually I
didn't even dawn on me until now like I
was like oh yeah yeah it's a good
connection I didn't really put much
thought into connecting the two but yeah
I just noticed I kind of like making
that connection with you and like
getting shared reality on that I just
felt kind of a little bit of a euphoria
that came up mm-hmm like some kind of
like oh like something like a background
became foreground nice and I'm like now
I'm just noticing I'm just wanting to
that close whatever that is that is
aware of context and respects it yet
sees it and also challenges it sounds
like you I feel like somehow closer to
you or like I'm closer to what's central
to you hmm because I don't know I don't
know what words I can put on what I'm
feeling right now but I didn't really
make that even though I was aware of
that connection it just makes more sense
now that you stated it I probably
wouldn't have been able to sort of map
the culture war as I did it without
having this sort of intuition about me
yeah that intuition about you he said
intuition about five times
how do you know you have like if I was
in your nervous system right if like he
took my awareness he put it in your
nervous system me I just inhabited your
nervous system like oh and I walked with
you through your life but I couldn't
understand the context I didn't know
what was going on I could just Phoebe in
your body feeling your sensations and
your emotions but I didn't have any
awareness of it what part of that
wouldn't be backed intuition as you put
it experience it if it if you experience
it so this is term that resonates with
me is the diamond the diamond no
Socrates talks about his guiding spirit
and I lean heavily on that I view it as
sort of a certain color of intuition a
certain quality of intuition that's that
that come just has an assertiveness
about it and maybe just kind of stems
from here and just rises up and then it
points to the direction where you should
go right and I almost have a like
radical faith in that intuition so just
I feel stillness there I just want to
sit I just want to sit with by what you
just say like having the experience of
like how poignant it what you said but
also the way that you said it and what
just came through it felt like the very
thing that you're talking about just
came through and just like they get
showered with it mm-hmm and there's a
cut quality of knowing you more of
liking you more and of you I'm almost
feeling I'm almost it almost seems like
that there's a what is it a what I how I
know to be interested or feel and flow
with you seems to have something to do
with these tensions going on inside of
you right like some of your complexity
is starting to kind of show itself to be
mmm is what I'm hearing is it's in one
level there's eight there's there's
something you've got your eye on and you
tending to any respect and you're aware
of what the rules are and and in the
context of it and there's even add when
I'm hearing is that there's a discipline
so listen to your de Mon right that
there's a there's something and it's in
take something to do that but it feels
like a very disciplined sense to it so
on one level I hear this tending to
structure in the forms of the logos if
you will mmm but then in another level I
feel like I feel like a a but almost
like a fanatical discipline about that
which is beyond the discipline right the
thing that rushes forward great willing
to like poke at things at those
structures in I sense a kind of that's a
big part of you to is that thing that
kind of pokes at some Wiggles at points
to and and it's the English the
things it's just it's all those are
going on right in one person hmm it's
very interesting that resonated multiple
levels it's like the this kind of this
feeling of the the Damon if I just
allowed it to operate unchecked it would
have been this is like just massive
ridiculous orgasm yeah but I'm
understanding the containers the logos
you know the the different context is
that I operate in and then sometimes the
Damon gets to play more and sometimes it
has to be policed more and I'm trying to
cultivate my life I guess or the Damon's
trying to nudge me to cultivate a life
where it's allowed to play more and then
that that pointing I didn't know how you
connected the the pointing out to
 or the poking the but
that's resonates as well yeah yeah
totally there's a there's a quote there
is really an interesting quality I'm
experiencing with you of like and I how
like personally how it's it's like how
its warming in me right is is is there's
part
as complexities that shine forth and I'm
like I'm like I wonder if we're like if
our hard our Damon's are feeling each
other or something famous sex but
there's a that Damon that disruptive
quality is what I'm hearing and the you
use an interesting word there's times to
police it right and let it flow and
there's like a policing element to it
and that you want to construct your life
such that it Damon is telling you make
the construction have more of me in it
yes in a way that the the Damon is
helping me construct a life where it
could flow freely authentically and like
tell me a little bit like tuck tell me a
little bit about the life that you're
looking at right now I mean he talked it
like you're you you it's like I know I
know you're married right you mentioned
something about like yeah okay tell me a
little bit about just the structure of
your life like what is your life like
right now and how is that part going is
how is the Damon flowing where is it
really really where is it going yeah
this is it and where is it going they're
not quite yet right so I'm married we're
looking to start a family we live in the
kind of the Greater Toronto Area I work
a nine-to-five job as a corporate
trainer and aside like adjacent to that
I have all these what I would bucket
under Damon inspired projects whether
it's the in-person meetup groups whether
it's a podcast whether it's the various
sort of articles mimetic art artifacts
I'm producing and then I have sort of
entrepreneurial ideas that I'm quietly
working on that you know could make that
livelihood bridge from what I'm doing
now to something that might speak to me
more yeah what is that
you talking about like the bridge one of
those things maybe actually you'd like
it didn't like actually make your
livelihood so the three things that I
mentioned like the writing
I'm not really thinking of monetizing
those but I have entrepreneurial
projects that could sustain a livelihood
for myself and my family but they think
you know it's like a long game
and so I'm quietly working on those not
publicly to build that livelihood bridge
from was securing me right now to that
and then that that is really Damon
inspired right it's just I just want to
take a moment and just like kind of sit
with you for a second so now that we
brought in your life into articulation
just a little bit of it what's it like
being yeah well there's a calmness to me
right now
and there's said a mild nervousness or
worry in the sense that I'm cognizant
that this might become an artifact that
we post some water and I never revealed
this much about myself in a public
setting pause one sec I just want to
like kind of be with that experience for
a second right so there's a calmness and
there's a nervousness that you're like
when with the nervousness she became
more aware of like Oh what I'm nervous
about and I've never revealed this much
of myself on a personal level since I
just want to take a moment and just kind
of be with what's that what that's like
for you I noticed I'm smiling Tiffani
happy yeah did I'm also oh like a
Cossack you'll respect your privacy or
whatever your nervousness is the wrong
word I think it's um maybe concerned
about losing control of the impression
and then adjacent to that almost
unrelated to it there's just like zero
 given
like who cares so there's that this like
the duck rabbit thing if they go in and
out right so that's cool so what was
started off is like he first looked was
nervousness now it's actually an
awareness right of what I'm hearing is
like the policing part and the demons
like like just let's take
[Laughter]
those are here those be here for a
moment
mm-hmm yeah there's a I feel attention
definitely in this like can almost like
this is a big tension is you know I just
hit it just really kind of hit me I felt
like my I felt like a sense of
compassion when I just became aware of
when he said tension you your hands went
like this I just got aware of what came
back to me is what he told me about your
life and I what you described is like
basically you're it's not really
grounded when you talked about your life
9 to 5 job right you have your you have
these objects right and you have
long-term investments like so you have
your I instability and your very
intentional about Damon coming out and
it seems really responsible to me
mmm-hmm in that moment when you're like
oh I'm holding those tension I was like
else all of a sudden it look like it's
also this kind of quality the heart part
of it felt like felt for how much you're
holding just I just got the sense of
like I feel impressed with yeah you're
just holding a lot your eye on right and
you're it seems really clear that you're
responsible about it you're also
responsible about your spirit and
there's this equality of just like oh I
just wonder what that's like just
holding all that
if you tell them that's not that's how I
would yeah the term that it's coming up
a lot in our conversation today is blue
balls it's a fish that there's that one
hand it may feel like a blue ball state
where it's sort of like there's a there
is a like you know maybe to disabuse
people or yourself is that you know
there's a kind of a wild man to me and I
kind of contain myself a lot in these
type of environments yeah it's like if
you and I got got drinks together like
it's like watch out type of thing we
don't know where we'll end up or in
Mexico or something like that and and
then that's sort of like that the
daymond getting unleashed and so there's
a guy I guess a blue ball element to it
but then I like that that responsibility
thing it feels very just I guess
masculine mature
it's a maturity
you
maturity the the awareness on
containment right but just that the the
way that you language it tells me it
kind of gay I think it revealed a
quality of attentiveness to it holding
attention where it's like you take a
couple drinks in the boom like we get a
lot of trouble together I can tell that
means so there's a no wet so there is an
awareness about structure ever just
cares about what I get this sense of
that has a history city to it like how
does it make sense that that you're so
responsible in one respect when you have
a spirit that would actually just like
to like to explode all structures and
like make the make the the real is kind
of wiggle out into everything right like
where does the respect for that come
from or the kinds of restraints that you
move into and being relationship with
somebody like that growing up like I
just sense that there's like a that's
the history I'm into it
well the story that's just coming up is
sort of just like a little kiss hand on
the stove type thing you know you
touched something I hurt you you know
usually take it away and so it could be
in a history of doing that and I can
kind of map over specific incidence of
that and then there's something else
that came to mind just
be a respect for truth they just sort of
like actually knowing what's real and
what's reality and the parameters that
you have to operate in I know a lot of
people right that have touched hot
stoves to have a very different response
rate the thing that hat like I think the
thing I'm pleased about is what knows to
want to still be around the stove even
though it burn to you right like there's
a sense of like I know I'm noticing I'm
like I'm wondering what like what your
wife is like I'm wondering like my
interests of going like what's your
history like what's your dad like mm-hmm
like what's your mom like you know
what's the because on some level like
and just another thing I just wanted
presents just for context around around
circling is so at the moment we usually
think about the moment as like like an
instant of time right there's this
moment right now this moment right now
that's not the experience at the moment
the experience the moment is more like
the way that we understand music like
there's a temporality and it's really
like as tight as Heidegger would say it
is like human beings especially it's
like you're listening it's more like
there's the anticipation of the next
beat as the past be lingers and along
gates and then in there were past and
future come together and the history
brings a gravity to the to the future
and then that becomes the moment as like
a song so there's part of why I'm little
like I'm listening I think why I feel
like an interest is like there's a I
feel like an elongation of some history
that has you be this really interesting
tension between really responsible and
tentative and retentive and respectful
yet having a Wow having like a wild
spirit running through you and that what
I'm hearing is that your entire life on
some on some level is structured or
distinct
or occurs to you in having both those
things like flourish mm-hmm and so I'm
just feeling I'm just that's like I'm
feeling like the beat that just passed
or the elongation of like a history of
like mmm it was your dad like I'm
wondering what your mom was like and
[Music]
it's interesting because I you know I
put a lot of I guess inter subjective
thought into my past and you know I did
a lot of work in that area but I haven't
really looked at it in these two sort of
beings all right if you want to put it
that way and then it just kind of feels
like in the past maybe they were
polarized in a way but now they're sort
of just like Co hearing together right
yeah an idea I want them to like kind of
just mesh at one point in my life that
that that like that thing is you so what
I'm hearing is it's first of all that's
kind of cool so we're looking at your
life in new terms right right right
on some level so like now you have a new
past there's a pass where it's like oh
there's these two things and if I go
back when it was kind of cool you said
is they get further apart and that that
now that we've named that a little bit
you look back and you now see oh there's
been these two things and they're coming
together and my life on some level has
been that sensibility of weaving them
closer and closer and closer together
what's that like I mean it's revelatory
to me an excited life so I will call out
there's one thing that I want to have
somewhat of a distance to this narrative
yeah I don't want to drink the kool-aid
of my excitement towards this narrative
right so that that's going on that's
maybe that's probably part of the
structure thing if you wanted like hide
it there yeah
and well there's an openness to it right
now really just want to kind of I'll
allow my body to sit with it and see
where it takes me
totally what kind what kind of openness
isn't me sit with it is it sort of it's
like method acting or trying on the
Wardrobe of each of those states and
seeing how it feels like so what does it
feel like when I am sort of at that
architecture in place and I'm working on
and I'm constructing it and then how
does it feel like when I'm just kind of
like you know
jaymund inspired in the world and then
how do those two kind of states play
with each other yeah or relate with each
other only only we set back there's an
openness to it right and if that that is
a really different it felt I had a
different tempo in that moment when you
said that mmm
almost like I'm wondering if we like a
little bit in the center of attention
right take the center of either
hurricane a little bit it's like you
know those are the duck rabbit and then
if you keep looking at it and then if
they shift back and forth and it gets a
little blurry right and you almost see
both at the same time that's what I'm
begging I'm experiencing and that thing
that's tending to that like what I'm
wondering about your heart like there's
a passion yeah that is just delicious
for me and one where I really I can
appreciate because I have to do the same
thing it's like I have to corral the
horses right and I just get this sense
that there's probably I just imagine
there's a history of letting the horses
out too far like burnt you burned
yourself but just the excitement and the
passion seems like more like love to me
like it's almost like you're loving
something mmm you're caring about
something like that I think that's what
it is there's a sense of care and I also
I want to I want to almost like another
thing I want to like dive through your
eyes and just go right down into your
heart hmm it's like um the heart stuff
when you mention the word heart I just
felt like a barrier towards it right
it's like it's like I wanted to report
on what the heart felt but I don't have
access to it and and it's like you
mentioned that care is maybe almost like
a UH this tensions like a longing to
love yeah so there's a longing let's
just say that let's just try on that for
a second like the tension is there's a
longing to love if this is the source if
we follow that longing back where do we
go we just like like relax back into the
long a just to me
you kind of paint the longing a little
bit more so I can sense it if that
longing is sort of like it there's a
feeling of a adventurousness to it right
it was just like you're you're trying to
taste something you're trying to you
know pursue the horizon and get lost in
his beauty but there's sort of like this
I like the word adventure for whatever
reason but then to focus on your
question to kind of trace it back when
you relax into when you trace it back
what is that it's the quality feeling
noticing my voice is softer right just
there's a sensitivity there's a softness
it's something I don't
Express too often are you expressing it
now is this a moment where you're
starting to you are or have expressed it
I feel the presence of the softest when
you say it hmm like there's a slower
tempo I'm noticing I'm like more in my
body
talking slower I'm like yeah it's give
myself a tuning to something more closer
in it seems I'm at the door of it it
feels like so let's just let the door be
there mentioned I don't express this
often I've thought a rose about exposure
therapy about how you want to get
someone closer to the snake not touching
it hito and and that kind of brought a
smile to my face because that feels like
what we're doing right now it's like I
think I would how I would how I would
phrase it it's like so we're just being
with what is and what I'm hearing like
is if you're talking about like is is
this is this concealment into
unconcealed into veiling and unveiling
teal in the word to reveal is
interesting because it means and it's
field means it's something special
protecting to reveal is simultaneously
to unveil it but also we
feel it and so so as we've just been
talking we've just been with all the
different layers of and now it feels
like we're in I'm in the presence of
something it's being revealed like it
more in concealment and I'm noticing I
like that this is a natural like
softness it's coming up I feel more
personal it feels good to me there's a
sweetness about it I taste that
sweetness too and I'm wrestling if I
should say this and so that means I
should say it I think I should say it
there's a part of me when we were
staying with the sweetness or the
softness mild like teary eyed feeling
and this is something that happens when
I get this circling to this is usually
when I tap out and then there's this
color of reflecting on the artifact that
this could be and then it gets to fold
like I don't want to go there and then
Oh wouldn't it be cool to go there
because I'm crying on a camera with guy
and then that kind of like just kind of
kind of conceals the whole or process or
just distracts it hospice it once again
so what I'm hearing is there's kind of a
sense an awareness of a listening or
gaze right it's everything that you just
said I think presupposes tending to what
would what wouldn't look good or they
don't like there's a there's a if we
just let that gaze be there do you look
at the way that he just were moved in
different ways to tend to it
what kind of gays is it is it a gays
it's like loving you and being like
you're the best thing in the world I
want to hear more
is it one that's like good aiming at
years got a gun pointed at you remember
the sense of the gays
so the gays meaning how it's like that
watchful eye sort of like my PR agent is
that sure like I think well no if we
just say that every response is in
relationship to an occurring world right
and some that response is a perfect
correlation if you look at the response
like the different levels of that it'll
reveal what background this is this is
helpful okay how do you feel about being
helped
just good I just noticed I want more of
that for you it feels because warm yeah
and when you mentioned the the gazer
it's almost feels like there's a I see
or feel something gazing at me now and
I'm trying to ask it or just kind of
inquire into or put words to what it's
doing and it there seems to be like a
fatherly protective aspect to it yeah
yeah yeah and I'm almost surprised
saying that because I thought I was
gonna go a different angle yeah
so you're kind of surprised by what
you're finding out about you hmm here's
a fatherly that's something about that
really resonated in fact I just wanted
to say like I like that about you name
something that was wasn't a felt and you
just named it it came in the episode
there's a tending to things and it it's
it's masculine right it has masculine
quality too it's got a penetrative
quality to it okay and what I think I'm
getting is that so
you know part of what you mentioned is
just an awareness of this being one of
or inside of one of what you called a
passion project we're inside of a
context that's designed for you to take
the most like the thing that you want to
have guide your life happening mm-hmm
right what's right as I just presents
that or brought language to that looks
like there's a mixture of being kind of
impressed and right there kind of
ability to call these things out and and
then does that feeling of residence the
residents came out first obviously then
the feeling of being impressed so on one
what's funny is a ISM as I'm sitting
there I feel literally inside of your
care hmm like yeah we're inside of a
thing that you built that wouldn't have
been there this wouldn't have been here
unless you actually did stuff to create
this that was listening to something
that is almost out of your control your
Daymond hmm and like you have this
Foreman we're inside of it's like
literally it's contrived you said the
sense of its constructed in your tending
and your caring that's so cool look on
your face like a I think that's the most
I've seen your face change yeah it's
like um I always feel caught you know
that's that's the word that came to my
mind like yeah because I don't feel
seen that often and it seems like what
I'm imagining is it it's the thing that
got seen is that you care like that's
what it feels like is being revealed to
me it's like oh my god like you just
will say these two aspects that have
been a history of being at war with each
other your father legally you your being
a father and he thrusting things that
like so it they sing and we're inside of
that and you feel like we're inside of
your passion and what you care about
[Music]
it's like your Cindy not only the
architecture but you're seeing you're
recognizing the architect nice like what
is the architect feel like now that the
architect has been a little bit more
reveals such that the architecture is
now holding the architect means having a
moment of pause it seems like having him
be seen it just feels very present and
I'm I'm empty-headed
in a way and just I guess a quality of
wellness throughout the body I just keep
thinking about your wife how can I keep
thinking about your wife mmm because
it's private yeah yeah like yeah what do
you think it's interesting she doesn't
come to many of my in-person meetings
and she came to one this week and
everyone was like like Peters wife and
it's a very private part of my life you
know I don't I don't speak the boat at
that often and so I imagine on your part
is sort of like you're poking nature he
wanted kind of like what she looked like
wish you personalities like you know how
does this guy match with the feminine
it's more you know it actually what's
there it doesn't feel pokey if I feel a
district feel deep respect for your
privacy actually hmm right like a deep
respect for it until I actually I've
been having it almost throughout the
whole conversation and I'm just like
what been refraining from bringing then
but I there's just a sense of actually
what I'm wondering about it she saw this
right and she was in the presence of
like this softness that's coming forward
like this caring thing it doesn't get
seen that often and she was here I just
keep wondering what that would be like
for you and her and what she would see
and I'm wondering if she's it's almost
like this question is like I bet she has
a relationship to this right right yeah
she's probably the only person that sees
it on a regular basis yeah yeah what's
it like just bringing in some privacy
respectfully to this project this is
kind of Damon architecture
yeah oh this moment we're just bringing
in its gonna be heard and seen well
there's a horizon of a listening that
we're both inside of right now thing
alright there's this feeling of like
confidence in the sense that or a
feeling of rightness about it doesn't
feel too intrusive it doesn't feel like
uncomfortably vulnerable yeah it's like
it's like really surprisingly so on well
it's almost surprising how
not surprising if that makes any sense
yeah what do you make of that the first
thing that came to mind is I'm on path
there's a side of you right that were in
the presence of and we're in the
presence of a pretty-pretty like no open
to be seen place and you're surprised at
like how unsurprising it is on a certain
sense right great and there is a place
where in the unite I just I feel a
respect of like yeah there's a
relationship that you like pass right
you probably the only person what I'm
hearing you say that really has seized
this thing that cares about all this the
architect underneath their architecture
and what is she what's her
how does she respond to this India like
how do you experience does she speak it
does she just wordlessly acknowledge it
does she hold it
she should move by it like what's I
don't even like to this place with her I
think she thinks it's cool which is she
often expresses when sort of this sort
of stuff comes up and she thinks it's
cool right she thinks it's cool what
what do you like what's it like for you
I feel attractive I feel accepted right
you know wanted and then I feel you know
what that attraction for her and you
know yeah a gel right and when you and
like
because your attraction to her yeah what
happens over there what do you see then
the blue balls goes away I had to get a
full spectrum yeah yeah then the dance
just happens you know and just just very
and yet now on this side of the privacy
walls are coming up now a little bit
maybe that's why the I tried to engineer
that joking just because let's just like
to be aware of that I just want to like
cuz the privacy walls coming up if we
backtrack just a little bit before there
was the there was the the door mm-hm
feeling back into the longing wait and
there was a door we just kind of let the
door be there is it feel like the door
is open and we're on the other side of
the door place are we in just like the
door
crack and it's like nudged a little bit
open and there's like light shining
through or I feel maybe a breeze coming
coming in do you know why it's closed no
on one level but I want to say yes on
another level and I think the sense is
if we're like standing at the door he's
kind of keeping with that metaphor I
have this sense of like like a warrior
at the gate right there's one sense in
which I feel like it's like almost like
chivalrous like you're tending to your
world right boom there's a door here and
it's closed there's like a chosen nest
to it and I I sent also there's another
part which is not as chosen or like or
not as conscious or something like that
there's a judgement to what's on the
other side of the door or a judgment in
it being expressed a judgment about it
maybe not it but it maybe is an
embarrassment of it being expressed an
awareness of the possibility of
embarrassment something about that just
resonates with the discomfort I feel
with you a little bit mmm it's almost
like I have a sympathetic resonance oh
just feels like it like a sympathy
sympathy with with the sense of being
naked or something like or the
possibility
of being exposed on some level right so
let's let that be there so on awareness
of the possibility of shame it's like
just to sit with that or if I'm caught I
put I use the word shame I don't know if
that that's yeah it's like I'm almost
it's not shame right but it's almost
like I'm ashamed of it if it expressed
itself it's an anticipation right like
if it expresses itself I'm gonna I'm
gonna blush right right or it's like I
lose control
yeah that part it's like that part I
think that's if we say there's another
guard at the gate you know I guess got
this image of like the other guard is
more like this ones like this is
appropriate right like I am it's very
chosen right there's I'm like there's
different levels of vulnerability and
it's clear and you're tending to
something it's like the line there's
this other part where it feels more like
control like in my understanding of
controls like controls what makes
control control it's is it's
preventative in nature right it's more
about making sure something doesn't
happen right right and it's like I don't
know what the is on the other side
of this door and if I open it wide open
I lose control
yeah and the unknown unknown there
I don't know if it's as frightening I
don't know what it is but I'm not ready
anymore yeah yeah you say that again and
I'm not I'm not ready anymore cuz if we
remember that readiness that I usually
have with me and especially these
moments that won't be here yeah so here
we are sounds like we're just a little
bit out of control right now I still
feel in control though just I appreciate
that there's just like it's not even
like that there's something back there
like that that you know about it's more
like it has this element of there's
something there could be something back
there that if it goes out I'll lose
control and I'll and I'll be embarrassed
which kind of presupposes a witness
again of some kind right of being out of
control hmm I would imagine like I could
just tend to the part of like yeah when
I when I said before in the beginning
like oh yeah I can just feel a place
where you're just holding a lot like
there's an element of like where it's
chosen there's also an element where I
imagine that there's just some suffering
like if there's a little bit of
suffering there
like when I think about control as we're
talking about it I'm just no we're of a
sensitivity I think you're there when
you mentioned that we're suffering I was
trying to kind of just dive into it and
and maybe it's like unseen the part of
me that is unseen and doesn't feel too
deserving to be seen and there's a
sadness to that you know as you say
sadness is that is that something you
can feel a hint of I felt the hint of it
when he said it
yeah yeah let's just let that be there
to that like there's some sadness there
there's like as you articulated there's
an awareness of like Oh assent was it a
sense of dissent like is it like an
inferiority or a fear of like it won't
be seen as good what's not it just won't
be seen actually I'm searching let's
listen to the sadness the sadness knows
he said
sicom love you know it's like um doesn't
deserve to be loved maybe
as you say that I feel myself going hmm
just a compassion caring about you
what's happening for you just like right
now it's really easy for me just to sink
I just know this like they talking about
like this sadness and it like it won't
be loved or like there's something
that's like won't be loved here and so
there's a sadness around it and it's
funny as you as they sink into it with
you I feel a love for you I'm like oh
yeah I could be friends with you for a
long time something like that it's like
that that you know and I appreciate I
think that there is some there's so much
deliberateness to you right like and and
really like you're aware of a horizon
and what's on the other arisin is
calling to you and you've construct like
the way that you built your life is in
relationship to that and it's got this
like very deliberate quality to it and
then in what I'm feeling is like oh
there's a place back here that actually
seems to be more about like I feel like
I'm sinking back like it's not so much
like the periodic part it's more of that
there's that which gives me right I'm
resting back into here that's back into
it it sounds like that there's something
that it's concerned about whether or not
it's going to be held like will it be
gloved is it lovable those concerns
start to come up and there's funny it's
like that's where I'm feeling like oh
yeah that process of just being a sense
of like the quality of holding of being
like we relaxed into that there's some
concern
that come up and I know this because
there's a holding quality to my presence
right now like you kind of feel it was
my words almost like I have a quoi feel
like attending okay this is would be
something like the Midwife right I feel
like there's an innocence there and then
the atonement I'm discovering as well as
as it's happening yes I am when I focus
on that the sadness the idea that it's
undeserving of love it's like almost uh
I lose words for my ability to kind of
express myself and it's just once they
overwhelmed they're just like you know
just crushes through
feel bad you know just felt like sweet
and it's like there's something about it
that where words are different like they
don't come right I do have like kind of
a wave of appreciation free for you
right now and this process it's sort of
like I can sense that you're so into
this right and like you're you're in
this with me right now and and I'm like
wow like you know people tear here like
you that like about this and so I'm
caring about you hmm
what just happened right there when I
said that like there's a little wave
[Music]
it's almost like a justing to that
reality
yeah kind of like not warned quite that
way yeah it's sort of sort of like
tension between that warmness you know
that it feels good being cared for
but then that resistance I want to slap
your hand away and say I don't need your
care you know I got this like the
doorman comes back yeah yeah so just
something about like it's like we became
aware of like Oh
I'm in I'm being met in I'm being cared
about and seen and then we've found
ourselves anything like oh wait a minute
this may suppose that I I need to be
cared about like sits like a little just
a little wave of that sounds like it
came up yeah and it didn't take over me
completely as a sort of like there were
like kind of juggling if each other like
knocking me around so it's interesting I
just didn't really struck by by that
thing for a period of time wasn't there
right it just wasn't there it was so not
there that we weren't even necessarily
even thinking about it like and then
when I said I cared about you it's
almost like it it woke up or something
just a little bit so this is like gilze
can wheres like it just like i think i
feel privileged to be in a very rare
space with you really personal and like
there's an innocence that i think i see
and feel with you wow it's like a this
the title of the story that just rose of
my head is that i don't need anybody's
love it's like I can get by
without it which is but you
know that's the pretense now is it your
wife was right here I think she would
hug me yeah yeah totally I just get this
sense of like I think I keep thinking
about your wife it's interesting cuz
like as I feel parts of you she comes
forward in my imagination huh and I
think what's there for me is I feel so
glad that you have her in your life
right and that like that she responds to
this right she loves this part of you
she sees it and and it does feel to me
like it there's a quality of like where
I it makes sense to me it's worth
protecting like it's worth being
consciously veiled in private and that
you know like there is a quality of just
like a preciousness that's that's the
word preciousness that I can feel my
nervous system being in response to you
and I just feel like when you said
you're like oh like a few minutes ago
and he said usefully appreciative of me
and how much I was basically caring
about you but they just felt like a wave
that I just felt a wave of that
appreciation like he was melting was a
melting wallet II just kind of say
there's quality at the time like like I
get to sit here and abide here for like
the rest of my life it's kind of got
that eternality to it I just feel like
oh my god a wave of aliveness all right
I'm like you know ready to march on the
battlefield and you know like totally so
cuz it's just feel that current like it
sounds like an another koala quality of
beingness just came up it has an
aliveness
that's right yeah it feels awake yeah is
it awakeness it's little wake must be
there huh I still feel the innocence but
I do feel this kind of sense of rising
or like look I feel like I'd like my
there was a balloon in my torso it like
filled up such that I don't have to hold
myself up anymore it's just full right
right and there's an innocence there for
me hmm I like that yeah it's like you
know that I guess uh there's a
judgmental quality to the word innocence
but it just kind of evaporated mmm it's
like oh yeah I like being innocent Yeah
right and there's a there's also seemed
it seems like in words a strength like
it's in the word readiness right all
right let's go but there's like a an
unprotected quality to it just like it a
proactive vulnerability that's ready
[Music]
so we just kind of start to little
started to line the circle open right is
he just is if we just start to like
allow in this we're in a place right now
right those rare it feels special to me
it feels very real right and as he is
that there was kind of an innocence
there's some pain there there was like I
was there we just kind of kept opening
to it like at a certain point it was
like went from sadness to a softness to
it innocence as we rested in the
innocence and just stayed there then the
office and the rising certain to happen
right right you know like if we go and
just the like the integration part just
like if you just imagine that and you
just unfolded from here and you just
brought this in whatever way that you
would into your life and your like your
relationship and your projects and your
work like what do you see
one thing I I don't know if this is
respond respond to that directly but one
thing that feels really kind of live is
this sort of hyper awareness that I have
towards the doorman or the guard right
and like how much he colors my whole
life in a way yeah and then we went to
the place where we kind of just touched
the doorman kind of peeked at the door
and all that is the dynamics there and
just sort of is maybe there's an
annoyance about this right like how kind
of like how much I'm kind of structured
into this space
[Music]
but then you know awareness is it just
feels
healthy so to return back to your
question I just feel like a curiosity of
how it's gonna manifest and gonna be
excited to see how it unfolds the sense
of an it's it's gonna unfold mm-hmm and
if we just if we just kind of like
recognize the logos right the awareness
of a distinction there's this quality of
a knit it has something to do with what
I heard you say is has something to do
with this awareness of this particular
guard that like colors it brings a level
of suffering what I heard - or
difficulty that was not that
distinguished before it's now
distinguished you could see it and now
you're having a relationship with it
like there's like some irritation with
it ER but also some possibility of this
other thing unfolding right just
something else is starting to like start
to bring the language if you just
imagined like you just don't need to
walk in the world right with and this is
kept unfolding what what do you what do
you imagine you'd start to see what
would you hear he hates touch how would
you do those things
what would you stop seeing or do you
start seeing I think I would see the the
beauty and others there's a bit more
salient to me it's sort of like um right
it's like giving allowing others the
chance to love me
it sounds um that's not the right phrase
but just allowing others an opportunity
in a way and then that will afford me an
opportunity
to return the favor so I guess that's
where the original line of seeing the
beauty and others would be more salient
and as and if you just kind of dig up a
new let's just say that like he started
seeing the beauty and other people and
it started becoming more sailing and
then the you started orienting to that
to that sailing right and you just bring
that through time and you just imagine
the face that it articulates and the
nervous system that that grows in
relationship to it and was now that
starts to characterize and make choices
and movements and actions based on that
what starts to you start to see like
that the world that gets created like
laughter like sort of like uh was the
French Way Jewish song sort of joy you
know like the yeah it sounds like you'd
be able to just you'll have things where
you just say the word laughter and
somebody look laughs magic abilities we
just start to complete here just in the
senses yeah just want to encourage just
because usually when we see stuff right
it's like you know there's that
experience of like you don't see with
the with the orientation that you're
seeing with right you see with it but
then there's these moments where you go
you see so you see it right and and then
that seeing goes to a different level of
complexity and now what you are seeing
with becomes seen and then there's that
kind of quality of that there's a new
place that you're seeing from and they
see that see your life that's like the
logos right like seeing the frame that
you're in like and I just want to keep
encouraging you just to bring language
to this because the more and he named
something like in the me I think his st.
Maximus the christian mystic talked
about like you know that when you name
something it brings it into being it
gathers like it gathers in losses
alright so you just want to encourage
you just to keep articulating it so it
can gather more of you and seeing really
beautiful this beautiful guy like like
you're doing so much good work right
love it and your fatherly about you
 deliberate and like you're
holding two things together and you
you're creating a life and you're
married and like you're probably gonna
have a family and you're you it really
does look like you're listening to the
Damon takes something to do that right
we do it well and you doing it
man and it seems to well forth there's
also a quality of innocence about you
like it's like I would almost like would
imagine that there's like a that which
has like world light up and then you
want to ask questions about it
articulated it's like I would imagine
that that has something to do with that
innocence that we touch like that kind
of sense of wonder right it's also the
same Maximus would say he's like the
ground of our consciousness he
distinguishes round of our consciousness
is this is a existential astonishment at
the given miss of being like like the
ontological ground is he would
distinguish it is is a existential
astonishment at the given this be
including itself and that like feel that
really alive in you
[Music]
I'm curious when you first your first
impression of me right like maybe the
first half-hour of when we spoke the
first time and then now after going
through a circling session is is
something fundamentally change or what
what was added to that oh yeah like
let's see
well it's interesting actually what's
changed is I think more distinction or
understanding of what I was drawn to in
the first place mm-hmm it's almost like
I feel like I've been getting to know
like why I know so I think that makes
sense like yeah and some level I've been
feeling like oh there's it's been
becoming articulated but the thing
that's articulated is actually present
those present it's just present there's
a presence way that you world right and
B being in your world and a watch and
it's interesting it's like there's a
knowingness on some level we've just
been kind of like I've been like what is
that trait like it's like this is like
oh wait what about that part yeah yeah
 you I don't want to you better like
and we just kind of kept getting it
feels like unveiling hmm and like I want
to call it that I have a desire now to
you know to circle you or to like you
just or CUV circle and I'm curious like
do you get circled often like and then
the other question I had is do you have
the same similar attention because it
seems like you do between this kind of
this Damon and then the the structure
yeah yeah I for me actually it's like
for me in this part of my life
here's I mean here's just the truth
about me like I actually have like I
think one little
like thread that like connects me to the
ground there's something in me that just
wants to go dissolve into the everything
like it just will and it's gotten me in
trouble before right and and I've
learned from that trouble that's made
right and that's had me really get a lot
more here so for me it's interesting
like a lot of what has been transforming
me is a lot of being a lot more
deliberate in what I'm doing with my
life it's like marriage is had a huge
impact like II like in a ways that are
just humbling to me like and I think it
has something to do with this background
sense of that it's something unambiguous
in my world it's almost like if there's
a center of the mandala it's like the
right thing got into the center and
there's like this ontological
chiropractic adjustment mmm I'm a lot
more relaxed with my life and a lot more
free to be disciplined because there's
something like the right things the
great things are in order and it's a lot
to do with just being um letting the
woman I'm with Brianne really see like
really see she's given all of herself to
me and then when I really see that I
recognize a like in anything like
whatever it takes like right there this
there was something in the way of that
for me that has stirred a lot to do is
my history so it was like when we got
back together we'd broken up for buddy
you got back together I started to
recognize this bond that we had that I
cuz I couldn't see it right a lot of
different reasons I couldn't relate to
it well when I came back in I saw it and
I'm like oh my god like this is like the
most important thing in the world like
and I have
I didn't grow up in a place that like my
parents weren't like securely attached
they were crazy you know they're
up there awesome people there's like
amazing people and they had addiction
and all the craziness goes with that so
like it's not like I had any reference
point but there was a place in me that
was really frozen in relationship to
Brienne's pain and because I was frozen
I couldn't like I would always have to
be guarding myself or pretending like I
was there and just enduring it but
because I couldn't actually touch her
care her heart and when I did when it
unfroze it was so obvious and so and I'm
just like that has just kind of
blossomed in my life and I'm a lot more
organized a lot more you know successful
and effective and kind of stuff and
there's a lot more it's a lot more
effortless I'm just still I'm just
that's the thing right now in my life
that I'm looking at and it's yielding so
much light like so much I notice I talk
about it a lot as you hear me kind of
talk about it because like what I'm
doing is it's just this thing that's
like glowing and I'm like huh did
that happen
you know mmm I stumble on this yeah yeah
what's interesting to me is there really
is a quality of like what's fascinating
to me there's look like a quality of
yeah I'm when it fully really wedded
fully and I'm I'm wedded to the to the
right thing right person and that when
I'm walking around in the world the
world looks different to me like that's
what's really interesting to me it's
like even when I'm not thinking about my
relationship like when I talked to the
guy at the grocery store right when the
thing that you can't stress me out look
like at the end of the world I'm just
kind of like I just made it differently
and yeah so it's so interesting like
like where I feel like I got I've gotten
such a deeper respect for
one is that there's this tradition
called marriage that I there's like some
finality I have to do but I'm really
feeling the effects of the wisdom that
that institution and the evolution the
truth of it feels like there's a an
evolutionary truth in its being been
there for thousands of years that I feel
like I'm I'm experiencing right it's
right you're humbled by that I mean
being that child secular humanism I mean
this almost religious experience with
something traditional is really really
having me feel different it's like I
wanna come on - but I'm glad that that
ding brought us because I have a another
podcast like 10 minutes that I got a
jump on yeah this like there's this term
I like called intellectual dark matter
it's like all the the dark matter that
kind of makes up like you know the
iceberg that you can't see that makes
that that gives justification for a
practice or an idea or whatever and then
we got kind of like separated from that
when it comes to marriage or a lot of
people did but it seems like to me it's
like you're you're getting your
understanding your groc and that
intellectual dark matter when it comes
to marriage like I get it it's changing
me that's awesome in finding out about
it as it happens this is really cool
it's very it's very rich it's like I
thought when I see for example when I
just see the person that can see you on
to you at a deep level I just that has
it's so meaningful for me in a way that
I don't think I've ever been able to
appreciate that before so what should we
do with this I think we should look at
it and make sure it's all good but let's
spread it out in the world yeah
think I probably post it on YouTube and
you can feel free to do whatever you
want with it but I think the pup
YouTube's a better format than the
podcast right I would imagine you can
just kind of like in the intro right if
people are used to doing that you can
just say like if you like I recommend
just just put the link there and then
just go like you may want to watch this
it's probably gonna be better - yeah and
I'm a kind of like you know your first
kind of intro before like maybe I'll
just slice that and say if you want to
watch the full thing then you know go on
YouTube and check it out that might be a
bet that maybe cuz you had a lot of kind
of good intellectual content that kind
of rounded circling just for me and I'm
sure a lot of people haven't heard about
it yeah totally can you get that sense
of like circumambulating told that I was
beautiful and I feel like I left this so
I first there's one of them thank you
deeply my friend for you know the game
green to do this again and it got a lot
from it it's one of those things that
you know a lot of C's got planted that I
need to like just let's sit and see what
comes for through it so I just have a
tremendous amount of like appreciation
and gratitude for you right now and then
us doing this gratitude receipt yeah so
I wanted to say that and yeah let's just
release and see what happens yeah let's
do it let's do it cool all right
like I'm glad we were able to warm you
up for the next podcast yeah talking to
a Marxist now mindset make him cry yeah
yeah make me cry so thank you my friend
take care