like standard twentieth-century
physicalist American mmm paradigm so
it's neat are you recording yeah okay
it's neat that the physical the capacity
of the medium and also the human
relation allottee that emerges in the
context of that capacity which is to say
two people said there's a new guy doing
stuff on the YouTube that you should
check out mm-hmm
so on the one hand because of the
YouTube he could create the meaning
crisis and disseminate it it kind of
throw the bottle into the ocean and also
in principle some billions of people
could choose to see it
yeah and we're now long enough into this
that there is a culture of kinda like
New Yorkers recommending restaurants uh
this is the thing like I I watched it it
has the right flavor and taste to it'll
only take two episodes in but it's it's
definitely gonna be a your kind of thing
and B I think it's gonna be the same
with David fuller being one of those one
of those two people mm-hmm right mmm so
there's that right so there's the the
fact of
the the kismet that we can have these
conversations with John and then
ultimately with each other mm-hmm that I
think is also is quite interesting in
the the immediate almost like the
efficient cause of why you and I are
talking is that after he and I spoke a
few times I can't remember what happened
but something in my body settled in that
said that such that I found myself
saying working group on the new religion
that isn't a religion meaning it feels
like there's a good possibility of doing
something where there's a little nudge
little push of extra intentionality to
coalesce some group not many probably
five to seven who get together in some
periodicity with in physical space not
via this medium to push the inquiry of a
new religion that is a religion and
probably a new credo that is what's the
term that is always subordinate to
religion mmm
for further meaningfully further mm-hm
and John recommended you hmm
and somebody that would be potentially
interested in and bringing particular
capacities to this conversation mmm
so that's the mmm the standard order
interpretation of how it is to be come
to be talked together today yeah totally
I just feel moved but I feel moved in
stock and like appreciative and just
there's there's a way in which
as I was talking about earlier there is
a way in which I kind of I can
experience these deep love affairs with
people in this space of Las afiyah right
this quality of dialog of like
disclosure and self disclosure that that
is really going through something
together that has there's a particular
kind of loved bonding that I experience
that is hmm is something that I just
I've been experiencing it with John and
multiple people in my life right my
history I could almost look at my my
personal history as different points in
which I had friends or a friend that
went deep into this kind of train of
thought that created a whole atmosphere
that ended up altering my
presuppositions that had been perceived
differently and just the deep personal
bonds that I've created with people so
he's a wave of that right when you when
you told me that mm-hmm
so I found myself just then on the one
hand reflecting back on my own
experiences of that and even into
relationships that were younger like the
the teacher you know the teacher who
brought that same context and that
feeling of sharpness of life and
richness of possibility and
meaningfulness of relationship even if
it was just you know one one semester
yeah
and then I guess coming from this
direction there was a feeling of and and
down of its the term like omen or
moment' that when you when you finished
what you were saying and the whole thing
sort of landed a almost like a finger
pointing or something saying now pay
attention there's something something
about what just happened or what's going
on is particularly meaningful
yeah
mmm honey
so John mentioned Heidegger mm-hmm and
I'm really interested really really
quite interested in that you know I
don't know why my mind jumped to it so
quickly but it's clearly chomping at the
bit so perhaps it is a good idea to run
with it um though I have no particular
attachment to following that path at any
pace perhaps it's better to slow down
yeah totally
i I a couple things like yeah
heidegger's Heidegger's a whole world
like it's a whole world that's I I'm
it's a it's a world that's there's
something that Heidegger I think was
haunted him that that revealed a level
of thinking or you could say the
movement of intelligibility right that I
started to read for reasons I don't
quite understand at the same time that
circling was emerging because my back my
background is I don't have like I'm not
academic yeah what just really quick
that could you say that another way oh
yeah I could paraphrase that completely
that was that was the dropping in of the
realization of what it would mean to be
dealing with Heidegger in the context of
a group of people in a process that
actually could enable that group to have
a collective capacity yeah yeah and
what's interesting and this is what's
telling about I think revealing about
the the world like what Heidegger was
doing is I didn't realize the connection
between the two until like two or three
years later where because I didn't quite
understand why I was reading Heidegger
because I didn't really understand him I
mean I'm who I'm Dyslexic and I couldn't
learn how to read until I was like 11
and took a heroic teacher to kind of do
that for me and so my reading
comprehension is not like the best so I
don't I didn't quite understand why I
was reading the hardest philosopher in
like like known to man but there was
something about what he was saying about
being that that it was like to to
attempt to understand him what I what I
realized was to was to try to understand
him and this is similar to my experience
of actually being mentored or being with
a teacher that there's this quality of
Ezreal codes as Verve a key would say of
participatory right participation in
which like with the mentor when my
grandfather who was a tailor who was
mentor for two years he lived in a park
in Hanover Germany when he would talk
about stories about being dwelling with
his mentor it was his dwelling quality
where much of
much of the learning wasn't so much
about what the tailor said about
tailoring it was sitting next to him for
hours at a time right leading London and
all of the sensibility in the history of
tailor hood in his way of being that you
kind of dwell in and then you kind of
come out in some sense
mentored fully through that right you
can carry that way of being right so I
would imagine it's similar to that
experience of when you go to another
country and then come back home and
people tell you you have an accent it's
very much like that like for me that's
there's like what Heidegger says and
understanding what he says and and when
people summarize Heidegger there's
missions like he takes but that's
actually not that's not really Heidegger
Heidegger is taking you on this walk of
thinking right and the point is mostly
this it's the experience of
understanding that is and I was most
left with because though I would like it
read Heidegger so you're like trying to
like in order to kind of understand what
are you saying you have to step so
outside of your frame of reference right
did then look back and then kind of get
it and then okay start all over again
right yeah and I would just do that
hours and hours and hours and hours and
then I go in circle and then I do that
and I'd circle I do that they'd circle
they I do that I'd circle I was back and
forth and then one day somebody said
something that had this vernacular that
was just the accent of circling and it
was I'm like all of a sudden
hit me I'm like very fun very funny
grandfather Heidegger oh I see this
steady you know what I realized is he
taught me actually how to see um
we taught me wet like he taught me that
there's like you could say the
phenomenological sense is is this this
awareness of the concealment is and that
that that which is both concealed is
that which is most near and that and
that that kind of looking of you getting
that sense of a horizon or a Talos and
also the background and the foreground
and just having the sense of just
following that back that kind of closer
and closer and closer in which is in I
would say encircling started to
cultivate this deep sense of wonder
right
about what I think the way that for
Venky talks about is this trance framing
this primordial ground which when you
when you realize it there's this kind of
primordial sense of wonderment that
comes up it is also the very experience
of when you participate with each other
in that sense of wonderment it seems to
produce the kind of experiences that
people call wonder and love and affinity
an unreasonable devotion and all of you
know yeah Wow well I'm not sure
you
one thing that was running through my
way of making sense of what was what I
was perceiving Ruth was the sense or the
feeling of a
like a spacetime
okay okay I can say it this way I had a
real I had it inside a long time ago
where I had realized if you take a look
at a light at a lightning bolt and from
the perspective of a person looking at a
lightning bolt
it looks jaggedy but from the
perspective of the lightning bolt it's a
perfectly straight line because we're
looking at it from what you might call a
neutral third-person perspective through
space its perceiving the galvanic
potential mm-hmm so it's proceeding
along the the the gradient of galvanic
potential and is simply following the
straightest path through the radium
galvanic potential yeah so from its
perspective it's traversing a straight
line yeah and then I was imagining the
notion of the circle circling but a
circle and the circle has a from a again
objective third-person space-time
perspective I can say that you were in a
circle when there are a group of people
oriented I would imagine in a hall
facing inward geometrically yeah
same place at the same time right yeah
but then I was having this flash of for
example when I was reading among Welland
de Landa should that cook right there
and how it connected with a conversation
that I had been having in my hand of
course with Jude alloys and there was a
flash of insight as the two connected
and I had this feeling of it being as if
we were in a circle but me gated through
a phenomenology that has a different
frame of reference yeah that makes sense
yeah it does can you seem more about the
frame of reference
yeah oh man
well if we if we just zoom in on the
conversation we're having right now yeah
and I can feel myself getting lost so if
I get lost please bring me back mm-hmm
[Music]
what we can notice is that there's a
very fun objective illusion that we're
having a conversation with each other in
some sense this is as if we were
face-to-face mm-hmm separated by a
couple of feet yeah and yet of course if
I notice what's happening in reality it
couldn't be further from the truth in
fact it's quite likely that the sound
waves that are being projected into my
microphone electrically and converted
into digital signals inside my laptop
packet 'add up in TCP IP packets and
then spewed across the internet through
the protocol that may in fact be jumping
through satellites into space and back
down which then are emerged to convert
into analog signals in your laptop um
the medium that enables that creates a
so think about that like the lightning
bolt there's a object of perspective on
our point of view that collapses that
entire complexity of the underlying
reality of what packets face would
perceive as a hell of a job into
something that is isomorphic to a
face-to-face conversation yeah all right
yeah so if I can run that same
projection here and simulate a
face-to-face conversation using a medium
a variety of different media constructs
I could do the inverse and I could say
oh well it looks like the medium of
capitalist and producing books and
shipping them to me via Amazon and
projecting text into my eyeball that was
glued to paper I mimetic 'le copying the
text that was actually scripted by in
this case delays into Londa over a
different time frame same exact thing in
Reverse point of fact I am actually in a
circle with them but that circle is
propagating through reality at a
different kind of way and if we can
actually grok the consequences of the
media on the way the consciousness is
actually able to form itself as a
coherent singularity then we're doing
something interesting hmm
[Laughter]
hey I don't think I got lost I actually
pulled it off yeah I am a couple things
you see you how old is how many kids do
you have I have three I have a 17 year
old 15 year old and I have an eleven
month old okay said that okay that's
what I got from one of I think one of
your interviews you talked about just
having a newborn how's that how is that
it is incredible
actually it's it's it's funny because
going in I've done it before
twice and paid a lot of attention I
wasn't sort of like just passing through
yeah
and one of the things that I knew about
myself was that I perfect to be
perfectly honest don't find the first
six months of children to be
particularly interesting not my thing
mm-hmm but after six months it starts to
build and now at 11 months it's out of
this world how nice it is and how like
delightful
almost always and the ability to now be
so fully present both in terms of time I
can choose how I want to spend my time
and so I allocate my time
to best advantage for our relationship
my relationship with my daughter and my
wife but then also the the self the the
self that I am and the capacity of this
self to be present herself yeah is
you
well and point back there are no words
but there's it's it's nice that sense of
I know you mean that sense of when
they're first born the first six months
they're kind of like an amoeba yeah and
they're all mom right they're all kind
of a you know for sure
this is they're a bunch of tubes that
build up pressure and then mom happens
and then that release and then we help
with the cleanup you know or something
like that
yep yeah every once in while we sort of
like walk around in circles for a while
so mom can get some sleep
yeah exactly exactly how long have you
been married five years uh-huh and at a
previous marriage that was for 18 years
okay got it and how is it how's it being
married just just with now that you have
a child between the two of you I'll
become huh well this is a very this is a
the basis of our relationship was a
choice a conscious choice to enter into
a very conscious co-evolutionary
relationship and so then to have a child
was also very conscious choice taken
over
a solid two years hmm I've really
building the capacity to even understand
what would mean to make that as a choice
oh well and being quite aware of the
implications for the relationship and
again it has been astounding I mean II
of course very painful very challenging
broken bent things that had seemed solid
or easy but just inking continuing to
can to increase the surface area of the
possibility of relationship
I'm just like um part of the way that I
at part of my booms I'm noticing like in
my residence with this is I I feel I'm
in the midst of being utterly struck by
how being married is completely affected
me in ways it's not anticipated how long
have you been married
I've been married about nine months oh
wow
so yeah I've been with I've been with
the woman I've been married for well
going going on like about eight and a
half years with like a a year a year and
a half gap in between there and it's so
I'm
and I think that I'm just I'm really
really struck by now I've been married
before I was married you know in my
early 20s and it for about fourteen
years and it it just wasn't the same
thing mm-hmm
this is really kind of this sense there
is really this sense of where I didn't
even realize to what degree
I had not experienced what I'm
experiencing now had now that I'm wedded
but it feels like there's feels like
there's a certain kind of surrender
where I really did wet like he really
did wet like my being and
and it's it feels very much as if the
the most right wholesome thing
the right thing got put in the center of
the mandala and then I had this
ontological chiropractic shift like
somebody yeah right very nice I know
that's I know that feeling either right
yes that's very well put I like that
it's a is that I think the one of the
things that's really striking me about
it is you know you can you could just
hear mice like you know the child like a
being as you know the child of a secular
humanist you know like I'm like wow
there's really something to this
marriage thing but I I actually really
mean that in this deep sense of
of some kind of some kind of potential
kind of got realized in this this sense
of dropping in that deeply with somebody
in such a local way
[Music]
and I felt that I felt the tickle of
that in a podcast actually those
listening of you this morning I forget
who it was but it was a an entreprenuer
podcast I think you venture stories yeah
and there was this sense in which I
really liked it or in it and I got this
feeling of as you're talking about it
where
you I felt this sense of like we're
almost like my proprioception of time
would change on all directions this kind
of greater picture and then I got landed
in this sense of like okay like stick to
what's real right
like tend to your relationship at all
like that but it had that sense of like
where I felt stretched and then and all
of it was coherent of this sense of just
like being with what's most real and
bringing our attention on that and like
you know like my wife my relationship
with my wife right but like the way that
I treat my neighbor the way that I eat
like he sent this sense of it felt it
just felt like those things were so much
more salient just through listening to
you but also had so much more of the
whole inside of it is very wholesome hmm
Wow well thank you that's yeah there's
any wonderful it was the that was the
experience I had it of listening yeah so
I am almost never listened to a podcast
that I've been on
and my first-person experience is that I
have very little I'm so I'm very into
I'm some I'm not thinking about what I'm
saying yeah and so I actually had very
little memory of the podcast that I'm in
so this is actually the first time I
back I've gotten feedback on that
particular podcast so thank you Oh
totally yeah that's very nice to hear
unless you think too much sometime it's
I would recommend it Wow that III will
try it a little that could be
interesting and fun that's great oh wow
that's really wonderful it kind of makes
sense the way the way you're describing
it yeah
also
hmm miss if I can
well okay so we can I think we can even
be just in the middle of it so what I
was just just to doing just then I was
just gonna ask you what were you just
doing right there I was trying to it's
kind of like pulling taffy I was trying
to weeds if I can get in there
Holness you said wholeness and wholesome
yeah stay connected I was trying to stay
connected and to bring to pull or
stretch that connectedness into the
context of the moment while maintaining
the continuity of the connectedness hmm
yeah that's what I am that's what I'm
trying to do that's my my endeavor and
it's funny I'm making a lot of weird
noises and blowing my eyes and doing
things but it's like yeah this is a lot
closer to juggling than it is to talking
yeah it's weird I'm not quite sure
what's happening I don't have a good and
I prefer not to try to to describe it
too much it feels like the kind of thing
that turns into a credo that isn't
subordinate to a religion you understand
about it that has it makes sense to not
try to describe it like what is the
what's the thing that we're yeah yeah
you
that's very powerful the question there
is very powerful there's a lot of
importance or potent potency that is
implicated in the in the inquiry it has
to do with the if you as you can imagine
the the effort to be able to speak
without about this question is very
challenging it has to do with the
necessity of preventing the
in authentic articulation of meaning in
subordination to a a Wow
God is this really hard
you
you
I'm trying very hard not to simply be a
Taoist
mmm the easy thing would be to say that
that which is endeavoring to express
itself is precisely that which cannot be
said but that is an answer the question
in the least it's just this the question
it just says it again in a different way
if we just look at just for a second so
this is what I'm it this is like I know
what I'm experiencing and listening to
you is that whatever it is that you
probably we probably won't say but we'll
say and they're not saying it's right
the the sense of orientation
that I would imagine has it make sense
to respond to it with both effort and
care already reveals something to me
about it like I I feel that just as I'm
listening in the magnetar and uh there's
a sense in which there's something about
the respectfulness of it and the sense
of the effort that's worth it in the
particular hardness but the engagement
already reveals it in some way to me yes
yes this is right this is very nice this
is um you know words that come up that
are very easy that simplify but also
have the exactly the characteristic of
doing the thing that we're trying to
avoid yeah are things like sacred and
profane yeah and
you
Paul Vander Claire yes I was watching a
portion I quite like connection and I
hope I can get the time to finish
watching it of a conversation between
John and Paul bender I don't know
anything about Paul's background at all
unfortunately wouldn't quite cold but
they were talking about the Hebraic
illusion of the name of God and that
that is not something that has spoken
and I think it has to do with
carefulness as you said care yeah yeah
yeah there's a few more things that
start to pour out there's
if these you're connected they're not
this
the hint center of it but they come with
it they like fellow travelers
what's the Whitman oh these are like
give ring slanty-eyed shamblers that
come slouching along with the profane
mmm we have our marketers for example
and our idolaters that once it is named
it is very easy to be able to articulate
the sounds that are framed in the words
so that they sound like the thing that
is being said that are not it and in
fact precisely get between the soul and
the thing yeah yeah yes can see a
concealment concealment yeah the sense
of like the sense of just Cologne
well if you think about reveal to I be
just I I caught wind of this just the
other day I'm just like I was thinking
about this this is the word reveal one
something that's veiled right first it
discloses about like something's
precious enough to bail mm-hmm hey you
only veil that which is precious enough
but to reveal means both ways right to
reveal it and to reveal yes it's
revealing quality of disclosure of that
and that's one of the things if
Heidegger had one thought my
understanding of the one thought is
whole life he dedicated to think was
what is the question of the being of
beings and how do you another way of
putting that is how do you talk about
context without making it a Content how
do you disclose being that that the way
in which it discloses itself is in its
it reveals itself in its simultaneously
withdrawal yeah right so there's still
there's a way in which I feel right at
the center of that with you in some
regard and that something about that a
leafy and sense of the awareness that
concealment is because I was thinking
about like moments of insight right in
in
you'd say this is exactly what Heidegger
would say is is that concealment itself
is concealed in our modern times right
in the age of technology in its
inflaming sense of that the being of
beings is a standing reserve awaiting
our optimization in that which it but
here's the thing is is you said you're
from Texas right I am I was born there
what which part of Texas I was born in
Lubbock and I was raised in the hill
country okay I'm not that familiar what
nice some west of Austin northwest of
San Antonio okay got you Plano Texas
okay I know it like there's this way
there that track homey shopping center
[Music]
it like lots of Texas with these huge
tract homes that go on for miles like
with yep with once there's there's it's
hell like I go there yeah I'm like it is
so I cannot be there my son lives there
and why I can't I can't stay there for
more than three days and I just I just
feel like I just need to commit suicide
or something right it's there's
something so fundamentally awful about
it but wasn't one of the things that
makes it health for me is that no one's
walking around going this is hell well
we're in a very odd spot right now
because I was thinking almost exactly
the same thoughts about four hours ago
huh yeah and wooden things that makes
the hell is that no one's walking around
just full stop yeah you won't you if you
walk around you'll notice no one's
walking around right and no one's going
like this is awful yeah so that's one of
the things that you say that high degree
would say that's the Anto theology of
our times that that that concealment has
concealment itself has become concealed
yeah like a truly dark time is not a
time when people are uh-huh yes it's
dark it's where no one's it's dark that
it's dark mm-hmm so inside and we
actually can be very very simple
yeah very and very personal yeah we were
talking earlier I think before we
started recording about the way that
there's an experience of this
conversation happening through zoom
where the the framing of your face up
close and also the way that the body has
sort of locked in we go into this fugue
state where we're actually not being
aware of the physical sensations of our
body the amount of energy that were
pouring into this experience so that
when we're done we're kind of like
unplugged and like oh my god it was like
three days worth of experience that
happened in an hour right and that's
that's a lot of very similar and many
people experience that you know the
experience of I remember when my oldest
daughter and much to my chagrin we were
not thoughtful about this but she
watched a television show for many but
particularly one called
Teletubbies and I remember the
experience of when I turned off the TV
she would actually get physically
enraged and the the disconnect between
where you are who you are the experience
that you're having and then your bodies
experience you know that that ability to
have your body and your mind be
differentially experiencing what's
happening and to actually not be in
right relationship with each other is
very common like almost everyone has
that experience almost all the time mmm
and it's a very nice like simple way of
articulating that the thing you were
talking about and then when you have
that exclude that experience of the
would you call them the suburban strip
mall hell yeah
it's the archeo is the ontological
design equivalent of that same
phenomenon I think they're distinctly
connected that the only way that we can
endure living in suburban strip mall
hell is that we spend almost all of our
time looking at a flickering screen
that's causing our mind to feel like
it's getting meaningfulness and pushing
the chemicals into our body that
generates the simulation of
meaningfulness and then we then we go to
sleep yeah yeah totally in
and I think that one of the things one
of the things I just noticed the pace it
was different
yeah in the conversation what what do
you think it's like I just noticed that
something just the pace is different
like I feel a little bit less there's an
orientation or like I feel like a
gathering something is gathering a
little bit more so when you pointed it
out I also noticed that we should just
say that I agree there's the case mm-hmm
but I also noticed that prior to your
pointing it out I was in it not noticing
it mm-hmm
I feel like something about that is part
of the the why or what is happening oh
that that in it first
and not noticing it and no then the
pointing it out and realizing that I was
in it without noticing it is part of the
very thing that is gathering
yeah okay got it to bring in something
that you said earlier like when one of
the things that kind of just I think
also touched me in the beginning when
you talk when you talk to me about when
you said something about something about
yeah I think it's time to gather the
people right they're getting the
religion of no religion or the
non-religious religion that that
particular thing that readiness to kind
of come to form with something part of
what I think moved me was this sense of
would I would I gather from you and just
my experience of you and the sensibility
of the way that you move and the
cadences of your voice and where your
attention goes is that one of the things
that has just
Ben likes it's like keeps communicating
itself to my listening of you is this
real real clear an awareness of a danger
in - I don't know if the word is
clutching onto something in it such that
it goes in a predictable route of mm-hmm
and so there's this it's interesting I
think part of the part of the thing that
hit me was I was going like oh that
you're wanting to do that that that is
it's it's it's coming - it's makes sense
to you on some to even consider to bring
some form to this write or gather the
people right around it's like almost
like given my sense of you that just
that just sent that sounded meaningful
to me but also like risky and I think I
felt a little like I felt touched to be
a part of that risk right if that's the
case but that was kind of the the felt
sense of the whole thing that I just
tried to unpack right there great yeah
so first I'd just like to share my
appreciation for what it is you bring
into this conversation have brought and
I hope too that you continue to bring
now not just in this conversation but
over time
[Music]
the qualities and skillfulness of both
being aware and of communicating things
that seem to have a lot of yeah again
this wholeness or wholesomeness really I
feel a lot of care on your part to
actually be mindful of where the the
balance is and making sure that the
balance is being brought and fee and
when things go in a certain direction
just sort of bring things into that
maybe aren't quite being heard and
maintaining the the integrity of the
circle needs the sphericity of the
sphere mm-hmm so very much appreciate
that apreciation received to the point
and
yes I think this this sense feels quite
right I feel a similar sense of
trepidation to walk closely to tread
carefully on this possibility
[Music]
it feels to me like the way that a
crystal might emerge in a saturated
solution
almost maybe not quite but close ooh and
I think the point would be to actually
get it from close to all the way through
the way that a stem-cell or set of
cluster of stem cells would choose to
differentiate into their particular
tissues hmm so this context the being of
being
[Music]
as you say
very easy to yank
that out of its place yeah yeah and it's
it's can ask you what is it like to
consider to find you I would imagine
it's like finding yourself considering
bringing people together in something
like the religion of religion also also
like what you know just if you can if
there's any more form about that that
you can you can share like the thoughts
and some of the ideas of what you see
but what is it like to watch yourself
actually start to look at some specifics
around it mm-hmm so so probably the most
the first part that comes up is
something like
when you're you're listening to
something hmm
and you can't quite make out what it is
mm-hmm and then you start to be able to
understand where it is that you're
listening to so a song that has been in
my soul for a very long time that
suddenly someone say like John says
something and and it's more of a
remembering that it is or a we cognition
ah aha
that's the sound of it that's what what
sounded like that's the thing that was
being said that's the the sound that had
sort of been murmuring in the back of my
mind for the past 40 years mmm okay and
then a pacing of that there's a feeling
of a coalescence where there's a merging
possibility that seems to have a almost
like a rushing or zooming to it won't
add a a notion of a it's like it's like
running backwards somehow mmm it's hard
to this is very poor language I've ever
hear first one the first one just
totally yeah totally rocked me I heard
the song I got a song of you hearing
your song coming into articulation
there's something that's so that and and
that that you spoke of listening
mmm-hmm is real meaningful for me ah
yeah this is this is the thing that was
somebody not too long ago talked to me
about a way of perceiving the moment the
present mmhmm yeah
we typically find ourselves and again
there's a lot of Heidegger here about
proceeding the present as the
consequence of the past as say a rocket
ship driven by the past into the future
mmm but there's also we're pursuing the
present as a sailing ship being drawn
into the future pulled into the future
with no connection to the past leaving
the past behind and that's what I mean
by that experience of almost like going
backwards yeah
you can't you're not you're like
proceeding but you're walking backward
you're not seeing ahead where you're
going rather it's almost like you as you
see it you see it as you've passed it
and you're feeling it behind you you're
feeling the emerging thing behind you
and around you're flowing through it and
then as it shows up you can begin to see
it and you can begin to name it and you
can bend to go that's how there are
there it is a ha but you're actually not
without skill in this movement there's a
way to actually use that sensibility in
the sensitivity of what it is that's
going on in that direction a lie to be
able to guide your choices so that even
though the capacity to see into name
which was for such a long time front and
center is actually inverted and
backwards nonetheless it actually is a
more relevant way yeah navigating so
that's that's what it feels like so in
this sense
future
both he's got the sense of the future to
past to present of it just really does
remind me of Heidegger of that that
sense of it but so what do you say is
like the the past being having a gravity
right of the historicity of that's like
not history like you know a series of
events that are available to everybody
right but history in the sense of the
way that you and I are sitting that it
makes sense to sit in the way that we
are that were on a chair that were
upright that were that you went like
this that if that there's like that all
that has intelligibility is layer in
gravity's yeah of customs of social
practices of cultures of that we live
right yet that history is in some sense
the big is the history of the constant
becoming of the future right the calling
is forward right and so the present is
that point where it's it goes future
past and then the present is the
mutuality of those points where it goes
it comes in two comes in two like music
like with music you only hear your pick
up the note but actually the know
animates the tensions of the like the
long gating rhythms of the past and then
the the anticipation of the future is
what you is the experience of the music
it's not the animated note of the
present so that sense of richness and
when you said ooh
uh-huh okay can I say something oh
please just you know because I had a had
an experience with a German named Josh
he's a truly masterful guitar player
Mike capital M mm and we were in and
we're in an ayahuasca ceremony and he
was playing music as part of it
and he wasn't playing songs he was
playing music which is to say
every note that was struck was new in
universe in the relationship of the
context that it was in had never been
played before and would never be played
again and I listened very closely for a
while for like an hour two hours I know
how long it was as you can imagine he
did not strike a single false note he
played continuously for hours and every
note was perfectly placed between the
note before and after and had never been
played before he was not playing a song
but rather he was creating music that I
think is that's a very nice way of
speaking to this yeah so lonely so
that's that also really polished that
notion of concealment yeah if I if i
whistle the tune of Beethoven's Ninth
Symphony there's something very very
different very different about that yeah
that's the same yeah that's the past
right that's the past reanimating itself
through me yeah as opposed to the future
revealing itself through me well in some
way it's some way it's just it's like
the past is already a reached so it's in
it's always and it seems to be there
the past only shows up in its
bringing gravity to the nurturing fourth
of a possibility right mmm like that
that sounds really nice
yeah this kind of weaving sense of it
and I I think this is but my experience
of of that most of the things that I
called Jenny like genuinely good in my
life have started with the sense of I'm
going along and then something shines
forth right and I'm like and I just if
I'm fortunate enough I'm I could just
can't stop looking at it right and then
start moving in that direction but the
things that have been really deep for me
have been this process of like 20 years
later I'm still finding out what I was
interested in yeah and then that the the
trail that's left behind is like are
like methodologies and religions and
like a whole series of things of me
finding out what I was interested in
right or what grabs or seized me and
this is the this is the mystery to me of
like I don't actually understand how do
I know to be struck by something before
I understand it to be struck by it yeah
I mean that's a it's a mystery in fact
to me being down this tree I mean we
found ourselves and dancing around the
light of religion on that exact note
yeah I've had the same exact experience
yeah it's the way you were describing
Heidegger made me laugh because I had
the feeling with with Deloitte's uh-huh
yeah where I'm sitting there and I had
this feeling of just like almost be like
held and like smacked up against it you
know for years just boom boom and you
know just cracking open the anti Oedipus
and just reading through the whole thing
and going I don't know what the
just happened like I don't even know if
I recall a single word that was said but
what's going on and then I would read
and read and read and just like as you
say like it's it's like this absorption
this this digestion is metabolism what
is
it what is it that rings you into that
and and and locks you into it like this
it makes sense why in god's name would
you spend that much time yeah doing
something that you can't justify you
cannot it does not make sense the whole
point is it doesn't make sense and yet
it is the very center of that which is
well shoot I was a stop myself from
speaking is something else popped in
noticed and we could even say to have
become wise wisdom so as I have gotten
older wisdom for me is precisely the
ability to have had enough of those
experiences to say uh it's another one
of those again okay you know I you know
I've been through I've seen you before
I'm quite certain that I haven't the
slightest idea what's going on here and
that's okay
because everything that's really
mattered has been like this so I'm gonna
stick with this yes so there's a way
there's a there's a is it is it fair to
say that well I think what you just said
is there's a way that I could come to
know that not knowing to where I'm
my character becomes shaped into someone
that can not no more
that yeah yeah that that right there
mmm-hmm yes yeah I just felt like two
monkeys for a moment which you can
imagine right the first monkey like nap
the Flint yeah it was like yes yes
whatever whatever you just did there
dude that was it I don't know what whoa
can we do it again oh well it's it seems
like it seems like whatever it is
Oh hold on hold on sorry I just need to
yeah that was that was sacred that was
that was that was the thing so I'd like
to just extend honor and gratitude in
that direction
hmm I just as you were going like this
I was like if I thought it's like well
of love nice to meet you
nice to meet you too yeah nice to meet
you
I very much look forward to seeing what
comes of this me to meet you and I would
say that though I do not know that you
have any such intent I would if anyone
wants to watch this video I would have
no inhibitions against that okay good
good I'm glad to hear that man this was
fun that's where the me nice to meet you
too the hell do you i @ CM 40 c 47 i
think i'm 48 48 sweet yeah and we're
will you're born maybe 48 I was 1972 71
yeah so you're 40 so it depends on the
month got you got you birthday by the
way
thank you yeah Wow yeah this is a weird
thing innit this hole of being alive
it's very yeah it's very it's um I hope
I hope to I hope I can be I could be
deserving of orchid holds of perplexity
today that I think it is be sufficiently
perplexed awkwardly yeah was a
gobsmacked that's a good one I
gobsmacked right I unfortunately have
another meeting I hop on I have to hop
into very nice to meet you and I look
forward to more whatever the thing is
yep and there something good is
happening yeah have a good move
you
you