how is money created where does it come
from to benefit and what purpose does it
serve what is a money system what is the
money behind the money system the
centuries the mechanics of a monetary
system have remained hidden in the
prying eyes of the populace yet its
impact both on a national and
international level is perhaps
unsurpassed for it is the monetary
system that provides the foundation for
international dominance and national
control today as these very foundations
are being shaken by crises the need for
open and honest dialogue on the future
of the monetary system has never been
greater this economic crisis looks like
a cancer if you just wait and wait
thinking this is going to go away just
like a cancer it's going to grow and
it's going to late what I would say to
everybody is get prepared there's not a
time right now to wishful thinking the
government and sort things out the
government's don't rule the world
Goldman Sachs rules the world we're on
the verge of a perfect storm in a
position like corrupt and entrenched
interests that lurk in the corridors of
power the whom there are no reasons to
relinquish privileges bases are justly
deserved
reform plan for the NHS has he got a
police report and he got a plan to cut
the deficit
[Applause]
do you trust the government
try to calm down and behave like an
adult and eat you are
it is beyond you there's no coincidence
that boom embarks others become a real
cyclical issue around about the 1700
when William Paterson founded the Bank
of England forest the pod no not funny
only in your mind is it funny
it's not funny at all it's disgraceful
[Applause]
the system is inherently unstable as a
result of the international power it
provides to the dominant quality for at
the heart of it lies the idea of how can
I get something than nothing
sophistical analysis has found that
every time an empire begins to near its
own demise you'll find that it's
currently will be debate there is no
guide to how this process an offering to
give you an example a researcher at the
BBC working on all the tests and
documentary went to the Bank of England
said can you give me a you know a guide
to how money is created and they just
said no this documentary will
investigate and explain this
ever-changing system and the impact it
has both on a national and international
levels
[Music]
in 2010 the total UK money supply stood
at 2.15 trillion pounds 2.6 percent of
this total was physical cash fifty three
point five billion the rest two point
one trillion or 97.4% of the total money
supply was commercial bank money the
three percent of money is created
through the central bank and that money
essentially if you created a ten pound
note you can sell that to a bank to put
into their ATM and the bank would have
to repay that ten pound or buy it for
ten pounds
there'd be no interest may charged on
that money but that money is then
essentially transferred to the Treasury
and it's a form of fundraising for the
government is called sinirage
[Music]
when the Bank of England creates a
ten-pound note it costed about three or
four pounds to actually print that note
and it sells it to the high street banks
at face value sorts and pounds and the
profit the difference between printing
the note and actually signing up ten
pounds goes directly to the Treasury so
in effect all the profit that we get on
creating physical money bank notes goes
to the Treasury and it reduces how much
taxes we have to pay over the last ten
years that's raised about eighteen
billion pounds in 1948 notes and coins
constituted 17% of the total money
supply this is one contributing factor
in the government's ability to finance
post-war reconstruction this included
the establishment of the NHS in only 60
years notes and coins have shrunk to
less than 3%
prior to 1844 banknotes are created by
private bank and the government did not
profit from their creation pre
industrialization there was multiple
forms of money coexisting and say the
kind of rise and kind of of
government-sponsored fiat money is a
relatively recent phenomenon in the
1840s there was no law to stop banks
from creating their own banknotes so
they used to issue paper notes as kind
of a representative of what you had in
the bank account instead of you taking
your heavy metal coins out of the bank
and then going and paying somebody with
them you could get your paper which said
how much money you had in the bank and
you could give that to somebody and they
could use that to go and get the heavy
metal coins from the bank now over time
these paper notes became as good as
money people would use the paper notes
instead of going and getting the real
money from the bank and obviously as
soon as the bank's realized that what
they were creating had become you know
the dominant type of money in the
economy they realized that by by
creating more of it they could generate
profits you know they can just print up
some new notes lend it and get the
interest on top of that and they did
that you know up until the 1840s in the
1840s they pushed it just a little bit
too far and that caused inflation it
could destabilize the economy so in 1844
the Conservative government of Robert
Peel actually passed a law that took the
power to create money away from the
commercial banks and brought it back to
the state so since then the Bank of
England has been the only organization
authorised to to create paper notes
since then everything's gone digital and
what we now use as money is the digital
numbers that commercial banks can create
out of nothing the problem was that they
did not include in that in that
legislation the deposits the demand
deposits held in banks by individuals or
electronic forms of money which
essentially what those demand deposits
are today most of the money in
circulation is electronic money in its
bank it's bank demand deposits that just
that sitting are you know I can't so in
a way the legislation is got needs to
catch up with developments in electronic
money and the way that banks actually
operates money held in bank accounts are
called demand deposits this is an
accounting term that banks use when they
create credit banks follow the same
process from there create loans all
money held in bank accounts is an
accounting entry
[Music]
the reality is now that most money is
not paper and it's not metal coins it's
digital just numbers in a computer
system now it's your Visa debit card
it's your electronic you know ATM card
if this is plastic you know it's numbers
in the computer system you move money
from one computer system to another it's
all a big database and this digital
money is what we're now using to make
payments with it's what we actually use
to run the economy I think a lot of
people in the UK probably think that the
government or the central bank is in
control of most most money in
circulation and issues new money into
circulation but that's not the case
it's private banks that create a vast
majority of new money in circulation and
also decide how its allocated the
official terminology for this accounting
entry is commercial bank money when
banks issue loans to the public they
create new commercial bank money
when a customer repays alone commercial
bank money is destroyed the banks keep
the interest as profit there's a lot of
misconceptions about the way banks work
there was a poll done by the Cobden
centre where they asked people you know
how how they thought banks actually
operated around 30% of the public think
that when you put your money into the
bank it just stays there and it's safe
and you can understand why because you
know every every child has a piggy bank
where you keep putting money in and then
when it's a rainy day you smash it and
you take that money out and you spend it
so a lot of people keep this this idea
of banking you know it's somewhere safe
to keep your money so that it's there
for whenever you need it
another the other 60% of people assume
that when you put your money in that
money same beam it moves across to
somebody who wants to borrow it so you
have pensioner who keeps saving money or
her entire life and then her life
savings have been
lens or some you know young people who
want to buy a house but actually banks
don't work like that
at the moment in the UK money creation
and control is largely in the hands of
private banks about 97 to 98 percent of
money that's created is created as Bank
bank debt money you call it when banks
issue money into circulation as as loans
essentially this is very poorly
understood fact it's not a conspiracy
theory it's not a sauna crackpot theory
it's the way the Bank of England
describes the process when banks make
loans they create new money
a few economists will realize the way
the money system works but if you don't
you don't realize the way that money
works and you think that you know
everybody saving is going to work well
for the economy what really happens once
you understand the way the money system
works is that if everybody starts saving
the amount of money in the economy
shrinks and we have a recession so most
economists don't have this this full
picture they don't understand all
elements of the system they rely on
assumptions on you know receive
knowledge without actually going into
the details and you know money is money
as a centre of the economy if you don't
understand where it comes from who it
creates to creator and when it gets
created then how can you understand the
entire economy when the vast majority of
money that we use now is not cash but
it's electronic money then whoever's
creating the electronic money is getting
the proceeds of creating that money and
obviously creating an electronic money
is much more profitable than creating
cash because you don't have any
production cost at all so while we've
got eighteen billion over the course of
a decade in profit from creating camps
the banks have actually created 1.2
trillion pounds between 1998 and 2007
the UK money supply tripled 1.2 trillion
pounds was created by banks whilst 18
billion pounds was created by the
Treasury a lot of people think when I
say this or when you say this or when
positive money savers that will just a
bunch of nutters but on the 9th of March
in 2009 the governors of Federal Reserve
Ben Bernanke gave a first ever broadcast
interview the governor of the central
bank the United States of America ever
given and the day before that he'd
bailed out AIG and which is a insurance
company not even a bank actually to the
tune of about 160 billion dollars so the
journalist system now mr. Bernanke where
did you get a hundred and sixty billion
dollars to bail
any ID is that tax money that the Fed is
spending is not tax money the banks have
accounts with the Fed much the same way
that you have an account bank so it's
led to a bank we complete the computer
to mark up the ICP account they have
within so it's much more akin other than
exactly the saying was much work into
printing money banks create new money
whenever they extend credit by existing
assets or make payments on their own
account which mostly involves expanding
the assets when a bank buys securities
such as a corporate or government bond
it adds the bond to its assets and
increases the company's bank deposits by
the corresponding amount new commercial
bank money enter circulation when people
spend the credit that has been granted
to them by banks I found that talking on
the doorstep from August last year round
two from the August 2009 round to the
general election or eight nine eight
nine months I supposed knocking on doors
is that when you try to explain how
their own system works there's an almost
in built refusal of people to accept
that such a bizarre situation could
actually exist can't possibly you know
you can't bring bank compass don't
create money out of thin air
that's ridiculous they can't do that
they lend out their depositors money
most people have an idea of how money is
they're used to their own way of
handling money and they try and
implement their own idea of how their
small household economy works into the
national economy and of course it just
doesn't work out it just doesn't work
out at all by 2008 the outstanding loan
portfolio of bank created credit also
known as commercial bank money stood at
over two trillion pounds
as recently as 1982 the ratio of notes
and coins to bank deposits is one to
twelve by 2010 the ratio had risen to
one to 37 that is for every pound of
Treasury created money there was 37
pounds of Bank created money in McClain
years prior to the 2007 crisis the UK
commercial bank money supply expanded by
between 7 to 10 percent every year a
growth rate of 7% is the equivalent of
doubling the money supply every 10 years
the amount of money they're creating as
nothing is just incredible 1.2 trillion
in the last 10 years and there's that
money has been distributed according to
the priorities of the banking sector and
all the priorities of society bank
sector itself grew from nineteen eighty
two point five trillion dollars to 40
trillion dollars by asset in 1980 global
bank assets were worth 20 times the then
global economy by 2006 they were worth
75 times according to the UN as the
following chart shows total bank assets
of UK banks as a percentage of GDP
remain relatively stable at 50 to 60
percent up to the end of the 1960s after
that they shot up dramatically and the
real money in the world to be made today
is not by producing anything at all it's
simply by forms of speculating basically
making money from money that's the most
profitable and and by far in a way the
the biggest form of activity of economic
activity that exists in the world today
today banks are no longer restricted by
how much they can lend and as such how
much new credit they can create out of
nothing
they are restricted solely by their own
willingness to lend the issue with
allowing banks to create money the two
main issues firstly the fact that they
create this money when they make loans
so it guarantees that you know we have
to borrow all our money for the economy
from the banks as such to have a healthy
growing economy the government needs to
put in place strategies to allow for
ever-increasing debt the only way the
government can create additional
purchasing power is by getting itself
and us into more depth the second big
issue with allowing banks to create
money is that they have the incentive to
always create more you know they create
more money if they issue a loan they get
the bonuses and the commissions and the
incentives to create you know to lend as
much as possible you have to develop a
sales culture what did they do they
recruited an amazing guy lovely guy Andy
Hornby who came from Asda
to turn the bank into a supermarket
retailing operation if you trust bankers
to control the money supply the money
supply will just grow and grow and grow
as well the level of that until the
point where it crashes when some people
can't repay the debt and then they'll
stop lending you hear politicians and
journalists saying you know we've we've
been living beyond our means we've
become dependent on debt we need to rein
in our spending and live within our
means it's not possible in the current
system you know the reason why I've
reducing debt now is not because they've
been recklessly borrowing
we haven't borrowed all this money from
you know an army of pensioners who've
been saving up their all whole lives
money in the current system is there you
know it's created when banks make loans
so the only way in the current system
that we can have any money in the
economy you know the only way we can
have money for businesses trade is if we
borrowed it all from the banks
and it's a very opposite of what the
Tory parties are doing today which is
that you have to create savings before
you can help the National Health Service
and it's because economists have
completely confused those things both in
monetary policy terms but also in
economic thinking and because most
people still Harbor the old-fashioned
view that you need savings before you
commit that we have the mess that we're
in today
now one of the reasons why we find it
difficult to understand the banking
system and credit creation is that we
leave school without any money and we go
and get a job working as an apprentice
to a plumber we work really hard all
month and at the end of the month
somebody puts money in our bank and so
for us logic is you work and then you
get money you get savings in reality you
would never have got that job if credit
hadn't been created in the first
instance it's a really important
conceptual misunderstanding and it isn't
something that the public just are
guilty of economists don't understand is
that money doesn't come out of economic
activity a lot of people have come
across this kind of assume that if
you've got people do you got businesses
and you've got people doing things
somehow money somehow emerges out of the
process of people doing things doing it
making things and growing things and
selling things and producing things that
somehow money just emerges it's not it's
like oil in the car you have to put it
in I see David Cameron talking about how
we need an economy not based on debt but
we need an economy based on savings he
just doesn't know what he say it's
ridiculous it's absolutely absurd and it
shows his complete lack of understanding
of how our money system actually works
what he's essentially saying is that we
need an economy with no money if
everyone was saving we'd have math
disappearing of money which is
essentially what a bank write-off is
essentially is people defaulting on
their debt which which essentially is
just money disappearing but if people
weren't taking on the debt then it's
just it's just
to jokah such as a understanding of how
our economy works and how the monetary
system works and how money is actually
created so I really do get a loss out of
watching what people are actually saying
and they're all just regurgitating what
they've learned off each other and you
just hear the same things and it just
makes me it really gets on my nerves
when I hear people talking about yeah we
need more regulations we need to
regulate away banks are actually and the
bonus it's all just one big smokescreen
and working on all the symptoms of a
greater disease which is really you need
to look at the money system the way
money is created and if we don't want
any debt then we're essentially saying
we don't want any money and we want a
moneyless economy with the exception of
the 3% has created debt-free you know
it's a paradox under the current system
if you if we as the public go into
further debt then that's going to put
more money into the economy and we're
going to have a Bing when you have a
boon it's easier to borrow so people get
into even more debt and eventually you
know this the cycle continues ik is
easier and easier to get into debt until
some people get over in bed and then you
know they default they can't repay their
mortgage that's what happened in you
know happened first in subprime America
and then you know that just brings
through a wave of defaults which will
ripple across the entire economy the
banks going to solve and then we're into
a financial crisis and then the bank's
stopped lending and you know they were
excessively lending in the boom and then
they stopped lending and then that court
makes the recession even worse people
lose their jobs and then they become
even more dependent on debt just to
survive basically you know we have a
system where we have to borrow in order
to have an economy we have to be in debt
to the banks and that guarantees you
know massive profit for the banks this
is the boom-bust cycle
I've said before mr. Deputy Speaker no
return to boom and Martha
[Music]
next bank lenders must forever increase
we're paying interest on every single
pound even if even if you think the
money belongs to you somebody somewhere
is paying interest on that money the
banking system has such a huge impact on
the world but only because it supplies
our nation's money supply we have to
protect them we have to subsidize them
we have to allow them to continue
because the disaster of a bank collapse
affects us all in a huge way and anyone
that says that we shouldn't bailed out
the bank doesn't quite understand the
nature of our monetary system that's
like eliminating a huge chunk of our
money but also bailing out the banks is
perpetuating a system which is never
going to work anyway so whatever we do
we're always going to have this cycle
till we separate how money is created
and the activities are banking then the
banks can do as they wish there a normal
business like everyone else there's a
major Democratic issue here as well you
have these private profit-seeking banks
creating up to 200 billion pounds a year
and pumping that into the economy
wherever they want basically wherever it
suits them whether they're pumping it
into in these toxic derivatives
derivatives or putting money into
housing bubbles just making house a more
expensive two hundred billion pounds in
2007 for new money coming into the
economy create that and northing and
where that gets spent determines the
shape of our economy effectively so if
we're going to allow anybody to create
new money at Norfolk and we should all
leave have some Democratic control over
how that money do I mean it would rather
have had that money used for health care
or to deal with some of the
environmental issues to reduce poverty
or do you rather have it to make houses
more expensive so that
this can hold to his lips and
you can see it as a subsidy special
super subsidy to the bank for the right
to create money which should be for the
benefit of the public and spent through
a democratic process
there's also another form of money which
is effectively an electronic version of
cash and it's a type of money that the
commercial banks use themselves to make
payments between each other the high
street banks don't want to be carrying
around huge quantities of money because
it's dangerous and it's inconvenient and
it's expensive you have to hire security
guards for that type of money so what
they do is they pay each other in what
is an electronic version of cash which
in the industry is known as central bank
reserves they keep this electronic cash
in accounts at the Bank of England but
as a member of the public you can't
access this electronic cash you can't
get it an account with the Bank of
England what they do is they they
effectively sell this central bank money
to the banks and they do this by
creating it out of nothing and using
this money to pay for bonds to buy bonds
from the high street banks so the high
street bank will come along with a bond
which is you know effectively government
debt and it will give it to the Bank of
England and in return the Bank of
England will time some new numbers into
the bank's account at the Bank of
England so effectively they're creating
central bank reserves out nothing the
Bank of England creates central bank
reserves by increasing the available
credit in the settlement banks account
with the Bank of England the settlement
Bank in return post bonds or sells
assets as collateral for the reserves a
total of 46 banks hold central reserve
accounts at the Bank of England smaller
or foreign banks hold accounts with one
of these 46 banks to allow them to
accept or make payments in pound
sterling
prior to March 2009 the Bank of England
would ask each of the major settlement
banks how much reserve currency they
needed the settlement banks would then
swap a bond for the reserve currency and
agreed to repurchase the bond for a
specific amount at a specified future
date the settlement banks would then
receive interest at base or policy rate
for the central bank reserves they held
since the crisis settlement banks
central reserves have shot up
dramatically
when bank customers transfer funds from
their account to another person's
account a process called intraday
clearing occurs the amount of central
reserve currency Bank a has at the Bank
of England is reduced by the
corresponding amount that banks be
received this is the importance of
central reserve currency to banks before
the credit crisis if a bank was short of
central reserves at the Bank of England
to meet its obligations then the bank
would have to loan reserves from other
banks with interest
if you sell something on eBay you know
that that deal is not complete until you
get some money put into your account you
know most people actually want to see
the money in their account before
they're happy to close on a deal now the
banks are pretty much the same but they
want to see the money in their account
at the Bank of England before they
consider a deal complete so for example
if you if you're buying a house from
somebody who banks with a different bank
then what will happen after you spent a
quarter of a million on a house is you
will tell your bank transfer some money
to the house sellers bank and what the
bank will do is actually instruct the
Bank of England to move two hundred
fifty thousand from their account at the
Bank of England to the bank of the house
sound and that money will actually move
across between the accounts at the Bank
of England when that money's moved
across and the banks will consider that
that payment has been made and it's been
settled
they don't really deal in the kind of
money that we have in our accounts they
deal in there's special money that's can
only be used at the central bank there
are millions of people across the
country all transferring money to each
other using only a few major banks these
banks can keep a tally on their computer
systems and usually many of the
movements cancel each other out at the
end of the day the five major banks RBS
Lloyd's HSBC Barclays and Santander
holds over 85% of all deposits
as there are a limited number of banks
in the system the central reserve money
can only be moved around them in a
closed loop the money is just
circulating through the system over and
over again and if you think about it a
one pound coin could be used to make a
billion pounds of payments if it was
circulated a billion times that's
effectively the system that you have
narrows you have a small pool of real
money that is going round and round the
system and it's been used to make a huge
quantity payments on our behalf
just before the crisis there was only 20
billion pounds in the accounts at the
central bank September 2007 thousands of
Northern Rock customers queue up to
withdraw their cash the company had been
forced to seek emergency funding it's
the first run on a British bank in a
hundred and forty years
[Music]
if they don't have enough of this
central bank money then effectively they
can't make payments and if that happens
and pretty quickly the entire system
seizes up so the Bank of England has the
responsibility of making sure there's
enough of this money in the system the
requirements for banks to hold a
specific amount of reserve has changed
many times since 1947 at that time banks
needed to hold a minimum ratio of 30
percent to reserve cash or Treasury
bonds to deposit in 2006 the corridor
system was introduced in which banks
could set their own reserve targets each
month the rules changed again in March
2009 when the Bank of England introduced
quantitative easing quantitative easing
in effect gives settlement banks the
central reserve currency for free the
central reserve currency is what is
referred to as the real money in the
fractional reserve model but the fact is
banks can have as much of this as they
want and central reserve currency itself
is a form of fiat money which is backed
by nothing as a consequence there is no
longer a meaningful fractional reserve
if you look over the history last
hundred fifty years or so you start off
with the development of a gold standard
that really comes to for in the 1880s
1890s we're essentially countries pegged
themselves to a particular defined value
of gold and then they had an agreement
to fix that value to hold that value in
to trade gold amongst themselves to make
sure the balances are all there and also
to try and restrict or expand a contrite
activity in their own economies to make
sure that the balance that particular
fixed prices is maintained that
disintegrates in after the First World
War
this is where the whole thing breaks
apart very major dislocation in the
international monetary system at that
point not really resolved until you get
Bretton Woods agreements at the end of
the second world war in which everything
is paid to the dollar and the dollar is
paid to the vault so you kind of one
removed from gold backing or saying that
there is a definite you know sort of
solid commodity money behind the paper
money in the credit money that we're all
using over here you've had one removed
from it after Hiroshima Tokyo wondered
when the next atom bomb would fall they
did that wonder along
[Music]
in 1944 at Bretton Woods the US and the
UK began to negotiate how to govern the
world economy the world monetary system
and came up with the World Bank and the
IMF in a series of other institutions
designed to manage the global currency
and there was still a gold standard but
this gold standard was going to be tied
to the dollar all of the world's gold
had moved from London to Fort Knox and
all of the world currencies were tied to
the dollars this system was designed to
manage the sorts of imbalances to avoid
credit crunches or for countries that
credit crunches are known as balance of
trade deficits ie when they can't pay
their bills and their currency collapses
the currencies were managed and the
system was stable as long as the
Americans played the role of oversight
now who knows the great story about how
that all came to an end so the quantity
of money that was needed to pay for the
Vietnam War that's exactly what I was
trying to get at oil shocks was another
one that meant that the Americans were
no longer respecting their roles or
playing their role governing the
monetary system they were inflating the
value of their own currency but
ostensibly it was meant to be tied tied
to gold into every other currency so
what did the French do the French were a
little bit worried that President Nixon
wasn't entirely on it and they were
worried that they were that precisely
what we described that Nixon was
printing money when he shouldn't have
been was going on and they were worried
there wasn't enough gold to honor the
exchange rate of the French franc so
they sent a gunboat to New York Harbor
so ever so politely asked for our gold
factories did they get their gold back
going guess
they didn't and the Bretton Woods system
came to an end and this is the point in
which we enter the modern era of the
financial system historically money
creation was pegged to a commodity often
gold but today it is pegged to nothing
which means there is nothing backing our
money this piece of paper is just a
piece of paper where does this leave us
if money is based on nothing why do we
think it has any value sorry because we
can still go on exchange it what what
something else was going to shout great
little less in fact the word for credit
comes from belief correct
since the collapse of the dollar gold
standard in 1971 and the deregulation of
the financial system money creation has
grown exponentially the World Economic
Forum meeting in Davos at the present
time have called on a need for the
credit within the economy the global
economy to be expanded by 100 trillion
dollars 100 trillion US dollars a
trillion is 12 North so hundred trillion
if you want to imagine is a 1 followed
by 14 north they believe this credit
expansion will create a boom because
there is now more money in the economy
with which to make investments it's
fascinating this the emergence of
digital currency how its transformed
everything really because it just
completely Unleashed private banks to
dominate and create the money system
that works for them and works for the
people who run private banks if you want
to grow an economy under the current
scale we have to have growing debt you
can you know this is something that very
very few people really understand
especially not the politicians who are
managing the economy which is a scary
thought as the money supply grows more
money is available which can be invested
in productive avenues however it can
also be used to gamble and drive up
asset prices
[Music]
inflation is a rise in the general level
of prices of goods and services in an
economy over a period of time when the
general price level rises each unit of
currency buys fewer goods and services
as the money supply grows and there is
more currency available more money is
available for investment which can lead
to growth but more money is also
available for purchases of goods and
speculation which leads to inflation
essentially inflation is what happens
when too much money is chasing too few
goods and services so there's too much
money for the the actual output of the
economy however in practice inflation is
much more skewed and complicated
measuring inflation is not a science and
the way it is recorded closed is a
dilemma the Consumer Price Index or CPI
is measured from a sample of goods and
services each category of goods and
services is given away in data which
determines the overall impact of the
price of data for a specific category
however this measure is deemed to
provide a consistently low figure for
inflation interestingly house prices
mortgage repayments and council tax are
excluded yet apps and dating agency fees
are included the retail price index or
RPI inflation index is another way of
measuring inflation and scores
consistently higher values than the
Consumer Price Index recently many
pension schemes have adjusted their
annual payout increases from RPI to CC
ice this is another cost-saving measure
which will leave pensioners worse off in
future
the CPI index and inflation is not
geared towards providing an accurate
picture of inflation and the
deterioration in the purchasing power of
money
and the seven-year
mm and 2007 the money supply doubled and
the bank's you know the central bank the
Bank of England in this time was under
the impression that they had it under
control because they were saying you
know prices aren't going up that much of
course they were only looking at prices
in you know in your local corner shop
they weren't looking at the price of
housing and housing is the biggest
expenditure that most people will make
increasing house prices it may make you
feel like you're you're becoming
wealthier but as your wealth increases
the effect is that your children's
wealth is actually decreasing so in fact
there's no net gain in wealth because
your children are going to have to pay
even more when they want to buy a house
so in effect there's no there's no kind
of net increase they're gonna have to
earn even more they're gonna have to go
into even more debt so that rising house
prices do not create additional net GDP
value to the economy actually what they
do is they redistribute wealth towards
those people who already have houses are
you wealthier people and remove it from
poor people who can't afford to get on
the housing ladder so it's another
example of a very regressive policy
actually to allow house prices to simply
inflate it makes everybody feel kind of
like things are going well and people
spend more money on other stuff they
take equity out of their houses but it
it's not creating new jobs it's not
enhancing the quality of the economy
it's not helping our balance of trade
it's not helping the public deficit it's
a zero-sum game as of August 2011 eighty
five point five percent of consumer bank
lending were secured as mortgages on
dwellings if you have somebody creating
money that can only be spent on one
thing which is housing then the price of
that thing is going to go up between
2000 and 2010 they created over a
trillion pounds of new money 500 billion
pounds just in the three years before
the crisis that's why house prices went
up the way they were there's nothing you
know special about houses it was just
all this funny money being pumped into
that market if money is spent into the
economy into into a lot of money goes
into houses for example into mortgages
that's an increase in the amount of
money in the economy without a
corresponding increase in activity in
output
in GDP it's non GDP based spending
that's what causes inflation in the UK
we've had it in spades we've had you
know this massive housing boom and that
the main cause for the housing boom in
my opinion is the huge amount of
speculative credit created by the banks
to go into houses if houses with cheaper
they would be easier to build more a bit
more of them would be built there would
be less huge houses with hardly any
people in them London would not be the
center of a kind of very rich
speculative orgy where all the richest
people in the world won't want to get a
property in London because it's seen as
a great asset you know houses would be
seen as places to live primarily rather
than places to invest important thing to
think about is if you're a bank and
you've got to make a loan you have
choices you can you can give that loan
to a small business and you'll know that
the risk to you of that loan failing
defaulting is actually quite high
because that small business the owners
of that business have limited liability
which means if the business goes bust
you as a bank are getting nothing back
essentially you know that that's it so
that's kind of high risk compared to
loaning your money to somebody with some
collateral with a house behind them like
a mortgage so there's a there's a kind
of simple incentive for banks to prefer
putting money into housing than into a
small business now that's a real problem
or if you if you if you widen it out
across a whole economy because it means
there's an incentive you know to put
money into speculative rather than
productive investment so again we have
to think about how we create a monetary
system that is more balanced between
those two kinds of speculative and
productive investment the government
showing very little enormous reluctance
to regulate the housing market and to
again regulate the amount of money that
that banks put into house
we don't decide who creates credit for
what now we leave that to a couple of
chaps in a bank to decide basically a
bubble occurs when there is very high
inflation in the price of a specific
good or service over a short period of
time the idea of the two leads and
they're relevant is that we saw the
first-ever financial bubble and crash
the craze for tulips black tulips being
a mythical ideal of what somebody could
genetically engineer through cultivation
after many generations became a mania in
the Netherlands in the 1630 what they
didn't realize was that many of the very
very rare patterns on tulips were caused
by a virus and weren't genetic at all
but they traded in them to the extent
that tulip bulbs got to the point where
they were worth ten times the average
annual salary of a person working in the
Netherlands there was a futures market
in tulip bulbs because obviously you
plant them now but you don't know what's
going to come out the ground so we see
already 400 years ago that a money
system or a financial system is not
something that exists in the abstract
somewhere out there in the answer but
something that was to do with safe power
trades and how they interact with each
other
unlike tulips which are disposable
luxury houses are both a necessity and a
luxury and as such they are ideal as a
vehicle for money and bubble creation
our dwellings and perhaps the most
prized possession of value most people
aspire to
in sating house prices in this way
allows the nation to expand its money
supply without affecting inflation data
the additional purchasing power created
increases the perceived wealth in
relation to other nations and thus it
creates relative power it is a way of
increasing monetary power without
investing in the productive growth of
industry but certainly if you look at
Britain and America as outstanding
examples of this these are countries are
very high rates of private home
ownership so you've got a good base to
try and perform this sort of policy off
the back of I think was quite deliberate
in the case of the u.s. always explicit
as Alan Greenspan as head of the Federal
Reserve when confronted by a stock
market crash at the end of the 1990s
quite deliberately slashed interest
rates to almost zero
everyone can borrow very very cheaply in
particular it's very easy to borrow
against a house because this is a
vasectomies potentially something that
bank and sale okay we're not just
lending your money unsecured you
actually do have a house and that's
great because if we can repossess it
you would tell you this when you take
them or is but they can do this and that
problem is then what fuels expansion
such as it is inside the US and inside
the UK where something similar takes
place for the next decade or so putting
also reflection of an underlying
weakness of these governments that they
simply like the will and possibly the
ability buffing it more from sound to a
will to challenge financial markets to
challenge big capital and say we're
going to do something different now and
you're going to have to go along with it
because we've been democratically
elected and you lot frankly haven't and
we have a mandate to do this and we're
going to make this happen
yes remembers our part of the play
what you yappin about you all in Florida
in Holland or in the Netherlands what we
had over a period of trying to get
independence initially from Spain and
trying to raise money to get an army to
free themselves was financial innovation
they innovated public lotteries to get
money together they had public
subscription this was the idea that led
to the idea of public shares a piece of
the action that anybody could invest in
that meant that something like 2/3 of
the population was investing into it
bulbs by the 1630s after independence
these instruments were applied to
financing expansion why would such a
small country able to hold its own
against so much bigger countries for
example Spain and Portugal that had the
benefits of their empires for over a
century in respect of the Netherlands
why could they compete on what resource
basis
well they had a more efficient a more
involved and a broader based financial
system with these instruments that
they'd innovated that I love them to
bring more money to bear at one point
than anybody else more quickly
[Music]
but true
now inflation can be avoided if the
amount of money that goes into the
economy is regulated in a way that it
doesn't exceed the actual activity
that's happening in the economy now the
best way to do that in my opinion is to
make sure that money is issued into the
economy only for productive investment
for productive goods and services so
money goes in to health or small
business startup which creates jobs
which creates additional purchasing
power which means that there's no
inflation during their history almost
all central banks have employed forms of
direct credit regulation the central
bank would determine desired nominal GDP
growth then calculate the necessary
amount of credit creation to achieve
this and then allocate this credit
creation goes across the various banks
and title banks and across the
industrial sectors unproductive credit
was suppressed thus it was difficult or
impossible to obtain bank credit for
large-scale
purely speculative transactions such as
today's large-scale bank funding to
hedge funds the World Bank recognized in
a 1993 study that this mechanism of
intervention in credit allocation was at
the core of the East Asian economic
miracle there's all sorts of things that
governments have done in the past very
successfully in a number of cases and
not often not unsuccessfully in this
country but in the examples that spring
to mind like South Korea Japan often in
East Asia where governments be quite
targeted about how they go to rebalance
the economy and picking sectors and
deciding where the investments should
take place I think that has to start
happening the UK because when a
demand-side recession rather than
looking at crisis of it and supply you
have to have a system where credit is
put into productive avenues where credit
is put into building high-speed rail
links where credit is put into
building houses rather than giving
people money to inflate the prices of
houses so it it's quite simple really in
that way and the current system is
simply set up not to do that basically
the creation of money by private banks
for non-productive usage causes real
inflation and as such it is a tax on the
purchasing power of the medium of
exchange
the thing is view care of a quite stark
actually thirds average median real
incomes poor so that's you know what bit
in the middle for most people decline
their last eight years is cut also
they're now in quite sharp decline as we
go into the recession bring the
sharpness really since it looks like
since about the 1930s but it that way so
real income is declining bank created
fiat currency allows the private banks
to suck wealth from the economy and over
time results in a gradual decrease in
the standard of living as people become
poorer they become even more dependent
on debt and they at a time when
efficiency and machination have improved
dramatically if you need to go back to
nineteen sixties and we were expected to
we're looking forward to an age of
leisure what will be what they were
talking television programs thing what
people can do with all their spare time
you know and now we've got more people
working harder than ever spending more
than ever which looks great you know
when spending whatever did I go you know
but if you're not actually benefiting
from what you're spending if you happen
to spend the money on childcare goes on
commuting costs you know and so forth
just the cost that people didn't in the
past used to have to pay because they
could walk to work and you know one
member the family remain was able to
stay at home and be a permanent
homemaker and you're actually much near
not actually any better off you know if
one's under finance of such enormous
pressures nowadays you know I
unconscious that say my four nephews and
nieces are facing difficult times she's
going to find themselves having to work
you know very hard just to keep just to
keep a roof over than just to get a roof
over there just to keep a roof over
their head people are getting poor in
real terms is because pies it's always
going up because all this new funny
money is being pumped into the system by
the banks and they're creating it all
this debt so at the same time as prices
are going up and
getting more expensive we're getting
further and further into debt and you
know our our wealth and the return that
we get from actually working is getting
less and less all the time and you can't
deal with poverty when you have a
financial system and the money system
that distributes money from the poor to
the very rich any distribution that you
try and do in the opposite direction is
it's effectively festering the wind if
you look at issues like you know
increasing inequality one obvious way to
tackle inequality is to have say for
example a redistributed tax system you
know you tax the rich you give some
money to the poor you move their money
down down the scale that's all very well
but if you completely overlook the fact
that there's another redistributive
system which is taking money from the
poor and giving it to the rich then
you're not really going to tackle this
inequality and the way a debt-based
money system works it guarantees that
for every pound of money there's going
to be a pound of debt and that debt is
typically going to end up with you know
the poor the sort of lower middle
classes those people end up with the
debt and they end up paying interest on
that money which then goes back to the
banking sector and gets distributed to
the people working in the city or in
Wall Street and what this what the
system does overall is it distributes
money from from the poor to the rich
essentially distributes money from you
know the poorer regions of the UK back
to the city of London and it also
distributes money from all the small
businesses you know all their little
factories around the UK and distributes
that money back into the financial
sector we have a system whereby the
activity of actually supplying the KERS
under the very same roof as the same
organization that's responsible for
profiting from putting together
borrowers and lenders ie a bank so a
bank creates our nation's money supply
as well as making loans for profit the
government cannot allow the banking
system to fail because if it did over
97% of all money would disappear
this is why in the event of a crisis the
risk is transferred to the taxpayer but
even during normal times banks received
numerous guarantees and benefits beyond
the right to create money well by the
way I know the Bank of America is a very
big bank it happens I've got $32 a
myself just between us what assurance do
I have that this money is safe well all
deposits up to ten thousand dollars are
assured are insured by the federal
government in Washington that's my
guarantee yes have you heard that the
federal government is about two hundred
eighty billion dollars in the hole
[Music]
[Applause]
thanks receive large safety nets from
the government the taxpayer guarantees
eighty five thousand pounds of deposit
insurance and the Bank of England
provides liquidity insurance in case of
bank runs out of reserve currency
someone wrote that a big investment bank
is like a giant vampire squid wrapped
around the face of humanity hypnotizing
politicians who throw money as the bank
no strings attached no matter what
damage is done
the planet forcing tasks to things that
make life better
goodbye school goodbye playgrounds
goodbye Josh the bankers that we bailed
out then gave themselves bonuses that
were bigger than the first wave of
public spending cuts Britain alone gave
the bank's more money than it costs to
put a man on the moon six times over
where did our money go who let the banks
get away with it why can vampires squids
every useful no government yet is brave
enough to take them perhaps they need a
plan
the spending-cuts agenda is an attempt
by the government to shift steps from
its account to better the public this is
the government's response to the bank
bailouts and is necessary in a debt
based monetary system where increased
purchasing power is the result of
growing debt and we're a diversification
of debt provides overall stability and
market confidence policies such as
student fee increases and the
privatization of public services assets
and industry follow the same model the
problem we're facing I think is that
there's been business transference from
the public debt to the private debt
which is a which is essentially a way of
transferring risk actually away from
sort of UK plc in the government on to
the heads of individuals and it's going
to be the most vulnerable individuals
who are going to have the most death
thus it's a very unprecedented
that the government's embarking on where
the risk is moved on to those who are
most vulnerable and if there is another
financial shot there's an oil shock for
example the people who will pay the
penalty are those are the poorest people
in society or homeowners for example
they will fall into negative equity if
interest rates go up even one or two
percent they'll be real really big
problems so I don't think it's a
sensible way forward at the moment at
all and it's regressive and it's
certainly not fair in the terms that
that the government is talking about and
it's certainly not a case of we're in
this together as more of the country's
resources and industries are privatized
the private sector takes on more debt as
a result more money is created and there
is a room
some private equity companies have taken
this theory to the extreme engaging in a
practice known as a leveraged buyout
where a company is purchased at an often
inflated price and the purchase price is
transferred to the business of the deck
the company becomes responsible for the
funding of its own purchase these debts
are often so great that the company
needs to reduce staff salaries and
research activities when you have to
factor interest as a business if you
have to factor interest repayment into
your goods and services then you have to
charge a potentially higher price as you
take on more and more debt an increase
in the diversification of debt results
in an increase in the money supply when
the money supply increases more money is
available for productive activities and
consumption which is the condition for a
boom it's questionable whether we're
going to get out of this recession or
whether we'll just keep ticking along
the way that we are now however if we do
then when we come out of this recession
when growth starts again look at what
happens to debt it will rise and it will
keep rising and the faster the economy
is growing the faster the debt will rise
and then give it another 3 to 5 years
we'll be back where we were you know
there will become too much people start
defaulting again it's kind of the system
that we're locked into now is we can't
you can't grow the economy without
growing the debt and the debt is the
very thing that will bring down the
economy the only option going forward is
to reform it to stop banks from creating
money as debt by fixing the monetary
system we can prevent the banks from
ever causing another financial crisis
and we can also make the current your
public service cuts and the tax rises
and the increase in national debt
unnecessary
the current monetary system allows the
banking sector to extract wealth from
the economy whilst providing nothing
productive in return why is it that
we've got all this technology you know
all this new efficiency and yet it now
requires two people to finance a
household whereas in the 50s it only
needed one person working and the reason
for that is not because you know these
washing machines and everything are more
expensive it's because of all the debt
and it's because you're effectively the
banking sectors creaming it off from
everybody else so a growing banking
sector isn't a sign you know it's not a
good thing if the banking sector is
growing it's either that it's becoming a
less efficient or it's becoming a
parasite on the rest of the economy and
that's you know we can talk about the
banking sector becoming 4% 5% 6% of GDP
what's happening to the rest of the
economy is becoming 96 95 94 percent of
GDP we've got to get switched on for
this now you know if you run a if you
want to have a chance of tackling any of
the other big social issues you've got
to figure out the money issue the
poorest in the world pay for crises even
when they've not benefited from the
often regular reckless and speculative
booms like the housing boom in Ireland
that preceded that crisis you know over
the last 30 years we've seen income
differentials increase so that the rich
have got much much richer and ordinary
people haven't they stayed the same or
they've they've got poorer and one of
the ways that the economy was kept going
was by providing cheap credit which
provide providing debt to those very
people who couldn't really afford things
anymore and so they kept buying and when
it collapses it's those same people that
that have to pay once again even though
in many ways they were the victims the
first time as a result of the crisis the
Bank of England has brought corporate
debt and repackaged it at lower rates of
interest yet the average person is being
asked to pay more than ever to borrow on
overdrafts and credit cards
depths between the very wealthy arm or
between governments can always be
renegotiated and always have them
throughout world history there are not
anything set in stone it's generally
speaking when you have debts owed by the
poor to the rifts that suddenly debts
become a sacred obligation more
important than anything else the idea of
renegotiating them becomes unthinkable
can you pin down exactly what would keep
investors happy to make them feel more
confident that's a tough one personally
it doesn't matter that that's the I'm a
trader I don't really care about that if
I see an opportunity to make money I go
with that so for most traders we don't
really care that much how they gonna fix
be having a fixed economy how they're
going to fix the whole situation our job
is to make money from it and personally
I've been dreaming of this one for three
years if you know what to do you can
make a lot of money from I might I have
a confession which is I go to bed every
night I dream of another recession I
dream of another moment like this I
dream of another recession a dream of
another moment like this we can make a
lot of money from this well Virginia
hurt somebody real bad you ought to
way in which you can look across Europe
now and see that the new prime minister
is not selected essentially imposed
Papademos former employee of Goldman
Sachs the new Prime Minister and Finance
Minister of Italy Mario Monti former
employee of Goldman Sachs the new
president of the european central a
former employee thought the tactics
quite you know the kind of seen these
people poppy up absolutely everywhere
that's the way that change what we have
and take all power and all freedoms away
from the people and collect everything
into the hands of one small group with
absolute power without what's been
interesting at all this I suppose is the
question of democracy that's been opened
up very starkly in your that you have a
government's bankers who essentially
imposed on bankers who more or less got
into this mess but it rather proved me
but that's a good first approximation to
it and then you say okay bankers of the
people who therefore going to get as out
of it and instantly they're going to run
your your countrymen if there's a
serious question democracy since opened
up here by the way the banking crisis
drove more than a hundred million people
back into poverty the mortality
statistics of people who go into poverty
rise hugely for a whole range of reasons
so the banking crisis isn't just about
making poor it was about killing
people's realm and guess what
we haven't really cuts the bottom of it
we never held anybody to account and we
haven't done the radical reforming job
that we really needed to do because we
mistakenly thought if we destabilize the
position any further it will make
matters worse and guess you took the
decisions all the people who are they in
the first place I think you ought to
know that the business of one of these
businessmen is murder
their weapons are modern they are
thinking 2000 years out-of-date the way
that money works and how we how we use
it to do certain types of transactions
can be really very important in terms of
how over time it's steered society in
certain directions so how I use money
why I use money for and who's
controlling money and where it ends up
over time can completely transform
society the kinds of businesses that get
preferred by certain types of money
systems so at the moment we have a money
system that prefers large businesses
that can take a lot of their wealth
offshore because that's a more efficient
for them to do that but that means that
money ends up leaving communities
sometimes I think is quite amazing that
there is very little way of any
individual directing money towards their
locality you cannot invent I cannot
there's no way for me to actually say
well I know I've got a little bit
savings I want to invest in Norwich I
want to invest in businesses that want
to help here there's no mechanism to for
people to kind of invest within their
locality you put your money into a
mainstream bank and the money goes off
to where over who knows what this is
shout Brixton pound who knows what it is
it's worth one pound this one so it is
exchangeable for one Sterling pound is
this money what on what basis people
accept it there's over 200 shops
independent traders so it represented
something like we've agreed we can
choose to represent it to be something
and that depends on our mutual consent
the Bristol pound project has been
fascinating because I first started
reading about money and realized I
didn't understand it very well when I
started trying to set up a Bristol pound
so it's been a bit of a journey for me
and I think everybody else who's been
doing it we can actually build our own
currency systems which work to improve
the relationships between people within
communities why do people work and share
a lot of the economic benefits from the
wealth they're creating and they're
constantly using that wealth of creating
to build positive relationships with
other people within that area and they
can see the impact of the money so when
you spend something if I spend you know
20% of my wealth on a certain thing I'll
see what that 20% of my wealth doing
I'll say oh well it's it's actually
having a really positive effect because
those people who are using that money to
go and do something else which is really
good or I can see that it's actually
trashing the local woodland because I
was paying that carpenter to go and cut
down all the woods and I really like
going to the woods with my dogs actually
maybe I I don't want to do that so you
can include all what normally just just
get brushed aside as externalities oh
yes well externalities are actually our
life it's what we know in communities
all those externalities are what
actually make us live a good life I
think we want it to achieve help achieve
certain things you want it to help build
community we want to support independent
businesses want it to help preference
them over big and transnational
corporations because it's they've got
hold of their money and they can use it
with each other and it doesn't disappear
out of large management structures and
go offshore and end up in an account in
the Cayman Islands when we talk to
businesses actually they get it pretty
intuitively
the Bank of England of course may decide
this is a threat to the stability of
sterling at the moment they're reserving
their right to take an opinion on it
they've sent us all their rules and
regulations and what we've done is we've
got a team of lawyers who've given loads
of work pro bono and said okay we'll
work on this and we'll make it as
watertight as you possibly can in the
end what the Bank of England decided to
do we don't know you feel kind of
widespread proliferation of alternatives
is normally during periods of capitalist
crisis so the Great Depression you've
had become a rival of script currencies
particularly in North America and
experiments in Europe as well quite a
lot and most of those got extinguished
through you know basically being made
illegal by the kind of the authority of
the kind of central banks and the
political forces deciding that they
really didn't want those experienced to
carry on its monopoly state bank
currency that we have is very good at
some things it's it's very easy to trade
internationally with it it helps big
businesses it cuts down their
transaction costs but it's not so good
for independent businesses and it's not
so good for localities so if we have a
money system which where the rules value
community and connection between people
within communities over time you build
up on a better own and more wealthy
basis for a diverse local economy
a bank run can take three forms
customers can withdraw their money in
cash however this will not reduce the
digital money supply it will merely
transfer ownership or they can shift
their money from the large institutions
to smaller more ethical banks such as
credit unions mutual banks or
independent building societies our next
guest has a New Year's resolution though
she says will create a better financial
system and it's this move your money out
of the nation's big banks and into your
local community bank shifting commercial
bank money to these institutions will
reduce the monopolistic grip of the big
five banks you should clean shun Garcia
worried don't weigh junk wagon
[Music]
are your abortions Italian one
Mohammedan powerful to open down to
enhance our new Sonata Lucia third type
of bank run is the international bank
run according to at least one u.s.
senator this is what caused the
September 2008 meltdown look I was there
when the secretary and the chairman the
Federal Reserve came those days and
talked with members of Congress about
what was going on it was about September
15 here's the facts and we don't even
need to talk about these things on
Thursday at about 11 o'clock in the
morning the Federal Reserve noticed a
tremendous drawdown of a money market
accounts in the United States to the
tune of 550 billion dollars was being
drawn out in a matter of an hour to the
Treasury opened up its window to help a
pump 205 billion dollars in the system
and quickly realize that they could not
stem the tide we were having an
electronic run on the banks they decided
to close the operation closed down the
money accounts and announced a guarantee
of two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars per count so there wouldn't be
further panic out there and that's what
actually happened if they had not done
that that their estimation was that by
two o'clock that afternoon five and a
half trillion dollars would have been
drawn out of the money market system of
the United States would have collapsed
the entire economy of the United States
and within 24 hours the world economy
would have collapsed when money is
withdrawn internationally from one
currency to another the reserve currency
shifts from the National Bank of one
country to the reserve account of the
foreign bank foreign banks have
relationships with local banks that
allow them to hold foreign reserve
currencies whilst not being a part of
the central bank scheme at the local
central bank
for example when 1,000 pounds is
transferred into euros a UK bank will
agree an exchange rate with a euro area
bank perhaps 1.15 euros to the pound the
UK bank will then transfer a thousand
pounds of the central reserve currency
to the UK partner Bank of the European
Bank whilst the European bank will
transfer 1,150 euros of reserve currency
to the European partner Bank of the UK
bank what happens when currencies and
the exchange rate system is no longer
managed what are some of the first
consequences devaluations speculation
imbalances where some countries would
accrue more and more and more what what
would they accrue other currencies other
currencies the reserve currency needs to
be spent in the country of origin or
exchanged into other currencies most
foreign banks do not have deposit taking
accounts outside of their national
borders and as such the foreign reserves
they hold do not come back to them in
the form of deposits when a country
accumulates trade imbalances it either
accumulates foreign reserve currencies
in the case of surplus or spends its own
reserves in the case of negative trade
balances balance of trade is is
basically a due difference between what
you're selling abroad and what you're
buying from abroad now the feature on
the UK is that for a very long period of
time it's had a deficit of something
called a visible balance of trade which
is trading things but things that you
can see so that is goods that you'd
recognize stuff you can claim containers
it's cars computers things that you'd
see in a shop that's been a substantial
deficit for I think opened up in the did
open up in the early 1980s and
essentially it hasn't hasn't gone away
since and if anything has got wider and
wider
foreign-exchange reserves cannot be
directly used for domestic spending the
money can only be spent abroad or on
imports a country with a large balance
of trade deficit relies on its creditors
to spend the imbalances accrued in its
own market with ever happening proposals
in the past to try and create a
mechanism for those imbalances to do too
much help so Keynes for instance John
Maynard Keynes at the end of the Second
World War his original proposal for what
became Bretton Woods in the set
institutions set up there like the IMF
and the World Bank was that there will
be a kind of international clearing
Union this is particularly relating to
the trade side rather than sort of the
financial side directly but the
principle was that you know once the
trade balances had opened up everybody
would bank through an international
clearing Bank and that's what kind of
force everyone to eventually reconcile
the imbalances that needed in the real
economy but no such mechanism exists the
accumulated net trade imbalance for the
UK is around 800 billion pounds
in essence what has happened is that
over many years
some countries have had big trade
surpluses and others big trade deficits
the countries with trade deficits have
been spending more than they've been
earning so they've had to borrow from
abroad and they've been doing this year
after year countries like that of the
United States ourselves and some other
countries in Europe I cannot go on and
there are two ways in which this can
come to an end either and we're seeing
this as some other countries in Europe
if they can't find new ways to become
competitive then their ability to repay
the debts called into question another
way of doing it which we followed is a
real a credible plan to repay our debts
and the value of sterling has fallen by
25 percent to make our exports more
competitive and attractive to overseas
buyers and it to be more attractive for
British consumers to buy from British
producers rather than overseas producers
that is what we have done to put in
place framework to rebalance our economy
and I'm sure that's the right way to do
it currency wars also known as
competitive devaluation in the condition
where countries compete against each
other to achieve a relatively low
exchange rate for their currency as the
price to buy a particular currency Falls
so too does the real price of exports
from that country domestic industry
receives a boost in demand both at home
and abroad
it's Mays British exports appear rather
cheaper so they've kind of recovered a
little bit but because the rest of the
world is now looking really quite
rotated so they fall back down again
so what we're looking at is something
that you can almost kind of anarchy and
in a way the increasing anything this is
what's happened over the last few years
where even brazilian finance minister
has been most vocal about this talking
about currency wars talking about the
desire of national governments when
confronted by major recession they think
if we could export more we could dig
ourselves out of this recession if we
want to export more we depreciate our
currency that makes our Goods cheaper
everyone else buys them we'll all be
better off now the issue here is if you
depreciate it's like everybody else
appreciates against you
s-stuff becomes more expensive so
they're not too happy about that they
also want to depreciate and this is
where you can see a competitive rounded
evaluations breaking out to decrease the
value of its national currency a
national central bank sells reserve
currency into the market it creates this
currency out of nothing
by typing numbers into a computer during
the long phase of commodity money the
exchange rate would depend on the amount
of gold silver or copper contained in
the coins of each country similarly
after the advent of paper money and the
gold standard the exchange rate depended
on the amount of gold the government
promised to pay the holder of the
banknotes these amounts did not vary
greatly in the short term and as such
exchange rates between currencies were
relatively stable after the Second World
War
currencies were pegged to the dollar the
medulla was backed by gold this system
came to an end in 1971 so we have a
modern financial system where money is
now chaotically organized there is no
exchange rate because there's no gold
standard system to sustain so we don't
need it in fact we believe the market
will resolve all of the problems of
exchange whether your currency should be
worth more than mine is a reflection of
your economy relative to mine and if
that changes the currency and the
exchange rate can change and if we need
that to happen it will happen magically
by the efficiency of market and profit
seeking and you guys know the rest I
think a currencies value in relation to
another currency is determined by the
market if more people want to buy a
currency than sell it its value
increases if more people want to sell
its value decreases the value is set by
individual banks as they buy and sell
currencies they will adjust the exchange
rate
in the last last study I read in 2007
each day on currency market three point
two trillion dollars are traded each say
who knows what the global GDP you fifty
again brucey higher six three that's
closer the point is think about that
exchange happening every single day
there's about 260 business days a year
it takes a few weeks to match the global
value of every economic transaction that
happens everywhere every day in a year
and it takes a few weeks obviously all
of this trade currency said it's very
rate if you go abroad you exchange into
another currency or some form of
currency trading you're swapping your
pounds into whatever your rose or yen or
whatever it might be that happens very
regularly and that's a conventional part
of the trading process and large
corporations have to do this or on a
regular basis
where it becomes something that people
question and where you get people saying
we'll hang on this is speculation is
when you get people realizing that
currencies move around next to each
other if they move around in value make
sure each other there's always
opportunity to try and make money out of
those changes in value and therefore you
you can speculate on it and that's
that's more sort of questionable end of
the market that's the bit in the market
that things like a financial
transactions tax will try and chop away
at because the assumption there and it's
it's kind of not incorrect is that this
just produces instability for everyone
else but these people want volatility in
the market is that how they make their
money it want to encourage it they do
encourage it by trading speculating way
they did by 2010 the foreign exchange
market had grown to be the largest and
most liquid market in the world with an
average of four trillion dollars of
currency being exchanged every day
volatility creates a need what does it
do to countries especially perhaps small
ones like developing countries if there
are suddenly huge and instantly
fluctuating financial flow what do they
have to do to cope increase their
production and sell more lowering the
price and becoming possibly even poorer
once you sell to let the international
system it becomes really quite a
peculiar quite peculiar thing in a lot
of it depends on simply sentiment and
beliefs about what an economy is like
rather more depends aging the economy
might or might not actually be doing and
that is shift very very rapidly because
you know if it's just means belief of
that currency is supportable then they
can carry and believe in this until well
to whatever if that belief changes it
can change very rapidly in a financial
market the process of financial
contagion can take place here in just
minute seconds even then you can just
move from being apparently quite stable
robust economy to being one that
suddenly sentiment has turned against
you and you find that markets are
picking on you and it can often be not
much more than you're simply the
next-door neighbor of you know country
that's currently in trouble many of the
world's financial crises in the past
thirty years have been caused by rapid
withdrawals of the nation's currency or
the currencies of an entire region this
type of activity is often referred to as
financial warfare
it's benefited major institutions really
quite substantially that Goldman Sachs
for example or any large Bank has done
somewhat better out of this set of
arrangements then it would have done in
a formal regulated environment it's made
people very very wealthy it's allowed
financial markets to expand absolutely
and obviously anybody involved in that
this keen on seeing a deregulated world
in the case of the UK other government
which has been quite overtly and
deliberately and aggressively
arguing against any forms of regulation
being imposed on those financial markets
well it's not the case in some behind
the scenes pulling the strings it's that
this is this is how the thing works
quite deliberately quite in a burning in
front of it that's awell disease it's
making some people very rich they're
quite happy with it I think it is a form
of economic warfare and much of the
changing that in the way that the global
economy works over the last 30 years
result from this this debt sisters world
debt because it's given which countries
and banks and the financial sector
enormous amounts of power and control
over the poorer bits of the world where
a lot of the resources are but we like
using and that's being used in a way
that many people have compared to a form
of colonialism it's a very real direct
form of power that's been used over
those countries to force those countries
to do order really in the interests of
the richest segments of the world's that
they do and as a result of that not only
have corporations become absolutely
invariate you know made huge amounts of
profits and become absolutely enormous
and and all pervasive but the financial
sector has become even bigger than that
and the and the real money in in the
world to be made today is not by
producing anything at all it's simply by
forms of speculating basically making
money from money that's the most
profitable and and by far in a way the
the biggest form of activity of economic
activity that exists in the world today
to protect themselves vulnerable
countries need to accrue currency from
rich countries
you create these currencies out of
nothing the Netherlands first
governor-general of Indonesia the man
who built the trade routes fortified
them what I mean by that is built forts
along them and fought Spanish fleets and
British fleets said about the
development of the spat of the of the
Netherlands Empire and Netherlands trade
was we cannot make trade without war nor
war without trade money and power
so reserves have become the way in which
you can insure yourself against what
speculation who is you that speculation
speculative attack fall in the market
bubbles when a country succumbs to a
speculative attack it is asked to
deregulate its markets and conform its
financial systems to that of the
dominant party the big problem that
faced by most developing countries who
got into a debt crisis was that they
were told by the powers that be in the
world the International Monetary Fund
which is in many ways government the
global financial system but the way to
get out of debt actually is first of all
to restructure your economy especially
to increase your exports so you're
earning more more dollars and then you
can pay off your your debt which is
normally in dollars of some other
foreign currency unfortunately time and
time again that was proved to to not be
the case at all actually countries cut
back their public spending to the bone
so they stopped growing they stopped
having any potential for growth and what
they did produce was was was aimed at
the export market was aimed at creating
dollars and so on so they were paying
off their debt but they weren't
developing their own economy at all they
were paying far far far more in debt
repayments and they were spending on
health or education or anything else and
their debts just kept getting bigger and
bigger and bigger the country becomes a
vassal state allowing large corporations
to exploit its natural resources and
workforce
it's not Italian shadowy there's a great
mystery about what's happening here and
about the way the world operates its
life it's quite blunt I mean for the
last thirty years you've got something
pretty much everywhere and certainly
spreads pretty much everywhere that
generally gets labeled neoliberalism
this idea that you should have floating
exchange rates in a weak regulation
particularly financial markets minimal
government interference or involvement
with what market does and that's that's
more or less how the world operates and
then there are institutions and the
outstanding one at this point is the IMF
that there were actively try and enforce
this state of affairs so it's not
greatly shadowing if you sort of mean
that there are people kind of seen so
much for a manipulate stuff is actually
this is quite this is quite a bit this
is happening and this is hell for entire
my entire adult life actions where it
starts and looked like this is how the
world at the world is operated and it's
made some people very wealthy it's
producing novice concentrations of
wealth so when the International
Monetary Fund comes in in order to try
and alleviate a country's debt problems
it imposes a set of conditions and in
the 1980s and 90s they call that set of
conditions structural adjustment
structural adjustment program and it
tends to take very similar forms
wherever it happens and indeed we can
see structural adjustment programs in
essence happening today in countries
like Greece and Portugal and Ireland
where countries are instructed to
decrease the amount that they spend on
the public sector they are instructed to
liberalize their their trade market and
liberalize their capital markets so
money can much more easily come in and
out of their economy and the idea is
this will encourage investment to come
in from richer parts of the world and
that all of their problems will be
solved from this investment and the
natural fact this has proved time and
time again to be completely without
foundation in actual fact what happens
is it destroys fledgling industries and
capacities in these developing countries
and developing countries become
completely dependent on goods and
services from developed countries and
also from capital from developed
countries one of the things the
International Monetary Fund is way is
very keen on a
and telling countries to lower the taxes
that should be paid by multinational
corporations when they come and operate
in a country because then you'll
encourage more multinational
corporations to come in of course what
it also means is the profits that are
made by those multinational corporations
leaves the country just as quickly and
the country itself doesn't benefit and
today you have many developing countries
which have got almost no tax base and
they've not developed a tax base at all
and so they're even more dependent on
international capital markets on the
money markets on creating debt and
that's why you have so many countries in
the world that have really been robbed
of their sovereignty it's very difficult
to see how democratic societies can
evolve or function when actually a
government is more dependent on the
diktats of the International Monetary
Fund in the money markets then it is on
their own people what we've seen since
the 1970s is a dramatic increase in a
series of phenomena that have had a
serious innovative effect on the changes
in the financial system that have
brought us to the gleaming shining metal
in steel business that's over there in
case you don't know that's the City of
London I'm putting up to compensate for
the lack of a defined commodity based
value underlying currencies financial
institutions developed securitization as
a means to manage risk develop
securitization as a means to try and
stabilise the whole system to the set of
financial processes and fluent
innovations that really accelerate from
the 70s 80s onwards you had a chaotic
system that needed to manage risk and
you had to innovate you needed
derivatives options futures you have new
market in volatility management tools
who knows where the term hedging in
spreading your risk managing your risk
insuring against your it precisely up
until very recently you know up until
the 1960s the Securities and Exchange
Commission would be quite clear that Co
derivatives that weren't based on real
products like agricultural products of
pork belly futures where that would in
fact be essentially kind of gambling
and therefore you were allowed to trade
back changes in the 60s and everybody
can trade you know currency futures
things that are not based on real
products being traded at some point in
the future but based on movements of
currency prices once you have the system
of fixed exchange rates breaks down
obviously this thing accelerates
enormously so as you get the rollback of
government regulation here you get the
market take it over with its own
products here and the theory is that the
market is better at regulating itself
it's more stable that if you have a
government interfering all the time the
efficient market hypothesis the idea
that you know you set up a financial
market fast everybody in them is
well-informed they all keep the very
careful eye wave one else is doing your
therefore be very stable and it reflects
real changes in the economies only
driven by you know panics manias and
speculative bubbles on this really going
to happen if you've the wrist movement
up and down it's because something real
is happening and in traders and
investors influential market responding
to zeiss the efficient market hypothesis
the practice i think what you see in
2008 is are kind of aimed of that
process the appearance of this price is
so major the belief that you will simply
be self-stabilizing self-regulating
weird and can't carry on I mean the
practice carries on anyway being partly
arguing the same way we used to that
it's good or it's necessary or this is
okay for the world in the last decade we
had a new innovation something called
the credit default swap a way of buying
insurance against the company you've
invested in going back and in 2002 they
were less worth in total less than a
trillion dollars in 2007 they were worth
sixty trillion dollars that's five-year
everybody something sitting down
thinking oh these CDOs we've made don't
in fact provide the kind of stability
that we thought the max that's inside of
them is complete nonsense it turns out
there's a far more risk attached to
trying to securitize risk and securitize
debt in the way that we have done this
that we thought and we think these
things now worthless
we attempt to get more and more complex
ways of regulating shaping differential
market and trying to make a quick buck
out of it as well actually help produce
the opposite effect of what it's kind of
apologist said which is a legend led to
a spectacular crash what we saw as a
result of this very different situation
was one phenomenon above all one sector
above all group and that was the
financial sector while the financial
sector benefits enormously from the
current monetary system the system is
neither stable nor fair the assumption
in what the Bank of England does right
now is that the cash that we hold is
backed up by government debt the
government can back up as promises by
the fact that it can tax the public so
what they're implying is that cash is
backed up by government debt when
government debt is backed up by the
ability of government to get cash from
the public time and time again over the
last thirty years we've seen private
debts being transformed into into public
debts and the ultimately the price of
that debt is paid by by the public in
the in the debtor country this is why
spending cuts are necessary the system
is designed to make certain people very
rich at the expense of a nation citizens
and taxpayers the system lowers the
standard of living of the majority and
distributes this wealth among the
privileged so what we're left with is a
financial system since the early 70s
that has no fixed exchange rates that
suddenly has increasingly open financial
borders that has central banks having to
manage without having any control
because there's nothing here where the
gold used to be chaotically they have to
ease quantitatively they have to lend as
a lender of last resort
throughout history monetary systems were
designed to give the dominant Internet
power and advantage and this power is
fiercely defended and expanded on
and I plea intelligence from an
incredible bogeyman
an American flag is burned at the height
of the deviltry called President Johnson
and Francisco Franco were Philip
a new low in public projects added
spraying on spanish-american relations
or in the car or in the park
a lot of markings and all the world on
fire
American has no regard for Prevention's
of war or rules of morality
there
[Music]
judge Calderon
what I would like to see is a new kind
of currency that is backed by something
that that is scarce and that we really
need and we really value something like
energy or renewable energy for example
so as a kilowatt-hour backed currency
would be would be very interesting to me
we need to start valuing the things that
are most scarce and that we need to
survive as human race in the long run
and backing an international currency
with something like that will generate
enormous investment in for example
renewable energy if that's the you know
the primary international unit of
account that that's being used another
option is a basket of currency so you
mix off the value of different
currencies to create a very solid
currency that people have confidence in
perhaps even better would be a basket of
commodities with which to back up
international currencies now if it was
possible
internationally some way or another to
get all these competing and increasingly
competing national economies together
and say we're already sit down and write
an agreement somewhat like the Bretton
Woods Agreement which will allow for
unlike Bretton Woods allow for you know
some currencies to be paid against
different basses and goods that more
appropriate into their national
economies and you just sort of range
this if you're going to arrange that to
happen then that would be nice and you
can see how that would start to create a
kind of order
in the international master economy
which is otherwise lacking really
difficult today is just political is
that--who enough is going to do this who
is the force that that's going to kind
of make this thing happen
creating a monetary system which is both
fair and stable is possible and can be
achieved what are international
organizations for is not for such a
purpose banks are the most heavily
subsidized businesses in the world
specially protected by governments while
the money runs out for the rest of us
the largest private bank still pride
this is because they get the biggest
subsidy of them all right
hard to believe Martin wolf the chief
economics editor of the Financial Times
said it recently the essence of the
contemporary monetary system is the
creation of money out of nothing by
private banks often foolish lending you
heard that right
private banks create money out of
nothing then they loan it to us and ask
for interest on top if you've ever
wondered why the bank buildings around
the world soar higher than any palace or
spire ever did you now have the answer
but the banks don't simply print money
using secret printing presses in their
basements they don't have to like so
many other things these days printing
money has now gone digital
with the popular use of debit cards
electronic fund transfers and internet
banking only 3% of the money in the UK
is now made of paper and metal coin the
other 97% is entirely in computers
electronic money is convenient for
everything but it's especially
convenient for the private banks since
they own write and control the entire
digital money system and what do they do
with the special privilege today channel
new money the blood supply of the nation
towards the things we need like
hospitals schools universities and
public transport
not if it doesn't make a profit for them
instead they use their license to print
money to gamble on the financial markets
and push house prices out of reach of
ordinary people by pumping hundreds of
billions of pounds into risky mortgages
this is exactly how the bank's caused
the financial crisis and now the rest of
us are being asked to pay for it if we
can't afford to run hospitals and build
schools can we really afford to
subsidise the financial industry should
we have to live with less so the bankers
can have more this is ludicrous and it's
time to put a stop to it
the private banks can't be trusted to
hold the reins to our entire economy we
need to take away the bank's power to
create money out of nothing this will
stop them from causing yet another
financial meltdown and allow us to
afford the crucial services that we as a
society need what does the progressive
financial system look like and I want to
hear what some of you think who think
for example that we should ban Bank from
creating money control over how money is
created and what is useful is it's a
democratic issue you currently have the
banking sector profit-seeking banking
sector you know not accountable to any
videos in themselves who are creating up
to 200 billion pounds a year of new
spending power and deciding where in the
economy that goes under to reformers
believe that that entire money supply
should be for the benefit of the public
and should never be created by a private
organization as debt democratizing the
money supply what that means is putting
the power to issue and allocate money
back into the hands of people taking it
away from private organizations and
institutions that don't actually
represent the people that are not
democratically accountable
to the people the banks aren't
democratically accountable they're
accountable to their shareholders and
their shareholders only now they're
underwritten by us by the taxpayer but
they're not accountable to us that
doesn't make any sense at all so if you
democratize the monetary system you are
subjecting it to the same kinds of
discipline as the education system as a
health service and other key publicly
needed services there's no reason that
money should be viewed as any different
it is a fundamentally important service
that everybody needs I can't survive
without enough money nobody can so it
cannot be controlled purely by this
small elite of big big banks as it is in
the UK we do need a different system we
believe that the activity of supplying a
nation with money should be completely
separate from the activity of banking
what we need to do now is update that
law from 1844 to make the digital money
real money you know real it could be
electronic money but it needs to be
classified as money we just want banks
to to be like every other private
organization a private company in the
economy to be subject to market
discipline the problem is is that now
we're in this hybrid model where we have
no control of how they they spend the
money which creates our money and but
but also we're relying on them to create
our money and we're all constantly in
debt we'll be in debt
pretty much for the rest of our lives
and the younger generations who have it
even worse than the older generation
I've just been reading a report from the
United Nations Environment Programme and
they say we need 2 trillion dollars in
- you can imagine or - community a lot
of money a year to finance the greening
of the economy to move away from
poisonous carbon which is poisoning the
atmosphere to alternatives to carbon
when the banks collapsed in 2007 9 we
found according to the Bank of in the
Bank of England tells me that we raise
full two trillion dollars in a year to
bail out the banks so against that 2
trillion a year to bail out the
ecosystem yeah isn't a big deal if this
kind of model doesn't doesn't make any
sense either from an orthodox free
market perspective because these banks
are monopolists effectively they
monopolise credit creation so they don't
obey the rules of any kind of free
market discipline yet at the same time
they're not producing socially or
environmentally beneficial outcomes
along any real on a scale
[Music]
all that money does is enable us to do
what we can do and once we get us heads
around that you can make money work for
what we need the power to create money
is so you know so powerful you've got to
be very concerned about who has that
power if it's somebody who's going to
benefit from creating the money then you
know they're going to have any incentive
to create more than the economy actually
needs the same would probably happen if
you give that power to politicians you
know you can't trust a politician to to
be trying to please voters and to have
power over creation over creating money
at the same time it's a real conflict of
interest
the only thing you really can do is to
give it to someone who has no conflicts
of interest a independent transparent
accountable body money could be
allocated according to the needs and
desires of the population systems could
be put in place to allow for direct
democratic allocation of funds either
wholly or partially a framework and
rules could be established to
incorporate up-to-date economic theory
into how much money should be created
and for what types of purposes the
government would no longer be able to
get access to large sums of money to
pursue armed conflict if this was not
sanctioned by the populous we would be
able to see exactly what they're doing
with the power to create money we'd be
able to see how much they're creating
and where that money is going and that's
pretty much the only way we can get
control over the power to create money
and stop it being abused money Reform
Party was established in 2005 just after
the 2005 general election the idea of
the the money Reform Party was that we
would have this basic core issue that
people would agree with they might
disagree on other issues but fair enough
there are you know different ways of
going about it but that was the idea was
to was to go for watching like all the
lowest common denominator then to
attract people from with disparate views
getting elected to part of
is not the issue it's getting the issue
is getting the issue of money or fall
into into the public domain you know so
the people will begin to talk about it
[Music]
banks should not be able to gamble with
your money without your permission
so what they would need to do is offer
two types of account one is a safe call
it a transactions account put your money
in there the bank doesn't lend that they
don't put it at any risk whatsoever the
other is an investment account where you
put your money in for a certain period
of time and then the bank takes that
away and they invest it what happens
when you use these two types of account
is that in the event that a bank fails
the money in the safe accounts is still
there it's not at risk so you just moved
all the safe accounts to a bank that's
still healthy and then those people who
put their money in the investment
account they don't lose everything but
they ask to wait for the standard
liquidation procedure to find out how
much with the assets of the banks will
be returned to them and it means that
the government then never needs to bail
out a bank if banks can be allowed to
fail the system would actually be how
people think it is that you know in
completely money in the bank it's it's
very safe or at least they used to think
Patrick although 2008 crisis there's a
spectrum of opportunities there which
were just not exploring at the moment
and that's what that's what's upsetting
me that we're not even experimenting
when we know that the system we have now
is fundamentally flawed we've just had
the biggest crisis since since the
Second World War since the 1930s really
we know we have a system where the
creators of money are underwritten by us
anyway it's kind of the worst of both
worlds the situation we have at the
moment which is why we need to start
thinking of genuine alternatives so when
we're talking about you know what life
is going to be like in the post reform
system it doesn't mean that you can't
borrow it doesn't mean that you have to
save up 50 years before you can buy a
house it does mean that you might not be
able to buy a house that's ten or twelve
times your income but on the flip side
it means that the house that you want to
buy probably shouldn't cost you ten or
twelve times your income you know houses
should be affordable as it should
everything else you still be able to get
a mortgage you'll still be able to get
financed for a car you know businesses
will still get investment it just means
that debt
won't be such you know it won't be so
high it won't be such a huge feature of
people's lives person to person banking
has been around for a while it's
essentially the eBay of banking so it
allows borrowers and lenders to be to be
put together in a marketplace default
rates at the largest peer-to-peer lender
super are 0.7% risk is minimized by
calling funds so that each investors
contribution to a specific loan remains
minimal there's a site which is about
currency change
so again bypassing the kind of some
mainstream banking or currency exchange
system and just doing it
person-to-person
I think a lot of the interesting stuff
that's going to happen around currencies
and around money more generally is to do
with the impact on the Internet
my gut feeling is that we will see more
and more of those types of systems we
will also see more and more applications
and things you can have found that we
would never have imagined and I think
we're only just at the beginning of that
the issue of monetary reform has
historically been a very sensitive issue
because of the incredible power wealth
and privileges it bestows in an age
where analytic thought and a scientific
approach are held in such high esteem
there is no justifiable argument for
keeping the mechanics and implications
of the monetary process such a taboo
subject as Democratic citizen we have
the right to demand a monetary system
which is both stable and beneficial for
society the banking Lobby is very
powerful I suspect that they won't be in
favor of those kinds of models although
ultimately one could argue that it's a
much more stable footing for banks the
coalition government has set up a
independent commission on banking the
ICB and their remit is to essentially
recommend make recommendations to the
government on how banking sector can be
fixed there the remit includes you know
figuring out how they can prevent future
bailouts when they held their public
meetings around the country at each of
those meetings of the five panelists at
that meeting at least about three of
them were representatives of the big
banks it's a bizarre relationship if you
were going to try and improve building
regulations you wouldn't hire a cowboy
builder who built a building that glass
so why are we asking the banks for
advice on what we should do about thank
the independent commission on banking
recommended two major reforms the first
was the implementation of greater
capital and loss-absorbing capacity this
in effect is complementary to Basel 3
and will not differentiate the UK
banking system from the rest of Europe
the second recommendation was the
ring-fencing of retail banks
although portrayed as harsh to the banks
it can also be interpreted as a benefit
as retail banks will now have a lower
capital requirement ratio than
investment banks there is cozy
relationship between government and the
banks in the middle of the crisis I
spoke to somebody was working in the
Treasury in the middle of the crisis and
he said pretty much every second person
that you spoke to was working for one of
the big banks so when it comes to the
decision about whether you let one of
these toxic banks to fail or whether you
rescue it what kind of decision are you
going to get what kind of recommendation
you're going to get from somebody worse
than happening I've got a whole string
of letters and cards from various
politicians over the years
really you get letters which most cases
say nothing at all apart from thank you
very much you know you know I thank you
for your letter you know or thank you
for your DVD I want I'll have a look at
it or in the case of course letters to
the letters to the prime ministers last
Prime Minister a couple years ago No
thank you for your letter the Prime
Minister it's been passed on to the
Treasury who will no doubt respond to
you directly in due course and of course
I'm still waiting about two years later
from any sort of response from the
Treasury
[Music]
[Music]
thanks Lana sheets in our four times GDP
at six trillion pounds they are holding
the public hostage their wealth has
become so great regaining the financial
system that we are at the tipping point
whereby a single bank could now take
down the entire economy we can't let the
bank's crevassed business as usual
because if they do then all we're going
to see is more debt more poverty more
inequality and another crisis in Bible
and yes which we're going after paper
again it is a political issue ultimately
because the reforms that are required
can only be achieved by Parliament
really is a big actor Parliament all it
has to do basically prevents the
clearing banks from creating currency
based on the debt of their borrowers
that fit you cut bet you you you stop
that
[Music]
this is George
Jorge worked in a big bank in the City
of London but one day without warning
George's bank went bus luckily the
government rescued the bank and George
kept his job but the greedy government
wanted something in return for their
help they demanded a higher tax on
George's salary and bonus for someone
with a high-cost lifestyle like George a
shock like this can be devastating
now George struggles to afford the rent
on his Riverside apartment in central
London but tires on his Aston Martin are
wearing thin and a barely road-legal
unless George's situation improves or
unless someone like you helps him and
George may even be forced to walk past
the next Savile Row tailors and buy his
suit from Topshop or next
even if George had anything to celebrate
he can no longer afford the champagne to
celebrate with George is not alone
countless others are suffering like him
and no one knows how long it will be
until good times return but with your
help George can turn his life around a
simple monthly donation from you can
bring a bit of sunshine back to George's
life just 395 pounds we'll help him
celebrate minor achievements with a
magnum of Cristal champagne as little as
nine hundred pounds will help George buy
a new set of tires for his Aston Martin
2,000 pounds can help George recover his
self-esteem with a suit from a
prestigious Savile Row tail but even a
small amount for help just two hundred
pounds will buy a meal for George and
his girlfriend experience just two
hundred pounds extra will buy three by
adopting a banker you won't just be
supporting someone like George in a time
of need you'll also be supporting the
trendy wine bars of the City of London
the luxury carmakers a bitter and the
tailor's of Saville Row you'll be doing
your patriotic duty to support Britain's
greatest industry in its time of need
and when the good times return and
George gets his bonus back the taxes he
pays for help fund the public services
of the rest of you scroungers depend on
to please until the good times return
for George and those like him will you
give today
you
[Music]