H in mezquia or just his hometown when
he was quite old for the centenary of
Konoha de Gruyter who was a composer
also from mezquia and he begins that
speech by first of all thanking his
hometown all right this is always really
can learn from hi to get his gratitude I
actually took a note just maybe half an
hour ago second this is impossible for
you to read also because it's chairman
early it's the second of August leches
wrote what I have learned the most from
Heidegger is great from this in a time
of immediate availability hmm and so he
first of all he thanks his hometown and
then in this text way he says you know
this is a key bank fires of we think off
the person who has died in gratitude but
he says are we thinking I was usually
thinking but then he says that there's
no way around technology there isn't and
he says in that book as or in that short
text one has to we have to let electric
technological tools into our homes and
say yes to them and we also have to say
no to them so that they do not become
what's pathetically us of who we are so
that they're not extensions of who we
are because there's no point in
demonizing them because they're not off
the devil and is and that's this you
know in a sense there's a term from
hurdling chelonian sobriety there's a
certain distance to how we deal with
these things as long as they're not
becoming us then the relationship of of
master/slave is turned on its head they
just become what they could be which is
a tool right but not as they are now
incredibly invasive and all all in
surrounding and seemingly powerful and I
think that's and Heidegger also says
what would what is happening right now
is a you know uprooting and upheaval
that's the history
for our time for the maybe the decades
to come and it's probably getting a bit
first think I don't know but but within
that epochal change or currents there
will be there is a need for for people
to come about who can deal with
technology in a way that it that there's
a a reground it becomes possible right
right so I mean that's that's great
responsibility when responsive I like
the English word responsibility because
it because the because it comes from the
verb to respond yes then responsibility
we always respond to a to something
that's challenging yeah and let actually
demand something of us and even if we
don't respond then we're still
responding right that's not not not
being responsible is a response yes
what's what's going on so and it's
probably you know I'd rather have I you
and me and others using technology than
only Silicon Valley types who don't
think too much about it right them to
think about it right and yeah I mean if
it shouldn't probably become entertain I
would just not to tell you what to do
but if it I mean not maybe as
entertainment but do you do it with
others and do you do you have circling
sessions online with people
yes yes there's other there's other
organizations that have done that a lot
more but we are we're looking at going
more more online in experimenting with
it there is the thing I add the thing
that what one of the things I thought
about right is
if I look at like there's there's ways
in which there's like the little
openings like with YouTube right that I
think are really interesting and in its
it's like when technology because most
of the time technology in its in its you
know in its mania when something comes
out it's already by the time you get it
it's already just leading to the the
next technological thing it's like it's
a it's a mania right but there's there's
there's certain pockets of YouTube right
what which is what we're kind of in a
certain sense we're doing right now
we're technology actually like brought
up these kind of long-form conversations
great which which you get to cut it's
it's really interesting to look at this
where
one there's there's people having just
dialogues and conversations that meander
for hours right that that become present
so it's like I think there's ways in
which like technology created brought
presence right conversations between
people that were like the opposite of
technology right which actually takes
something to kind of like listen to and
you got to kind of struggle with it um
that's the part when I look at my own
phenomenological experience I notice
that I actually um you know like with
your videos right there's a way in which
there's a dialogue I've been having with
you all the time right there's there's
listening to it but but then there's
kind of the next video that you come out
with in our next conversation and
there's this anticipation of that in the
past video there's a there's a certain
kind it's interesting I've been noticing
that like I have
I have people that I dialogue with in my
mind when I go for walks and write that
and I'm anticipating the next video and
it's like adding to the thinking that
that now did I don't think I would have
without like the YouTube right I don't
think I would have that in that way so
one of the things I take solace in is is
I think that seems to be one of the
measures is like where if technology can
bring something that's that's that
doesn't doesn't in frame the thing that
it brings yeah but it discloses
something else right yeah
I think a lot to do with this this this
whole thing about like cuz I don't like
ya dialoguing right seems to be the
opposite of technology right and some
respect it there is there is that
there's also about about video or audio
in general it's all listening is very
close to us probably closer than just
seeing and these videos that people talk
it's not about the video actually it's
actually about people right birthing and
talking listening and so logos is at
stake Heraclitus in the first fragments
at a sale people always are but many as
he says always are in it to be hearing
the logos but don't listen to it yeah
hiding it in that short text again and
the Gillison hide speech he also says
that this speech is very likely going to
be broadcasted immediately over the
radio and newspapers and it will be
everywhere Martin Heidegger gives the
speech in honor of Connor decoyed system
and everyone can hear the speech if
there's someone that's recorded but he
said this it there's nothing wrong with
it he says right it's just how is it
that such a such a recording is
closer to us then the tree outside all
the fields right next to a wheel it's
something you can you know
phenomenologically speaking one of the
wood thinking back of my time growing up
in Germany I like ribbon us
yeah City not not a big city but when I
went to see my grandparents the villages
usually they were empty on a one with
children run playing outside this is in
the 90s of 80s they were to sit there
watching TV
hey I said that that was closer to them
than what was outside and that's that's
the strangeness of non Big D distancing
that's happening in technologies but
that's not to demonize it again it's
it's a question of again
responsibilities and how to respond to
it and what's being given but then
what's happening now is in hiding gates
are hiding for example he did record his
conversations he had conversation with a
Buddhist monk he gave he views that for
we had visa was a documentary filmmaker
for example and he recorded two hurdling
set columns so he wasn't deposited I
think what he says in that four texts as
well as said we need to it actually
invites us because he mentioned presence
actually invites us to really listen and
then you're in dialogue with someone as
he said you you go outside you take a
walk with you maybe listen to something
I said or someone else has said
somewhere and then you think about what
could be what could be the next how does
this fit into what I try to understand
but then you then were really thinking
about them are really listening and if
it so it's not distraction it's doing
the opposite yeah right so well it's
it's it's
perhaps it wasn't and that's why you
know YouTube and other channels are
fascinating in a sense because it's it's
not you're not being told
what
no no one's stopping anyone to to make
their own videos and try and make sense
of what's going on and of course you
know there's a bit of a cacophony it's
it's everyone can say just about
anything and that's maybe that's
problematic too but that's it's layers
to that to get to the heart of it I
think ultimately it's it's there's a guy
I know maybe you know I'm Justin Murphy
was it yeah he's a young academic he
just left academia because he didn't
wanted to remain in that and he Justin
made a bit more of a delusion he said in
a recent video that you know ask there's
a certain collapse of meaning taking
place or a meaning crisis is that the
guy that you did interviewed you the
3-hour interview yeah that's him yeah
yeah totally that's why that's how I
find out about you then I would call
okay good you know I wouldn't so you
could say nihilism or collapse with
meeting or meeting crisis right and
what's what's happening in it a quart
what would he thinks is on the horizon
is that and I would not I will rephrase
it because I don't agree with the way he
phrases it because he speaks with IQ
levels and I don't think that that's
right
real or anything he says such as you
know people who lost and say maybe more
open to trying to make sense of what's
going on and finding meaning in a way
that's more of a you know in a very high
category in terms the receivership and
then in a capacity to be a medium do -
re rephrase it and then respect and then
City to be a medium yes I think that's
okay so like I think that's what my
nigga means by you know city like a I
guess a psychological or psychological
way would be you know the high IQ people
aren't more intelligent there but they
can make snow so one who for whatever
reason is more I'm in a receiver
not because there's anything special
about them but maybe there's more
suffering but something it's actually
not not the greatest thing right you see
what's going on and then also having to
being able to articulate something
that's that's trying to carve out some
meaning from something
anyways that that would sort of in in
that you know medium capacity or task of
being a medium that there is justin puts
it differently but he says basically
those more capable of doing it they will
become meaning makers for the next
decades and that's something that to a
certain degree I think also is necessary
I guess institutions are probably
crumbling and politically it's
everything's a bit of a nightmare and so
it in and then of course there's meaning
crisis every this is why people are
flocking to people like Jordan Peterson
and others because TP provides with you
know meaning to a certain degree and
talks about archetypes etc which is
something that you're not confronted
with right and in the uncanny new work
of we need Anisha by the way I gave a I
don't know if you've listened to that
Nietzsche yeah
Nietzsche speaks of an uncanny new work
that's that's our history he says yeah
um any wheel work yeah Owen Heimlich is
leader react yeah I think it's the
Chairman and Owen Jaime King chairman is
always this very strong work because
it's unholy alright there's no sense of
home no sense of dwelling and Heidegger
often says this this is it
there is no dwelling ground let's not
kid ourselves it's quite desolate but
it's not the Klein this H is not decline
it's not collapse but it needs and
actually I think he's got
I think with technology does this this
too hot
yes this he's very difficult because
he's written so much he sees so much but
to a certain degree I think there is in
heilige selasa fee this possibility to
find a relationship with technology
that's less destructive than it maybe is
now or can still become right um and the
other thing because he mentioned he
basically grew up in the 17th century he
was as you know born in 80 I think 1889
late 19th century but it's true that in
Mexico there wasn't any there were in
machines or anything it was farmland it
probably was no tarmac on the roads
I would guess um but then think about it
he's 23 24 when the first world war
breaks out so and he's so that's the
very destructive or and so he's kind of
the strange and Lucky's it's kind of
what I always think is that were
actually quite lucky that there was
someone like him who was traditionally
trained in philosophy and theology and
grew up on a village and and it wasn't
confronted with any of this and then
technology just kicks in like
industrialization it was already of
course you know everywhere but it just
kicked in in the 20th century full-on
and he sees all of these massive changes
yes then can bring that all to the fore
well while others role is just born into
it right so we have someone so it was
almost like Sullivan a messenger from
the old world was also in touch with and
in dialogue with right this is the in
about dialogue right the strange thing
about dialogue is that you don't need to
speak to someone but I was open to hide
again I'm in dialogue with him I mean as
a as a listener
Bheema you wanted and and that's I think
also what philosophy is supposed
do huh it seems like yes probably seems
like the more people that your daily and
dial up who are dead the better
[Laughter]
yeah yeah where you were you and I are
kind of in it in a certain sense in a
rare position right in the in in the
sense that I can remember before the
internet yeah right I'm I'm around a lot
of people and I'm around a lot of young
people who don't have a memory before
the internet and they yeah they really
do seem like they they have a different
language and a different they're almost
like they occur to me is almost like a
different species yeah but that's that's
you know I'm laughing because there's
always this cosmic left oh and in the
face of something absurd that's good yes
yeah because there is something there's
something non-human about technology
that's the first thing we have to
understand is that this is not human it
isn't it is not just an extension of who
we are it says you know the iPhone isn't
just a better looking hammer this if you
don't see that if someone who doesn't
see a difference between the nuclear
bomb and a screwdriver right right I'm
sorry you know go play somewhere else
because this is this is just there's an
ontological difference that that's and
as a shift occurred and and people who
get sucked into technology too much they
they become someone else and it's again
you know when you say they don't they
don't have a memory before the internet
you could you could understand there's
not just on a notice how we usually
understand it this is something we
talked about last night wasn't it that
they don't have a memory before the
internet me
their memory itself is structured by the
internet or by the workings of what we
call the Internet 11 there so certainly
greed their identity their persona that
character is by how they memorize who
and what they are what their experiences
are these are very often immediately
externalized and objectified and then
hiding it and framed and put and put up
for evaluation by others and what's a
certain degree you can also wonder why
do all of these machines or these robots
these artificial intelligence units why
do they all their thirst for evaluations
you actually evaluate everything know
what's going on and says this thing if
you like whatever whatever is doing this
whatever it is
however really not what it is but what's
occurring their knees evaluations I mean
that's a very strange thought maybe it
maybe it isn't I'm not sure but if you
can't see if everything's constantly
evaluated then it can work with these
with these estimates and kind of dig
around how everything works
you had your quantification and then
begin to mimic and replicate right and
that's what it's doing and then feed it
back to us right maybe one of the things
that we notice is that people more and
more speak in cliches in the height of
goodness a certain language always
that's it but that's this may be even
more invasive now so but then that's
actually that's an invitation then to
try and be even more even sharper even
even more focused and concentrated and
not distracted and then it begins to
form and I think to a certain degree
this is there are things happening here
in London I'm meeting with people who
are who look for exit strategies we are
we've connected you're connecting with
new younger people who are you know at
the forefront of
you know it called the culture word it's
all these you said you know they're kind
of interchangeable because what they
what everyone is looking for is meaning
and in that's springing up and it's it
can be very different in this can be
people who are for them some of them
it's political this is about trust as
well as about technology for me it's
always existential into logical and
history and I guess for you it's
existential and on that level I not
until I think it's I like ontology on my
sandwich I'm like no man I'm ontological
[Laughter]
told you but by the author like so by
the by what I think I hear is is it's
the the meaning that points to
significance right is what you're
talking about like is when you say like
the meaning crisis of this of this age
is like so I think about it see it seems
like meaning how I know something is
meaningful is to the degree that I'm
willing to suffer for it for the sake of
it or I'm willing to do something hard
or go beyond my preferences because
something is something calls that forth
that and it seems to me the technology
like Heidegger says like to the degree
that is technological the degree that it
collapses distances right it actually
where as meaning is more about a horizon
that that calls forth in which you you
actually
[Music]
you get closer to by actually struggling
with it I think you know and it seems to
me that the big thing about technology
is the is the man especially especially
with some of these people I'm talking to
in Silicon Valley it is just really
weird it's so autistic um like that like
that like literally the blindness yeah
the blindness in the intolerance for any
kind of struggle the anxiety that comes
up in the billikin is like something
like mastery something that takes is
that takes time and grappling with
something in DiBella they it's like they
up there like look can you give me the
three three steps to optimize this this
is a process constant and so when they
so like right now one of the things that
we're doing at Google is we go to I go
down to Google um a gun down there three
times and basically circle the Google
people I'm feeling that absurdity tickle
but I think one of the things that we
did is like we the third time was the
first time we actually did real like
just real circling and yeah it was quite
a it actually was quite beautiful and
striking to me um I think because what
they experienced I think was something
that was not even something that they
were resisting it just wasn't in there
it wasn't in there horizon there's a
there's a there's a certain kind of like
openness that they have but it's like a
the lateral openness it's like they're
all very aware that they they want to
grow
right and they want to grow as people
and they want to be open to feedback and
they want community however like when
with circling one of the like dimensions
that we go and choose the depth
dimension right is is like not actually
making things immediate available but
actually kind of moving towards
concealment and revealing that of like
more of a depth dimension and so when
they started to have that experience it
was there was the opening of death but
there was this other thing that happened
which was this almost this like striking
destabilization of that there was a
dimension like that at all right yeah
like a it was it was like a double a
double kind of opening that happened and
I reckon death dimension depth yeah
right like well with them
what's a long one more time talk about
death
um exactly not not any anything planned
or explicit okay how did they did they
reach out to you or did you ask them
because if they do they might that that
there's still an openness isn't that sir
oh yeah yeah totally there's an openness
in fact if you go to the Google campus
it is what it is really something like
it's a whole world
um they have showers they have like gyms
they have like multiple restaurants it's
all all of its free it's it's really
quite something that they have going on
there
but they yeah that how one of the people
who work there wanted to bring us in and
so the Inc Google encourages them to do
kind of community building events yeah
and so kind of in that in that way that
we got it we got invited in and then
what happens is that you help them that
helped me point them to and you put in
he said dimensions today mentioned said
they had Nana maybe for a long time
maybe ever considered could be there
would ya so for example right would be
something like remember with this one
this one woman who is being circled yeah
he was I asked her a question that she
did she didn't know the she didn't know
the answer to what that the video you
sent me no no that's that was actually a
oh yeah I'd love to hear your I would
love to hear your thoughts on what you
saw happen there I'm really interested
of like adhere that but I'll make a note
and then tell me about Google first
though it's so mentioned something like
where I would ask a question about like
well what's huh how do you know to want
that right in it and she's like I
why don't I don't I don't know and I was
like well what's the what what do you
know and in not know in not knowing
let's see if we can just kind of be
getting a relationship with the not
knowing like where yeah and then just
first of all that what you can be
relationship with that knowing stick
like stick with it there's an it there's
a just that whole thing kind of like
short-circuited it seemed like a whole
set of assumptions that were really like
just weren't a consideration okay what
what are the assumptions of the work so
the earth so what I'm hearing is that
the Assumption work are not knowing does
not exist
yeah not knowing is not possible
yeah I I have everything at my fingertip
yep I can just cut google it pun
intended
whether it was a bad joke but right but
if this should be the assumptions on
this campus which is an interesting way
of naming a you know the headquarter of
a corporation yeah I'm mission of course
the folks you know associations at least
of a university which is a place for
study in leisure actually also for life
of the mind and not necessarily just
being productive and contractual and
transactional yes so the assumption is
and it strikes them them as ought at
least to say least that there could be
said that's a big word
nothingness yeah at work or even
possible within them yes that's that's
damning that leads to immediate anxiety
of it yeah it and also um yes like the
unknown as a having kind I would say as
hasn't having an ontological presence to
it right some way in which it's here or
there it's just it's it's there
something about their frame
that just didn't include that right it's
more alike
the unknown is is simply the place to
program order to code order but the the
notion of like okay well let's just sit
here and just kind of be anxious then
like like well how do you know what are
we encountering such that what is the
anxiety understand this is actually this
is ontologically and historically
extremely important to bring this to the
fore how these people think yeah because
it's Google yeah right I mean if this
was some random software people in the
middle of no-man's-land who programmed
some you know computer games the one
that I had no influence but Google is
framing and enframing and ordering
everyone who's online everyone's
perception of the world what it's pro
the extremely important to work out and
make free from the unknown from the
concealed into a certain presence and
understanding of how they how they make
sense of the world yeah because you just
said the unknown to them is is what's
not yet been decoded or coded
yeah yeah so there couldn't there is
there's almost like trying to I mean if
you wanted you know Anita says that the
the platonism is construction of another
world as he understands fatalist that's
a bulwark for him against violence and
you could say rather than accepting
anxiety and nothing as in his experience
of loss of control or at least certain
in incapacity for a moment of not being
in charge
that's just coded away I will do this
the world to them is this data is
information isn't it it's and it's it's
it only asks
be decoded and then ordered and then
once and for all to be secured yes it is
an it is a this is something that I see
present everywhere this is interestingly
enough this is some this is Marcus's
this is what Marx never really described
communism but Marx just said you know at
some point materially everything will be
just available forever and then yeah
that's cause total liberation off of the
means of production it's just yes you're
going to happen Bertrand Russell and the
video I made on him on idleness I say at
the end of it it's the same assumption
it's once we've secured everything then
we can go and be idle which means right
doesn't mean to do nothing but which
means to then then we can go and find
meaning in life but only then so it will
take another hundred years John Maynard
Keynes another Cambridge boy from from
from from run this beautiful island east
wrote in an essay run at the same time
as russell sometimes i think in the
nineteen twenties said we will from now
on for a hundred years have to use usury
and be greedy and awful to each other
because then our grand grandchildren
will live in a world of Plenty where
they can live off Saxton's everything
will be secured
it's always about first securing all
interesting data and everything in then
on top of them
but only then can we live the leisurely
life and that means finding meaning
beyond us often finding again sort of a
meaning in history but it's it's if
that's the thought then you're always
just because it's it that that will
never come to an end all right
and I wonder what the mindset if you
like is and at Google precisely is that
if they're actually working sort of
working to with first of all personally
on with a framework but also as an
institution but towards creating frames
that don't allow for anything outside of
it outside
then this gives an insight into Google
that maybe it's not there because I mean
obviously Google employees philosophers
but is a usually in-house philosophers
which is say what Google wants to hear
anyways once so they'll tell them oh
look there's a guy I know who's at
Oxford he and he's now the in-house
philosopher means of a lot of
information right he has to say is the
world is just information let's - let's
decode it so that's what you know it's
kind of feeding feeding it's positive
feedback right I'm just telling them
what they want to hear anyways yes but
then again what I find interesting about
who has I have Google talks but they
invite people like knocking Trump's key
and I think even she check another the
sewer not a post but at least you know
point to other words so the rest is
openness still but yeah I think sorry
it's like it and that's what I think I
think I talk about is like there's a lot
there's a there's an openness that seems
to be good this way it's like a
flattened kind of openness uh-huh and it
and what's interesting is because
everything about Google when you walk in
there speaks to non here are key but
it's so obvious that the whole thing
that it's using to speak know here are
key is completely weirdly self-denying
right it's like and so in in the private
conversations almost everybody that I've
talked to that works at Google they're
like yeah like Google wants to think
that they're really open and liberal and
all this stuff but true like actually
they're just they're more corporate than
anybody right and there's a that's the
thing that you can't say right I think
of to say private so there's a there's
there's
is kind of thing about this kind of
suspicion for depth for things that take
time and struggle really hierarchy in a
certain sense right but this you know in
spin this further man he's so not
wanting and I'm saying not wanting a
willing with a purpose not willing for
something to take time there's a lot of
talk about how time is speeding up etc
but I don't even want to fall into that
but how is it then we then I think
ultimately we have to get time right um
and it's it's not linear it's not
circular ecstatic is hiding his word and
I don't one of the things to just
Heidegger speaks about time much more
often but he he he doesn't fully develop
eyes I think how how much further he
could have gone would talk I think
that's one of the that's some of the
work that needs to be done now is
because there's there's something that
breaks open with him of how he
understands time but he says that being
his presence unreason something not
something but just a presence thanks to
which beings appear in the way they
appear in time is the self concealment
of that presence I'm is what works in
that way and we've talked about history
and some of the messages we've sent back
and forth all right how history rose it
works like that but if you have programs
like Google and Google is ism is a
program to a certain degree right isn't
intelligence as well um what what is it
feeding off and what is it that it wants
to bills are not saying when they
because that implies sort of it you know
this some evil conspiracy or learned
it's just what is it as
Google or others what is it wants to
build and why what is it fighting
against its fighting against time yeah
it's fine if and if Heidegger is right
that time is concealed not only but to
certainly be self concealing and
absconded yeah and they're fighting
against concealment and then we're back
to this you know any framing of what
technology wants to do it wants to give
you everything immediately is as present
and available but it isn't not even or
not even this conversation is perfectly
present right because it'll linger it
with us we're only just asked we're
talking yeah in this dialogue and this
wouldn't happen without us talking I
couldn't have this dialogue with just
about anyone or with myself
no requires just two of us and invented
and but then it's its presence isn't
just this current moment it'll recur
right as we we step out of it at some
point yeah and come back to it later but
it'll it's it's it's mind-blowing that
if you think of time and I'm just doing
this now I it as Holly who says is
something that actually does the
concealing or is the self concealing of
every presence yeah and why is it that
there's this
the suspicion against anything that
takes time you know how nervous we get
when we type something into Google and
Wi-Fi is slowing down horror it's not
spitting out the answer merely intense
anxiety already yes so I wonder I wonder
that happy why is it that we have to
work so
but so much Attalus I mean there's so
much energy going into that right is
that Google is a presence making machine
isn't it that's what it is it makes
everything present and available
immediately but not you know because
they're different modes of presence so
when I say present answers this is kind
of in framing presence right um that
just presents something it's just that
this is just this is the fact this is
the truth this is the first result on
Google
speaking of hierarchy I mean sorry
Google is just by itself what it is
perfectly hierarchical yeah everyone
everyone just clicks hit number one
right no one cares about page number two
mind you meet one page one maybe the
first three is what I click right right
perfectly hierarchical in essence but if
you think about how much effort and in
time and an energy of obviously
brilliant young minds has gone into so
far creating a world of non concealment
tempted perfect availability and
immediacy right and then you tell me
just now that there's an anxiety when
you talk to there's this depth dimension
and by depth you could say there's there
are conceals dimension because you said
they weren't even aware that they those
were there you see with this the sense
of fairness that's concealed yes
necessarily concealed this is also what
circling dust isn't it circling as far
as I now understood and they haven't
done it obviously it's just it's just
that then you bring to the fore
something that is there but not there
yet fully concealed but then what when
it's best when it's set forth brought
out shown it's not grasped it doesn't
become an object right its lingers for a
moment you can't touch it you can't
grasp it in that sense yeah but then it
moves away this is why I I think you
call it surfing because it goes and
having unique circles yes and or even
spirals maybe oh yeah
and this is an insight into Google I've
never had is that they the not date but
some of the people you've talked to so
far if they have this you're an anxiety
you can also say if it if it's anxiety
then as Heidegger says it's only in
anxiety that the nothingness of the
world shows itself it's only when the
nothingness of the world begins to show
itself that we actually begin to grasp
the horizons of the world which makes
the real true world and not this and
this is a quote from someone else in the
world that world we live in now where we
have no there's a bit of a lack of place
or a sense of where we really are yeah
yeah yeah it's yeah so I you know I
wonder what why this tear off of
concealment why do we we we have to we
have to have everything at our
fingertips I think this is what all of
these mechanisms or machines of I don't
know what to call it
I actually therefore yeah yeah this word
of concealment is to get rid of get rid
of this this these dimensions right yet
again it you said there's a flat
openness and I think you also said
something I can't quite repeat now is
ISM he said they didn't know there was
something there so they had never and so
there's what what's lacking then it's
you can translate that in Psychological
terms maybe and say what's lacking if
you don't respect cuz human is that look
thank you you can deny death you will
still die
right and this is something else until
we can have it all don't want to die
yeah one sees that connects right you
know it's a pipe tree you know a chandre
way i'd british philosopher he said to
me in interview six years ago he said
it's more likely that the debt will rise
from them from the earth but um it but
so if you want to get rid of concealment
you'll conceal
sell from yourself you don't sell
reflect huh what self-reflection have
been in the proper self-reflection I
think isn't just you know this Cartesian
super presence of oneself as oneself
look this is just me mmmm-mmm iiiii
German philosopher each finish i am i
and that's the first principle and
everything else is deducted for that
it's self reflection is going into these
corners as Nietzsche puts it off of the
soul that are not there in reflection
that you have to find right you have to
go look for right those are concealed
so right there shocked me maybe I'm
taking this way too far right but no I'm
writing writing it there maybe that too
certainly me they're shutting themselves
out from themselves by not for allowing
for concealment and abscond in the
obscure and the officiant the imprecise
and the but not available right and the
part yes yes and that there's a there's
also a quality to of like a a benign
friendliness
that's so fundamentally unlike impotent
almost it's like everyone's like hey
we're Googlers they literally have their
little hats with the with like a like a
little fan literally and they have bikes
they have you know you know one speed
bikes that are have all the colors in it
they have everything is about
friendliness yeah
flattening where you don't really kind
of walk away with any sense of anybody
that you can remember like that's that
thing about like
it's really I remember it's like it's
it's difficult to walk out
being able to remember someone's face
there yet every everybody is encouraged
to commune right to talk with one
another to have community events yet
there's no it's it's just bizarre its
bizarrely frictionless in that's what
I'm talking about it's like flatland
I think if Wilbur talks about kind of
flat land it's it's faceless yeah yeah
that's something you can notice that I
mean not some mystic I mentioned the
sharp building yeah that's that's that's
hideous
but many but not not opposed to
skyscrapers per se or anything but it's
if you compare that to maybe the Empire
State Building or the Chrysler Building
these are neoclassical you know and I
don't care for these you know sexual
interpretations of that I think that's
nonsense but they are the neoclassical
buildings that are statements and they
are the Empire State Building is
beautiful yeah I it's it's beautiful
because it's classical that's not
classes this is by classical I mean it's
sort of the classical is always capable
of Hegel is the last classical think of
Hegel is a thinker who who accepts
obviously contradictions right he's a
dialectical think and when nature calls
grand style is even even a step further
withered by niacin and the Apple in Ian
so that backwards artists as the
uploading a net which ones chaos and
full life both of them are allowed it's
it's it's waste knowing that you need
both yes the task of of the philosopher
of the thinker is always to bring the
two together and let
do their thing as we could say dude do
what they do but but only in
relationship with each other because
then it becomes something beautiful and
what we want is just the Apple in Ian
and those are the and and or not even be
able in Ian anymore right because then
at least you would have proper form it's
it's it's something new I don't know
what to call it but that facelessness is
something I've noticed in what cities
are becoming now they're becoming
faceless yep yep
you're losing there is no distinction
yeah totally distinction right and and
it's in in some way it's been thinking
about what you what you what you
actually yeah and having so many
different thoughts and I the unfortunate
part is I only have one mouth I mean you
can you can ask some Silicon Valley
guides to add a couple more yeah totally
yeah let me grab some water and I have
to go pee
[Music]
[Music]
you
you
you
[Music]
it was great okay on technological thing
yeah yeah I am so that one of the things
that you talked about in I think in the
in the last video that you did yeah
which I really I've been thinking about
like it I've been noticing I've been
going by churches and and kind of really
going like those churches look somehow
different in the sense where I think you
were talking about where Nietzsche
Nietzsche basically said that I when I
think what I got was that the thing that
was like the distinction that I really
heard what
that in some sense Christianity in the
will to truth kind of led to its own
demise
right it in a certain sense like like
the whole thing about and I thought
about with confession like what's like
what's true be honest like really look
at things that on some level that that
the actual and then I saw I was walking
by a church and they say God is truth
like was central and then next next to
it it was like in cement you know isn't
the brick or something like that it was
an older Church in the next next to it
was God is love yeah I thought about
that sense of like oh yeah
there's a way in which
the will to truth right insa in some way
like led to the the whole the
questioning of of the premises in the
axioms of the church and undid itself in
some way
and how like Nietzsche like articulated
batter that's what I got from it yeah
yeah and I'm I'm wondering about that
sense of and then then it talked about
like well then at some point right if
he's just keep you asking yourself
what's true right and you keep willing
truth that at some point you get the
willing the willing that's willing truth
and then that's the now becomes the
truth and then there's this you know
this kind of like all the stuff that
we're talking about with technology um
but just to think about that of cuz I
also wanted to talk with you too about I
was just wondering about what I just
noticed I feel like when I when I hear
about like the what's going on with with
the church and how it's like like people
are just dropping like flies
right the amount and I feel so sad about
that like and I'm surprised cuz I don't
I actually I've never been had any kind
of formal religious training or
upbringing like none of that but I just
noticed that when I hear those stats I
feel so sad like
and I've been also kind of like looking
at like drawn to these questions about
about and so on some level just this
dichotomy between
like when God like if God's dead the
it's almost like the the but the space
of God doesn't go away right right
there's still if God's not there they're
still there they're on some level that
somehow like work like in concealment
and I just would I'd love to hear what
your just what your thoughts are about
like and it but there's also I think
some really good work being done in
[Music]
paradoxically and in theology right now
like the guy David Bentley Hart mm-hmm
are you familiar with him no yes I'll
send you I'll send you a video as videos
of him he's quite easy really scholarly
and he's just irritating is
it he's got quite a sense of humor and
he's just so arrogant but he's so he
really can talk salat about Heidegger he
talks a lot about temporality any in it
and he's grappling with this he these
deeper theological questions like what
is the so i i've been thinking about
actually going in for some reason i've
been thinking about going in and
actually going to and i don't know why
i'm i don't even know why i'm thinking
about this yeah but like like going to
an orthodox church and then just going
to
the rituals and like there's something
drawing me there and I I think it has
something to do I think one of the
things that maybe attracts me there is
just this sense of this kind of raping
of concealment right or the intolerance
of concealment in our temper ality the
the that sense of it seemed it seemed to
me that you know the way that how I
understand
Heidegger really talks about time is
it's not future present past it's more
like future past like the gravity of the
historicity has the moment shall show up
right and that were we're losing a past
like we're losing a sense of history of
tradition right oh all that stuff is
just disclosing itself as like shows up
for people is just yeah this
there's a certain I think what
technology does is attempting to
establish history business yeah Raiders
history it's the eternal recurrence of
the same becomes I mean you know and
which you can interpret as a way of
speaking of time yeah coming from the
tradition before we had terms like
ecstatic or that high degree yet yeah
but that technology in the Heidegger
says this in the text that the true face
of technology is that it's circling
around itself it's an ever its is the
you know recurring of the ever saying
yeah and that's that's a Mattson realm
off there is no history there is no
sense of coming from somewhere and then
there is no sense of going anywhere
right and
when you say you go to churches that's
there's always and you mentioned all the
docs churches that Russian Orthodox a
Greek Orthodox said there's a lot more
maybe than in the other Church is a
certain sense for mystery yeah that is
lacking and without that without this
perfect presence you maybe you get to
face this unreflective happy but not so
happy really weird places that are
really places yeah this is the Google
campus the campus like Oxford University
isn't Simula is it inviting people to
wander and vendor and meander where is
it in a way that's like professional
wrestling
you know like how professional wrestling
there it's it's acting ah everyone knows
it's acting but yet no one talks about
how it's acting I it's it's just very
bizarre I don't I I know it's in it's
that's really popular in America I don't
know it's missing in Europe and all
those guys right it's all scripted no
one really believes it but yet no one's
saying that they don't believe it's like
that right there's a yeah so I'm
wondering about like in in the sense of
just York wet like this question that
like you and when we were talking about
with Google as you as you were talking
about like why is it that we're so
intolerant of concealment right
um it's yeah I I don't know why to
certain degree also from where this
we're thinking to certain degree comes
from is there's always presents at work
it's it's difficult to give you know
there's no definite answer at this point
and I don't have one
it's probably to do with a denial of
death and if you go even deeper
it is this collapse of the sudden
disappearance of God maybe rather than
the death of God it's just because it's
not I want to say it so much again
that's so when Nietzsche says God is
dead this is very often you know it's
very the youths
would say yes Wow God is dead I agree
but it isn't when you actually read the
madman it's not a triumph
yeah but he says is this yes there's no
horizon you didn't use the word horizon
so when there's no horizon that means
there's no boundary there's no limit
when there's no limit there's nothing
that pushes back against you yes today
after you want to be in this ultimate
availability where you have everything
not even at hand it's it's it it needs
to be there without asking even without
even it's there before you even have to
think of it and it's also it's it's just
it's destroying thinking but why is it
happening it's I'm not sure why but you
can perhaps say that in in an h or epoch
rather where meaning disappears we
hold on to try to maybe build castles
that that if not ground any meaning
beyond itself maybe you know except for
we're building a better world and all
this nonsense
it's you
yeah it's I'm I'm not sure where it
comes from like in at the moment maybe
you maybe need to hear the question
again so I can in this because I expect
your question then I was highlighting
with the with
something right on the periphery of I'm
just noticing that like kind of there's
a way in which I am oriented in the in
the conversation which is this kind of
this sense of like basically I think the
question that you had asked earlier
which is in Anton relationship with
Google which is like what is this what
is this in basically intolerance or
anxiety around concealment right like
what and I if if this sense of just what
you're talking about like horizons I
love the notion of a right it's like I
can think about horizons for God forever
um yeah but this sense of the having
lost it because they're it's true like
if I I tried to get at this in a like a
little video that I made for my students
when I just I just took my phone and I
pointed on the ground like and I was
like okay just get this experience like
you're just looking at it's like an inch
away from the ground right and you can't
even tell that you're looking at dirt
right and then there's a certain point
where it comes like I you know I lift it
up a little bit and then you can kind of
see a rock but you don't know what the
rock is and then you see a little blade
of grass and I was like okay now
look at this right now all of a sudden
you get oh it's the ground but before
before you had the horizon of like the
grass you could see the grass the ground
wasn't there like in some way and then
he go all the way up and pretty soon the
ocean and you see the Golden Gate Bridge
and then you look back and now when you
look at that there's so much more in
some way in some way there's a way
there's a way that everything that's not
present in what you're looking at right
is actually fills it up with the horizon
of like oh it's in San Francisco there's
a place there's an orientation there's
like it animates it becomes what it is
and without that it's you don't know
what it is you don't know where you are
you don't know what you're looking
looking for and so there's this kind of
sense of like well okay like if if like
the horizon is gone yeah all we have is
stuff right yeah all we have is stuff
that which is measurable and all of that
if if there's concealment what is
concealment without a horizon like like
it seems like with the horizon
concealment is is what the what their
eyes and announces right cuz it's like
it's what's it announces something
beyond the horizon right that you move
towards but then the then the the
horizon becomes the ground because you
can't ever reach the horizon right so
there's this kind of sense of unfolding
Hurun concealment where there's a yeah
where the unknown actually becomes
something to move towards right in
orient around right patient that's it
it's orient this is Nietzsche's says
that basically there is now a lack of
orientation yeah you cannot have
cosmology that say I'm not going to say
the names without people people who are
so-called content philosophers in
America who now talk about cosmology of
black holes that's meaningless a cosmos
is a closed continue yeah that that is
in itself meaningful in the black hole
is the exact opposite of meaning and
it's it's it's the moment that this the
moment that you concede the cosmos
begins to collapse in modernity when the
Telos is taking away from the the final
cost so called from from things right
it's it begins to burst open and that we
are with we're now where everything's
just expanding and exploding for the
sake of why why is the universe
expanding book because it's expanding
why and so I think that with the horizon
breaking one you think about this is me
Cheney I think in the 1870s in Heidegger
in 1927 or in 1925 says if there's any
mean if there's any meaningful formula
it's not Colby - ergo so it's so more
abundance I am because I am towards my
death yeah so so I am because I'm
towards my death that's how I that's
where my meaning comes from and then
being towards death means not beating
towards the horizon because death is not
a horizon horizon you know very strictly
speaking does have to do with with
with with with someone projecting and
someone making sense the death is not
that but death as an ultimate limit
gives rise to horizon and I think
Heidegger posits almost as this if you
know it has almost possibility ultimate
limit that from which I received meaning
if I dare to push myself into my
possibility of not being by the
possibility of the impossibility of
existence that's how he what he calls
death I think that's this response to
the death of God and this is not tip to
use us to our death or mortality or
anything it's actually I think about us
realizing that in this epoch we have to
come to terms without finitude and what
was always struck me is that yeah this
is why it's important to hear about
what's going on inside of Silicon Valley
yeah it's why are they working against
death yeah um they are yeah they're
working against death because they're
working against consume and and maybe
you've read Heidegger calls death and
the 50s dusky Billick this designs this
is a very strange so in literal
translation this means the mountain
range of being right huh and you can see
that historically we always stride
through the history of being which isn't
which isn't a theoretical apparatus of
you know I'm just gonna pull out this
book haha yeah this is whack said about
being here and this no yeah no history
being is our history science Kashyyyk
this sign itself being itself is
historical it's being historical just
where we live and we as bottles stride
through the mountain range of being
which is staff itself as this
concealment dimension of abscond in the
image and why this in an unwillingness
to die there's not not just
unwillingness to Diamond that that
psychologically something else than just
trying to build the perfect cloud brain
where I can up the singularity is Ray
Kurzweil fantasize about and and the
other but you but ki big for hiding a
means and the collection no sorry the
concentration the gathering of
concealment and not just consuming also
sheltering and harboring and to
certainly be bagging also means bringing
forth maybe so that's key Billick right
see that's how he understands key bigots
it's very you know free this approach to
language but it brings something to the
for that so it meant also death is that
gathering of concealment its death
actually so why are technologists
working against death well the work in
Ken's death because they working against
concealment anyways yeah they're working
against concealment and time to a
certain degree has to do with consuming
every that then they're also working to
certain degree against time and trying
to build a timeless sphere the perfect
cloud that doesn't know time and if and
this is the Internet to a certain degree
is this very strange is what is it
actually is not a place medium that this
that if you just spent time with it on
your own it time just disappears and but
not in the not in this ecstatic sense of
that you get when you when you're
extremely you know at the peak of your
creativity well you wait you create
something timed us in that sense there's
a P and become exciting you could become
you you're maybe you know really precise
and quick and doing something in a short
amount of time but in time cuz it's just
gone from when you binge watching
Netflix for example it's all about
killing time
and I this expression English is just
again very fascinating to speak of
killing time and this is not my idea
this is I forgot their names that the
critical critical theorists from Germany
you say that the Internet is the new
stance and this standing now that's
that's still you know you can still
transform it and but but it's not it's
it's weirdly enough it's it's oh there's
always something working against time
and the time of human beings and how we
are temporally in the world and
therefore you know it's it's when you
say that there's a lack of horizons then
that means that there is no world in
that sense right right the world is what
is the world the world isn't as
Heidegger always says world isn't you
know the everything around us or it
isn't it isn't just a collection of
things world is the horizon or the
background against which beings appear
as meaningful yeah and and and then
that's that's something completely
different from saying it's just data
it's just information that's all stuff
it's just all the stuff that there is
right it's yeah I think what we're
trying to do is in in this epoch is Bill
building the total denial of the of the
meaning of the historical significance
of the death of God or the disappearance
of the divine and in that sense also you
know this intolerance or even fear of
concealment
mystery and there's no sense of wonder
and I I do wonder I mean you know as you
know careers are unreal okay I mean it's
their fantasies yes but I have a friend
of mine whose son works for a major
international corporation very
traditional
maybe that been googled they produce
actually something son
no no one of my friends son but there's
this gentleman he's in his late 60s and
he's got a 30 something year old son and
he said to look that corporation work
isn't real it's just a fantasy there's
enough people who believe in it and it's
there to make money and in pace you pays
your bills and everything but you have
to build up and I think what so what's
what's what one I think maybe one of the
greatest threats or dangerous coming
within the next decades is that the
people forget to build up their their
building their careers and their
building may be equity and blah blah
blah but we need to we have to build up
ways of making sense of the world that's
beyond these momentary because
everything's short-lived and fast
quickly there and then gone again it
mean the collapse of meaning is also
something that you know if you take it
seriously and you want to be responsible
they have to build up ways of making
sense of the world that aren't crudely
subjective istic yeah a lot of him
writing always talks about isn't it
let's learn we have to get rid of
subjects of this and it's yeah but then
we're just stuck with all you know I I
don't it doesn't matter all I have to do
is make say this is meaningful to me and
that's consumerism works right you buy
your identity right you buy meaning for
for a brief moment right yeah but but to
me it is switching yourself off for five
or six or maybe more hours on on a death
machine like like Netflix that's that's
telling that this is happening
it's quite the
there's something that then that
something that it's not I mean that
there's so much you know that there's so
much capacity for people to talk but
there's still not enough being said I
think about these fundamental dimensions
of existence where and of course you
know the other the other danger is that
it just becomes this is what hiding
assess in the 30s he says you know I
shouldn't have I shouldn't have written
this book and everybody talks about
being and that just means that being is
forgotten even more yeah so it's you
know the strange thing is that if we
let's just talk about concealment the it
becomes almost like an object itself but
if not then there's there's again
there's a danger of just turning it into
something at them you make one makes I
mean something we work with or operate
with right it's rather I think about a
slow building off of both ways so that
there will be a time again we cannot
rule that to happen well but such that
there is that openings as I say in this
this video lecture that openings in
history again that can come about but
it's a slow build-up to that and then
you know you a sense of wonder a sense
of mystery those will come back perhaps
but we can't rule them to come and we we
yeah its businesses yeah so I think
Heidegger - maybe summarize what I tried
to say is that Heidegger I think
responds to the death of God by making
us aware of our mortal finitude and and
saying without that we don't have a
horizon now this is what constitutes our
horizons is our infinity we have to be
aware of it and not work against it um
this is where meaning could rise from
from being mortally finite rather than
as Nietzsche says you know where are we
we don't know where we are we're
floating
Nietzsche says he speaks of the eternal
recurrence of the same as a heavy the
heaviest weight that's because we're
floating away and this floating maybe
that's you could maybe translate that as
saying that there is no depth dimension
about that there's no awareness off of
other dimensions of what they have
immediately present about themselves
which is that Korea in Silicon Valley
which is yeah it is pursuing that the
ladders they climb up or pursuing
certain things that are in this no time
period extremely important and
hierarchically you know this great
status that comes with it yes um but but
this yeah this lack off off from kind of
appreciating that not everything can be
maybe you know quantifying etc that's
hmm think about like what couple things
couple things one of the things I just
appreciated this about about our
conversation last time I'm appreciating
it again about what you said about uh
the I think he quoted Hegel and that
saying that the philosopher dies of
worry every day every day right every
day I and I really feel I feel that in
you but I feel like in a there's
something I did the thing I wanted to
ask you about too is when you in the
beginning you said yeah I just wrote
down this thing in my journal right like
thinks and think right and yeah what is
that what is that that like
what that did what what have you write
that down what what is that that's
what is that that that's moving right -
what is this thing that's like having us
just go mad in the conversation right
like cuz there's so many yeah yeah what
is that I have no idea this it just
comes yeah yeah just just come these
thoughts it's just all of a sudden
banana yes make sense so I'm I was
outside I was taking a walk and just all
just all of a sudden opened up and I
thought of gratitude in terms of how
consumerism mixed gratitude impossible
because everything's always there now
you know you know not grateful for for
for an Ikea glass or yeah or you know or
anything really whoo-hoo-hoo-hoo praises
the Lord or anything or anyone for the
food they write its and that hit me
today and they stopped I thought I
there's a lack of gratitude
and and what you can learn from hiding
it is how you know you know he's been
ridiculed for saying that
thinking is Duncan that thinking is
thanking yeah and it's pretty easy to
ridicule that but what was much more
difficult is to appreciate it and to
actually appreciate also that beauty and
hearing that in language because who's
says that you know it like words just
mean with the dictionary tells us and it
that it's not possible to hear something
in a word that no one else has heard
maybe before why would why would be
denied why would then not be allowed
right there's a who's decided that so
thinking is thanking it means first of
all there's a credit ood for being able
to think at all and then I think this
this the stands one can take is you know
anything
his hometown he thinks it sometime for
being for being there yeah so that he
could be man and he does I think at some
point he said to his brother that it
thinks in me he a B he wrote as you know
put some volumes there's about 100
published now and there could be more
and it's it things in me and if you ask
what is it maybe to beast strictly I'm
akhirin maybe it's it's what he calls I
guess which is not perfectly translated
as event you know I'd miss is more so
it's not published you first of all you
cannot transmit there's no English
equivalent there's word for just like
logos yeah
now there's we don't we cannot translate
Dow into any Western language that's not
happening
and that I miss you could think off and
he does that as coming into its own wild
disappearing and absconded coming into
its own well it's a it's a realm he says
like yeah a proper realm where being and
the human being meat is the I guess is
not a substance and I think the I guess
is that which that which throws itself
yeah catches itself that's like
experimenting with you know ways of
thinking and I've missed in that sense
and it's Agnes he says is what all of
metaphysics has always responded to
without knowing that that's what it's
responding to and that's how you get to
the epochs of being in the history of
people they did it could perhaps it's
possible to say that within Heidegger's
thought that what's taking over what's
inviting us
is that what heilige calls that is is a
certain realm where their being and that
also means history and possibilities of
meaning and horizons meet with the human
being and then we become we become not
not the because we're not the agents of
history right so that's that's what
humanism would say we're kind of where
the center of everything we do will lead
to this that no it's how we respond to
what's going on
that feeds back in so that comes back
later on and then that's and I think all
great thinkers say that need sir
Nietzsche certainly that's when he has
spirit poster assay what was it silent
thoughts move the world you know beware
of what comes and dogs feed it's not
it's silent almost silent notes that
make and again this has to do with
concealment and and non-availability
that's that's how this becomes about and
that's the agnes as it were itself
because it's this realm where this this
possibility opens up and when we respond
to it we respond in a way to it
currently if you more more than ever
where we try to make everything
available for us but then there's
another layer to that which is what's
what's making us do that isn't us it's
it's it's distinctly non-human what what
happens in technology and yeah
why because what once once you work
against mortality you are working
against you what it means to be human
you're trying what you know it's an
attempt to eradicate I
one because it's it it takes away that
dimension of our history that is what we
all suffer through yeah and that makes
anything ultimately meaningful yes or
encounter with our death
yeah yeah yeah and then you create this
this fake realm of off of you know a
deathless sphere which is also as you've
described it faceless
there's no distinction right you know
this is slowly coming about right no not
everywhere you know because you can save
the that that's you know unevenly
distributed it's not everywhere it's
it's not that that's another thing of
beauty is that it's not all-powerful
it's not everywhere but it is so slowly
showing itself that that's a possibility
of what could be coming and or is
announcing itself but then again it's
not it's not fatalism it's it's just
that we the way we respond to it changes
your feeds back into what's happening
and then comes back from behind in waves
and that you know if you ask personally
what is it I have no idea it's always
been there and if I don't think or write
or how F these conversations I would I
would I would not be able to exist it's
not my happen because there's no this is
that it's on you oh I fight today I'm
gonna sit down and think about death for
10 hours right right right
it's it as there's no it is not I don't
want to do any of this but that doesn't
mean that it's just in Psychological
terms you could say it's a pool yes
something pulling right Mac quite sure
what but yeah and it's the cut thing you
you said about Nietzsche about history
in the silence in the silent notes of
that yeah like that began that thing
about listening right just that and and
yes listening so you could even say that
you know history history isn't this this
one event after another succession of
big stuff in the news or anything or
whatever is in history books that's it's
weirdly enough part of it but there is a
there is a melody to history I think
what Heidegger wants us to make us aware
off again remind us off we said there is
this lingering melody that we can begin
to hear and then it slowly begins to
make sense yeah it's a god down these
beautiful artworks like for example good
is Faust which is one if you want to
understand modernity that's one of the
one of the texts you have to look at as
good as fast okay wanting someone to
tell me about Faust well you know it's
the false impact is the devil comes to
vows to as a
men who aspires to know everything have
absolute knowledge and he he's not
satisfied with anything I can get no
satisfaction right so he makes a pact
with the devil to achieve first of all
youth and then also to seduce a young
woman and destroy her life in a so in a
sense it's destroyed all for the sake of
gaining absolute power and knowledge
it's a story of the will to power if you
like and but when you when you read it
one of one of these texts that are you
know first of all beautifully written
and some of the most beautiful chairman
ever written of course good is it our
our national poet it's there's something
else that that happens maybe it might
not there's something that occurred to
me over for the first time that maybe
six seven years ago and read it again
and also saw the play on stage is that
there is this deep web I think you can
say in English this deep web of meaning
that's not ever but you cannot Google
that right you could read everything you
can have the you can scan every single
book in the world like Google Books
and no one you cannot pick up on it from
if you think it's all just information
and data there's something else is
working its way in history and it's
sometimes lights up and that's where we
need to get close to and to a certain
degree this epoch then it's been a
meaning is never just given meaning was
never just given this is something I
wanted to say is well before tonight is
meeting always has to be found and
rested from something else from seven if
you're just given meaning you're you
then you are as Kant would say you know
you are
you're what is it wouldn't windy you're
getting lost in translation I think you
know you self-inflicted ignorant
something I think would be the English
I'm not quite sure that now it says then
you you need to question but being
remains a question science fagot is a
question of being but the off is not a
genitive objectives as a being as an
object here but being as the subject
being is what's doing the questioning
right being asks us right that's what's
happening right and and we're brought
closer to to it in the moments off off
anxiety of facing death of running forth
towards death as Heidegger says then
when we deal with what's mmediately
there and available yes that because
then were trapped in a in a presence
that that only knows itself it's only
aware of itself but not aware of the
ecstatic moments that that made that
presence possible in the first place yes
and that's where we are we are we are in
a making an A and an H of making present
and Heidegger says and being in time
that if you make everything present then
you're stuck in in in in an
unquestioning non-understanding to track
yes right there there is no hearing you
don't need to hear anything you don't
need to do why because you you have
everything you need right supposedly
right but what I think what what what
what we're looking for altum Utley is
those who seek is is this other that
this is what's no longer possible in
this uncanny wheelwork and you know when
Nietzsche speaks of an uncanny real work
he doesn't say that it's ugly he doesn't
say that
it can they can look very you know
aesthetically pleasing as maybe a Google
campus is on the face of it you know
quite friendly and colorful than the
other one but that can be an uncanny we
work to yes unless maybe a sense of
uncanny nurse about it yeah unholy
wait right that's what I meant by the
razor no man I say you work we imagine
like a big machine it's modern times by
Charlie Chaplin but you can be an
adapted wheel and or a clock in right in
in an unholy non-place as well but you
don't have to we just go I'm I mean
unquestioning that's always that's
always the problem this is not non
questioning yes step because non
questioning means there is no there is
lacks say of an openness for when
something attacks us and and asks us to
question what is yeah so these are and
in all because even that so even that
moment where something asks us where
being asks us to respond those are
moments of not you know in that sense
they're not available
they actually they happen in consumed
and it's not clear where it comes from
so it comes out of a consume and if you
like right right right
that I just is word as we're talking I'm
just kind of getting this sense of just
just remembering like at least for me
anyways yeah meaning and mystery are
like the same almost like the same thing
right yeah so you could you know yeah
yeah I get yeah I guess you can say that
so they're not the equivalent no
identical yeah but they are in in this
beautiful claim
yeah where
right look if I just if I Vic it
I guess even this conversation between
you know these weirdos here
someone could someone could write bullet
points right
chairman guy says this American guy says
this right boom boom boom boom boom and
then you don't have to listen to it yes
so you're given the meaning the
significance of the conversation and
bullet points but but there's nothing
there's nothing that's being disclosed
by that you're just given something yeah
if you're given meaning yes and this by
the way that all of this is the oldest
problem it's the cave of claytor
right all comes back to that they're
given and this is something how do the
way that the cave is taught is false
right could usually so you know does
just educational he's just trying to
explain his theory of forms yeah the
other or you know the shadows aren't
real number no they're real that's the
thing shadows are real what but Plato is
after here is this strange old problem
that that can be beings that aren't
really beings that have a very difficult
illogical status right and so where we
are with the case is that Plato to a
certain degree also traps us in the cave
and the prisoners anyways they are given
meaning that's why they're prisoners
they're imprisoned by their
unquestioning stance that they assume
right and all they do is without ever
asking - so you know there's concealment
at work just by the very fact
they never turn their heads to see
what's behind them so that's already a
level of concealment or a dimension of
consumed if you like in them they learn
by heart the shadows that passed them by
and that's what structures their world
that's that's where they get their
so-called meaning from right their
existence you could say is pointless
because there's they don't ask what's
beyond this there's no transcending
themselves and trying to leave the cave
because only one of them who does and he
faces death when he comes back down
right yeah faces the death by hanging
because is he dared to leave ranks right
let's be very careful it's so to a
certain degree we're not saying anything
new because it's always the problem
but what Plato escaped when I was six 15
maybe 16 I don't remember
whenever I read it first and I read it
in Greek at school back then already
this is almost twenty years ago it hit
me that this is our age how is it
possible that a thinker 400 before
Christ or so describes television radio
and the computer cinema how is that
right
so you see maybe maybe maybe that's a
way of of getting into this
understanding of how history works yes
it again so how is it that that's just
an open question yeah oh is is that
Plato describes something that you know
it reminds us today of television of
cinema we have yes
now certainly also smartphones and the
internet right
well we deal with shadows yes these
shadows are real they make up our world
we scroll through Instagram and all oh I
want to be here I want to be this I want
to go there yes they structure how we
see the world so you see the shadows are
extremely powerful right people who
spend their lives staring at screens
trading whatever that that's unreal to a
certain degree that's put it then again
it is it's so what's I think the the
open question here is how is it that
what is history if if not
this slow wave crashing or not crashing
waves moving from behind us and coming
at us from from behind I mean the the
cave is only just now coming towards us
yeah don't mind but towards us because
we now have to deal with it yes on any
level that no one else has to deal with
before right right so interesting I had
like
[Music]
actually I wanted to ask you two about
this about
one of the things he talked about last
time was how how academia was awful
and I would have thought you know it's
interesting I would have thought that
the kind of conversation that we're
having right um
I think without even reflecting on it I
didn't really even think about it but I
just I was surprised when he talked
about that this was a this way of not
like connecting and this way was rare
yeah because it's it's rare because
there's no competition there's there's
there's just an interest in talking yeah
I'm not talking to you to overpower you
and show you that I'm right yeah and or
that or the other way around or even
just to teach you something I mean I'm
not teaching right now right I'm trying
to understand yeah yeah and that's
unfortunately I mean not the case in his
purchase of higher learning huh
and you you had you had the the person
that you went he's the first thing you
had interviewed that that guy who said
like there Justin yeah he said like he
taught Heidegger in a particular way
that people didn't necessarily like
agree that that's the way they should be
taught in that way
what was well how does doubted eat I'm
so curious about this cuz I mean even in
shinato yeah that yeah yeah the gut the
guy that was talking about um you had
interview to him I think he was yeah um
yeah I really liked that interview like
I listened to that a bunch of different
times like
well what I'm just so curious about this
because I'm like I just been over here
alone like trying to read Heidegger and
I haven't really had anyone to talk to I
don't know how people approach it like
this one of the things I like about
YouTube is that like there's actually
people is the first time I actually
heard people discuss Heidegger in some
sense right and like yeah but like when
you was it when you started to engage
with with Heidegger was it was it with
him in India in the university can you
share like what was that like for you
like to a certain degree he never
mentioned the name Heidegger he because
it doesn't matter yeah and the way
though he it was that thinking is not
hiding us thinking it's what if I had
ancient Greek and Latin at school yeah
and especially the I was you know I was
better in ancient Greek than in Latin
yeah because the Greek way of thinking
is closer to me than Roman thought Roman
thought is very superficial it's a lot
about decorum it's it's they're copycats
basically of Greek culture anyways and
you know very theatrical as Italians are
up until this day it's all theatrical
everything's dramatical and the kind of
serious about it but not really yes
yeah fascinating that's English but so
that when you did you know taught
philosophy that way of thinking that I
had become familiar with
in studying Greek the language came back
hmm did you have to mention hiding his
name so what I make of that hmm is that
the way Heidegger thinks isn't you know
oh it's erratically different and you
know it's it's just the way that Greeks
think and the way that ancient Greek
thought worked mmm how thinking itself
work since the question of being is not
all of this world it's a question for
meaning it's a question for existence
yeah question of history and it's
reminding us that there's something else
beyond that you know not beyond the
middle physical sense that but you know
we're not grasping at the moment we're
not even working for right and and the
other thing with with with you know
teaching hiding it it's just what I
would say is the question is do you take
it seriously what do you use it to as an
ornament or as as sort of a a good way
to start an academic career right
someone to argue with right I'm reading
a high to get critically yes you can you
can anyone critically that anyone can do
that
yeah that's waiting I mean I can sit
down and say ha ha Eagle mm-hmm
you're this doesn't make any sense and
know what you're trying to do when you
think is you approach it from the from
the perspective of necessity there is
necessity Hegel coming along after after
Kant who speaks and the critique of Pure
Reason about the antennae Me's agrees
that means that reason itself cannot
miss that reason always traps itself in
contradictions but then once to get rid
of the contradictions you know what
technology is technology is the
transcendental logic by which we
construct subjectively non contradiction
without contradictions that's why
everything's so boring we are all bloody
transcendental largest locations
according to the laws that can
finds finds establishes but finds in the
possibilities of nature in history yeah
and then Eagle says you can't look you
he says look a malleable you do admit
that there are contradictions - let's
take them seriously and that's why he's
a classical thinker yes and right ouch
huh this is to arrive at truth you need
to have being a nothing that's and and
then Heidi is another necessity we can
talk about that some other time but it's
just if you take it seriously this
thinking then there's a necessity to it
the way we approach it now in this hyper
intellectual world we live in it so it's
just you know theories just something to
to read critically or to write a paper
about that's interesting then how do you
assess some ways as you know everything
is interesting today but what does it
even mean to say it something's
interesting right it means nothing
Nietzsche says and I quote this in the
lecture he says we're all interested
we're all just epidermal e interested
nothing touches us really doesn't go
under a skin rock he says what are you
repeating says spectators historians
interpreters all reactive talents
they're not active they're not acting
not trying to build and create we're
trying to just respond and respect you
know look at something and then react to
it and that's kind of comfortable I know
but it doesn't believe it's it's kind of
weird because you know it transform you
yeah yeah right totally it's like this
understand it's the thing I think about
I think about with reading I mean
most of the continental philosophers I
mean definitely Heidegger like um I've
understood it's weird it's like it's so
interesting because I'm realizing that
what I what what hangs with me or where
um well actually you know who talked
about this was uh which his name he's
the Acala he's the cybernetic guy um
Gregory Bateson and he talked about like
the difference between like a
blockbuster movie and an art movie an
artful movie and what and what he would
say is like you know when you go into a
blockbuster movie right you go in one
way
great and then there's like the right
the opening and then the build-up right
and attention and then the crescendo and
the orgasm and then the happy ending and
then and then you walk out exactly the
same person right and where he said the
more artful a movie is is the more you
walk in one way and the movie opens up
these tensions right and to the degree
it's artful as he would put it it should
agree that by the end you're left with
something unsolved with the tension
that's there's an ink there's no like
crescendo and dude it's like you're left
with unresolved things such that you
walk out right and you actually have to
kind of live the completion of the movie
right so you walk out a different person
know the difference that our horizons
and I I think that that's the thing that
I really where I find you know we talk
about well what are some ways of getting
access to this kind of ecstatic
temporality and
um which I actually think that there's a
I think that there's a listening for
that right there's a there's a loser
listening and a desire to have like an
experience of that right what what is it
- what is it - live time or to be that
by a kind of time or a different sense
of time I mean that is just yeah I
really like yes that's it exactly I
think it begins for us as humans it
begins in language as it stirred me a
certain carefulness but how do you speak
and you know not say I don't have time
all right you never have time first of
all just happy right you cannot save
time what does that even mean right
show me that bank account where you've
saved time and that's not there so it's
not a stock but then you take or save or
not
no let me just not use time for now no
that's not my work so tippy if we only
speak in terms of times passing it's
passing me by all the time and yep don't
worry let's just say and this is
something that's very strange
because we always want to have you know
what's the result what's the outcome
what's projected once I was it true okay
what was the correspondence true that
that's a time arises and gifts itself
time gifts itself time gives us what we
didn't just I think that in itself is
transformative all right he keep telling
that yourself I'm I'm I'm certainly not
doing that every day right kids
something I actually remind myself off
as well right because we live in clock
time yeah we just think yeah it's
actually hey give me that's you know not
tie times
not take that's stupid that's a stupid
leave that people make oh we've invented
clock so we should meant a time no no
sorry
mine is a bit bigger than you but clock
time to certainly agree is fake you
cannot equalize time you know this is
why you get to all these shenanigans
about high time is relative on how it
feels
yes but it's not time is relative
because if it's relative then it would
be relative to some absolutely not some
what's happened some time is that I
think for now I have to think a lot more
about time I think what an exercise can
be is that one says time arises time
gives yeah and get a gig and then move
away from saying time is passing just a
time rice and that that is I you know
it's beginning to transform into beyond
it it feels when I say it there's quite
a sense of of I know it's kind of
soothing even this it's very really is
isn't it yeah it's like passes but am I
gonna running out I need to go get some
more time give me some more time
somewhere or you know I don't have time
so it's gone it's it's very strange
yep the time arises time gears right is
there's a quietness that comes over a
certain column yeah I start to like list
I start to to yeah I start to listen for
the silent note yes absolutely
Pingree yes yes yeah that I was thinking
about likes of my experience in this you
mentioned Goethe and Faust Grinnell you
with Goethe through his scientific work
which is just wild gray just
factors a guy created new sciences I
just like it and also I heard I heard
somewhere that like Garrett that has
like somehow they're able to measure
this but like Goethe has has used more
words
in his lifetime than any other person
like they did some sunless it was
interesting of like you know I think it
was about genius and language and yeah
they showed like that you know and the
person below him was like 40 you know
40,000 and Goethe was something like a
hundred and fifty thousand right Garrett
is fascinating to me um just the RET
like the range at which he he operated
but so my understanding of like what his
work with biology right was was
analogous to reading a text you know
you'd say that you know and for the most
part when we look at you know human
human-made objects we actually don't we
don't we don't uh look at them and
perceive them we read them like we we
net we see a chair because we we read
the functionality of chairs and because
we have the correlating distinction
right we can we can see the chair we
actually read it right and so just like
with the reading you don't you know and
he said he said so so like in the human
in the human world there's this way in
which we have the corollary cons as he
would say the concept meets the precept
right and that that those coming
together is the is the experience of the
world this is a but that it was he said
however with nature right he said we
don't how we try to understand nature is
not by reading it right how we try to
understand nature is bike as if we were
like opening a text and we were
measuring the shapes of the letters
right like because we don't and so I
think the thing that he was the Talos
that he was approaching what this was
seeing nature as a sacred text and that
that to give one's like to give one's
perception it's actually to give one's
eye right over to nature and that if you
could fully give it over to nature and
he had this whole way of doing this of
like how do you perceive the species
right of like in botany like that the
actual Sun like the revelation of the
science that we would be able to like
fully give over your sense of I am to
nature and that if if you could if you
could fully discipline your perception
in that giving you light up right it
would you'd experience it's in a certain
sense its idea
ID allottee as an experience you know
you could perceive the that which runs
through all oak trees that give oak
trees that you can actually read the
meaning of it in some way
and so there there's a and I think
that's maybe some some gives a hint
maybe in in towards the way that we can
kind of enter into these these cuz I
think that's that's quite a that's quite
a that's quite a wild sense of
temporality repeat what do you think
about when I look at that in the in this
is why it lights up for me is because I
was just reading I was reading Esther
Heidegger I think it notes down here
right the the ister I was at the I was
at the plan was that the you know the so
funny I'm like sitting here reading
Heidegger in the waiting room
- because we're trying to have kids my
I've been meditating too much so my
sperm don't swim anymore there -
quantumness um the doctor thinks it's
because of my age I think it's just
limiting but you know I'm sitting there
with my wife waiting to do this the what
do you call it that were they they do it
for you and then they stick it in her
and then we have a baby so but I'm
reading the Eastern Rite of Heidegger
and the first opening so I read I read
the poem right which I didn't really
understand it and I felt like I really
had to even I would have to I'd have to
go over that a thousand times - so I
think where I could actually begin to
comprehend what he's talking about there
were little moments of like like when he
talked about sign somehow bringing in
the Sun and the moon and the horizon I
was like oh that's something shakes
there a little bit but then but then
like the opening paragraph I was
noticing my experience of reading it
right in my experience of reading it was
where and this is where I feel so
grateful for Heidegger like I just feel
so much gratitude for him because it's
like
whether or not I'm getting the content
of what he's saying in order to try to
get it what he's and this is what's
what's so interesting about him in my
view is that
what makes it difficult to understand
his because he's bringing my attention
to a place that is nearer that I
normally look right it's like a it's not
this complex complicated thing it's
actually is just talking about the
the colleague is talk called a opening
with a call right Paul is calling in the
once it is quite it's your calling yeah
which grants that leg reveals the
dignity of that which is the call and
calling it's like you yeah and he very
often says also that we it's we have to
return to where we already are
yeah it isn't it isn't I think often you
start reading highly gets what's being
is massive wonderful thing that will
come at some point it's it's always
lingering it's something very simple and
very simple and it's not you're going
beyond an anywhere else but this strange
thing is and to quote Mazda eka why I
don't know I've got him a closeness and
this is how I know it so I don't know
where my second says it actually but
it's the line goes Wow why do you go out
home so we would you have to go out and
leave ourselves as work but we're
already there where we need to be but
still we have to go out and that's that
sort of difference self at work and that
that's what we have said that's this
have you like and it seems like there's
a kind of a yoga that like and following
just kind of following the movement of
understanding yes
it just kept having me get closer in
closer in closer in right in that that
is seems like in in some way
you're right it's like oh yeah I get it
and then it slips away right and I have
to read it again and but there's this
kind of sense of kidding really close in
like closer and closer and closer and
closer and closer um which I'm wondering
about is that I I think that has just
been so instructive for me right it's
almost like where I feel immersed
Aponte's really like this to a lot of
the Continental people are like really
like this but like um huntys really cool
in so many ways he really is like that
too but this sense of just where it
seems like it seems like where it brings
my attention right is like the
discipline or something or like the or
the practice of philosophy right of how
to live it like there's something about
the way that you have to read it right
and then I'm thinking good there's
something about that and the way that
Garrett is talking about like reading
nature as a kind of sacred text and
giving yourself over to it fully and
having it those kinds of right yeah sure
it's um my wife is just got home oh okay
okay I gotta make dinner should we uh
should we talk again later in August
yeah totally you know not every day I'll
do this every day yeah yeah that's just
email and then we do do that cool work
we can also set it may be whatever you
want to do really we can set of texts
but Heidegger yeah I I may I'll give you
I meant to write this I have a bunch of
ideas about things that I think would be
really interesting to do um also with an
eye on just wanting I I feel I feel
I want I want you to have what you want
to around like getting out of academia
and finding a way to do this right I
think there's a way right but I noticed
I want that for you um totally totally
what though there's some ideas about
that how to do that to that kind of
speaking you know kind of hooks into
that some more - yeah let me let me
write those things out and there would
be good yeah that would be good so we'll
we'll try we'll try for late August
maybe that's good
and I'm traveling a bit now I'm gonna go
hiking and and yeah I I'll send you some
um I'll say III included you in a
mailing list now so you know what I'm
doing outside of academia and stuff like
that like talks and whatever else and
wave by the way there's a video and
hiding it coming out on Sunday yeah on
human Heidegger yeah yeah yeah sure I do
[Laughter]
how is this for you
very good now there are always these I'm
a bit tired today because I had a very
rough week when it comes to drinking but
right now like four times and I'm too
old it's there always sees there's
moment yeah right I was like where it oh
yes yeah and I have all of it I hadn't
yeah and its meaning and mystery right
but that's doctor there's always I I'm
not gonna say too much now because I
don't know yet but there will be in
every good conversation there aren't
many good conversations right but good
conversations they linger and then
something comes back
and and that's that's the wonderful
thing about it isn't it you don't know
what will stay but something will stay
in it yeah and I think
maybe we've cracked something with that
concealment talk about Google and what
they're trying to do right maybe he
keeps his rim to be super careful using
us like it's a little bitch right like
let's lick right really well now if you
start if you start googling right and
you feel you feel more present you'll
know why yeah she's already in the
kitchen starting to cook sharing sharing
you and I hope dia will you come oh yes
sir right