I think we decided to focus this
conversation around Zach's most recent
essay yep called kovat 19 a war broke
out in heaven mm-hmm and I was really
happy to read this because it was so
mythopoetic so mythological and because
I'm a sucker for that kind of language
and I also thought it was quite brave
because nobody's writing like that you
make the very strong statement that
there's a war in heaven and using this
strong eschatological terminology is
that am I saying that right and I was
thinking about why that was so powerful
and I was thinking about Leonard Cohen
and I was thinking about Bob Dylan and I
was thinking about how they're always
singing about the end of the world like
in some level like there's always this
flood that's got to come and and and
there's a crack in everything and you
know things are get a slide in all
directions and all these sort of lines
from from popular music we're coming
into my mind which is very biblical in
some sense and that's probably one of
the reasons why I really appreciate
Zak's essay and it's also I think a
reason why other people might be quite
critical of it because the people once
want a more rational explanation for
what's happening and that kind of thing
not the ER essay was was not not
rational or reasonable but so could we
speak about that can we speak about why
you're using this kind of kind of
language and why it's important and why
I think I think your essay seems to be
making the rounds in other words it's
affecting people in one way or another
sure thank you I mean I I'm still
actually surprised by the reception of
the paper I'm
very happy I didn't expect it to be as
as well received as it was actually
because I mostly expected people to be
you know cautious or worried about the
mythopoetic angle but I mean I was
trying to draw attention it as clearly
as I could to the interior aspects of
the crisis too and to specifically have
something to say that wasn't directly
about the biology and the geopolitics
and all the dynamics that are within
this and yeah and some of it was also
just in my own experience returning to
where I go for solace right like as I
was looking out at the stuff that's
coming from like the spiritual crown you
know and just terrible a lot of it's
terrible like an insulting
I think insulting and a retreat to a
kind of relativistic pre tragic
spiritual escapism
so can you characterize that describe
what is so so terrible and then
something about you know let's say a
spiritual reaction to well I mean again
it's it you know it's it's complex
because there's there's so much in the
religious landscape now right so you
still have the grip traditions you know
the church and and the Sangha and all
these things would still exist from the
great traditions I'm talking mostly
about the non-affiliated kind of human
potential movement New Age movement
crowd at least in America where there's
this strange confluence between
post-modernism and Buddhism and in
particular where you get this like
allegiance between the deconstructing of
truth by post-modernism which is
something
like something specific and the
deconstructing of like experience of
self and reality in terms of some
discourses and Buddhism right and not
specifically Buddhism and most of the
people I'm talking about really having
even like read a Buddhist Sutra but what
they're getting is the notion that if
you analyze your own experience like of
a boss on a meditator you will realize
that most of the things you take to be
true or not simply true right that
there's some deeper reality beyond they
kind of given phenomenology so emptiness
different than form mostly we don't
experience I'm Dennis although even it's
always already there and then
post-modernism is doing something
specific in linguistics all right
taking aim at the modern notion of
objectivity and these other things and
so you give this confidence where you
get a relativistic post-modernism with a
particular brand of kind of spiritual
criticism of the kind of conventional
reality let's say it's the spiritual
criticism and so though you end up
getting people denying that viruses
exist right and that we have bodies and
then right correct and thanking the
virus and writing a whole long things
where they end up saying that actually I
don't believe any of the things I'm
saying that's not right we shouldn't
believe anything you can't believe
anything we don't know anything but
here's a long list of things I believe
but I don't really believe that and so
there's a lack of courage and spiritual
fortitude on the part of those people
who are or are people are looking to for
that and so yeah it was
it's just concerning and it's of course
it's still still going on you know that
that kind of that kind of view so in
some sense this was a response to that I
was trying to you know as you say it's
not a reasonable piece but I was saying
the piece is not unreasonable and so I'm
trying to say reasonable things about
topics instead of thinking that saying
something unreasonable is profound just
because it's unreasonable or not
unreasonable when me and John we're
talking the last time with Christopher
or master of Pietro in the midst of our
conversation I came up with this sort of
thing I said this is like a judgment or
something right what's happening it just
came into my mind right as a biblical
language and John was saying wait a
minute hold on here be careful so maybe
John you want to speak to to the the the
cut your cautionary sure response to the
dangers of using this kind of language
and how can we use this kind of poetic
language correctly or rightly err in a
way that's helpful one I think Zach did
a great job of doing I do attitude so
first of all compliment Zach I read the
article and I thought it was exemplary
of how to use what I would call symbolic
language in order to make important
bridges symbol on to connect between the
phenomenological and what we might call
the ontological because I saw that a
large part of what the essay was doing
was exactly using what you're calling
myth or poetic language to bridge
between those two domains for people in
a very powerful way I think that's very
important we can talk about that more as
we go into our discussion but I think
that how do you how do you get craft a
language that's you know deeply
transgender that deeply resonates with
people's phenomenological experience and
yet also gives them you know a way of
articulating a grasp on reality that is
very needed right now
and I thought what Zach was doing was
exemplifying that very well that's how
it landed for me that that's how the
language was coming up the biblical and
so the biblical language I've often
cautioned people I think the most
appropriate attitude toward the Bible is
a deeply reverential ambivalence the
Bible is it is a terrible book in the
sense of its capacity to cause great
harm but also in its terrific in the
sense that it can induce significant
powerful and transformation and
people so the biblical language my
concern is I share one with Zach and
then one that I think he might have also
I think he's he steered very very
adroitly between Scylla and Charybdis
they're very nicely between a
fundamentalist return of this language
because my concern is and I've seen a
lot of people talking this way the virus
is very much like an Old Testament deity
it's abstract it's ubiquitous you don't
know what it will strike right it's it's
demanding purity codes from us
it's narrowing our world we feel like
we're under judgment we feel like we're
being punished we feel like we have to
invoke purity codes and this is a very
ancient way of thinking for us and it's
very problematic I think it would be
very antithetical to the direction that
zach is pointing to in his paper in his
article if we if that kind of thing
becomes prevalent and then the
alternative and I don't think it's an
exclusive alternative although the
culture pretends that they are the
alternative is is the kind of decadent
Romanticism that Zach put his finger on
that spirituality that lacks integrity
not only courage Zach I would say it
lacks integrity in that what it does is
it privileges certain kinds of discourse
well of course claiming that no
discourse has privileged it claims a
kind of exceptionalism for Buddhism that
people like Stephen bachelor and Evan
Thompson have just shown is without
merit as an argument it does a very poor
job opposite I would say to what you
were trying to do Zach and succeeding at
bridging between the phenomenology and
it doesn't set up an agave what it does
is it says all everything is to be
constructed in here everything is
deconstructed out there and therefore I
ultimately get some kind of nebulous
conformity between my inner world and my
outer world because they're all equally
deconstructed which is I think precious
I'm kind of irresponsible in a very
powerful way so I think I didn't I I saw
Zach as like I say steering between both
of those ways in
we could start using I agree with Zack
fundamentally on this that when were in
liminal right and that's exactly what
the phenomenology and the ontology are
in this like the deep like talk to each
other when we're in liminal we are drawn
towards this kind of language I totally
agree what I'm suggesting is the what
the we can be drawn and then we can
articulate and appropriate that language
in three different ways at least to my
mind one is the one that Zack is very
critical of and I am too
the sort of decadent romanticism that
has that purely negative and I think
vacuous conformity and then there's a
kind of fundamentalism that I think
especially when we're enacting purity
codes is a very real danger and you know
and the attendant things upon it you
know conspiracy theory scapegoating
before all things we have to be very
very careful of and so I thought that
what Zack did was from and perhaps sec
this is one of the reasons why it's it's
getting such a great reception i think
you in addition to the content which I
think was valuable I think you
exemplified a way of appropriating this
language that as I again I agree with
you is what is going to emerge as the
response to the attempt to symbol on to
connect the phenomenological neon
logical and you steered it between the
two things that I'm most concerned of
well I have three there but two I've
articulated one is the fundamentalism
the other is you know like you say the
completely decadent romantic magical
thinking bullshit I would put it I'm
using that term technically right and
then the third one I have a fear of
which you also didn't do you took great
care of which is a kind of pretentious
utopian certainty well you know this
clearly indicates that the revolution
should come and this is blah blah blah
blah right and and that kind of thing -
and I mean it right and and and then
there's a danger of course around
apocalyptic thinking to fall into that
kind of utopic pseudo certainty and I
think you steered between all three of
those really really well so that's we
there's sorry ginger maybe there's also
a danger of sort of
with this eschatology is life hating or
something it's like you want the
apocalypse to happen
well that overlaps a lot with the
fundamentalism fundamentalism tends to
you know you know the emphasis is on the
the destructive nature of God's wrath
and in it that's usually bound up with a
kind of conspiratorial there's all the
evil ones out there that I resent and
hate and I'm afraid of and this will
finally get rid of them and those of us
who are pure will be set free to the
earth that kind of thing and the and the
fundamentalist view and that's called
the the new-age view there are actually
isomorphic in their structure like yes
yeah there there's a there's a basically
kind of a structural narcissism yes and
a tendency to project and basically it
stands of like mind or faith only which
ends up being you create your reality
kind of thing or basically you get what
you deserve yes and so that's yeah
that's just there and as a cognitive
developmental psychologist it's easy to
see the places in people's personalities
where they can actually retreat to lower
forms of meaning making and self
regulation so so you allowed it to that
very clearly when you talked about the
possibility of losing the world's soul
and falling in with this Chi pen I just
wanted to unpack that a little bit
because I thought you were implying and
and just add to that are also tragic you
talked about the tragic and maybe that's
a remedy to this New Age thinking is for
us to really contemplate the tragic
right yeah I think of John as you were
speaking I was thinking of this phrase
by Harbor moss it was something like cuz
you know he brought his dissertation on
shelling and the problem of free will
and then later in this life Habermas
returned to Kierkegaard and began to
consider religion again very seriously
and in this later work he talked about
the the untapped semantic potentials of
religious language yes I mean that there
there lay within religious language and
symbol untapped semantic potential
specifically and this is it to think for
protecting vulnerable forms of community
life and experience so the idea being
that the meaning that lies hidden within
these symbolic ways of speaking it has
to do with the basis of choice making
and relationship and ethics Frank which
is also another difference between I
think what I was trying to do and what
is usually happening under the spiritual
kind of rhetoric which is that we need
to inform the basis of ethics and choice
not the basis of emotional
self-regulation and the feeling of
safety base of and self-esteem
gratifications right so those are
distinct and the mind wants to do both
like you want to create a sense of
meaning in a worldview that makes you
feel safe and makes you feel valuable
and important and in control and but you
also want to create one that allows you
to live in relationship to reality
and specifically the reality that you
have other people and and so yeah I was
trying to really bring home something
like in an ethos and and the sense of
you know for lack of a better word
morality which is relevant now which is
why I was concerned about what we're
able to say on a hospital ward in New
York City right like one of the things
get that can be said in these places and
how important that must be right be able
to say the right things to people who
are actually suffering not people who
are afraid of suffering and trying to
reconcile themselves and the calm their
limbic system after looking at Facebook
for an hour and a half people who are in
the midst of it and where are the
cultural resources we can use in the
languages that are available in the
symbols that are shared between us where
can be with one another in the the
intensity of this and say something so
that's kind of where where it came from
and then I ended up returning to my
roots in Emerson and other places where
I was looking for this this kind of
language so and also just to my
background in music you know I think
often about this triplet kid I got from
Forrest Landry which is song text and
code be in different forms of expression
and that all of them are important and
code is about what you do so let it be
written so let it be done like a legal
code right and text is about this
interest objective clarity of semantics
basically precision song is different
song is rooted and subjective and this
is where symbol and image lives so much
and so connecting song with text is what
I was trying to do well not cuz I'm not
right about the facts and legal code and
the quarantine and how the keeper saw I
wasn't good to him in there I was just
trying to connect with the song that I
was trying to sing and find me a way to
bring that up into some space of reason
and what you're talking about is poetry
you know correct right and and and a
need for that
right but the problem is just invoking
poetry again is in poetry because of you
know several generations and education
has been relegated to a certain status
and function with another culture but I
think is not I not attributing this to
you Andrew but I'm saying how most
people knew when most people hear the
word poetry they don't hear what's that
for yeah that's true yeah right they
don't and that's why there's a huge
educational thrust towards the end of
Zach's article but I wanted to pick up
on something first before I do want to
turn to the educational stuff because I
think it's really important so if the
first point you were saying about that
Zach is the - um this goes to where
Chris and I have been doing about trying
to remember that when we invoke the
language the sacred has both the homing
and the horror aspects to it right at
the point of the sacred yes is if it's
supposed to shelter us but it's also
supposed to expose us to
a reality that is beyond us that's the
numinous side of things and I think the
really difficult thing that we have to
do right now with the symbolic language
is write its effect because it's
ultimately sacred language is to craft
it in such a way that those two things
are being done at the same time that
we're giving people a sense of how they
can get grounded and centered but also
challenge them to face the
transformative demands that reality is
placing upon us and I think that's
another concern I have is a polarization
of the language of the sacred either
into the oh it's you know it's all
wonderful we're all snuggly and warm and
we all love each other or or or you know
which is also becoming the sort of
horrific nihilism with its you know
we're all just doomed and destroyed in
sort of glorying in a way that reality's
overwhelming because I can see some
people finally finding but in a deeply
shadowed twisted way you know well
finally I'm finally connected back to
reality right you know at least there's
this horrific thing that's destroying
you know all the offices and
institutions of power and let yes and
you know that kind of fist shaking
salute towards the flames and so part of
the difficulty I think we face here is
to craft language they can bring those
to start with it's sacred
together again one of my favorite one of
my favorite versions of this Wilfred was
for children so it's an edgy as an
educational impact on it is in the
Narnia Chronicles and the kids are
talking and they're talking to some of
the talking animals and they say well is
at Joslin came and the kids go and the
animals go oh no no he's not hey hmm but
he's good right and there was this right
and it was there was a Lewis is trying
to get this other place right again we
you can see the sacred as not the team
you know I will be what I will be you
know God's self naming right but also
the fact that this is ultimately
something that affords transformation
and transcendence in a powerful way and
so if you look give me one more minute
guys I know I'm talking a lot this
brings me to this ongoing discussion
I've been having with Jordan Hall and
Christmas DiPietro and guys in stock and
with you and is this whole notion of
what you were pointing to in your major
point a minute ago Andrew sorry Zack it
was that right that you're trying to
link this language to being able to say
the right thing and do the right it's
ultimately you're trying to link it to
wisdom in my in my language and this
fear near a party and care right well
but that's a big part the rationality of
caring is what Socrates was primarily
about above and beyond any rationality
of argumentation he makes that very
clear the one thing he knew was Tonica
he knew how to properly care and what to
care about and how to care but that
Britta but the invoking Socrates brings
up this whole thing I've been trying to
talk about this notion of faith Socratic
faith because the relationship to
symbols is not one of conviction in the
sense and of the way in which the
argument convict's you neither should be
and zack is critical of this just kind
of an emotional affective response
that's an inappropriate response to
symbols i mean so my tutor here is
Tillich that the appropriate response to
symbol is faith but faith completely
understood not as this magical
projection and willful assertion or
passive
you know acceptance of you know some
fatalistic demon but more again this
ability to what Zack is again I think
exemplifying in his paper which is to
sense the Kairos sense the course of
things and become deeply coupled and
involved with it and I think that is
something that needs to be talked about
and it's also something that we can
offer people now as an alternative to
either magical faith or you know merely
sort of assertion of faith and I think
that's also something that needs to be
brought into this discussion and I think
is that again I don't think this is
foreign to your article Zack I think you
you're clearly exemplifying it in in
what you're talking about and the way
you're invoking the symbol
language almost in a prophetic fashion I
totally want I just want to repeat what
you said about the importance maybe of
joining those two worlds together right
that the the the horror and and the fate
that's what I am and if we if we're just
in the sublime blissful world of
imagination it's nice but we never come
down to the earth and if we're there
just in in this sort of materialistic
horror you don't have any vision so it's
it's bringing these two worlds together
I think and what I'm saying is that act
of bringing them together is of course
inherently symbolic I keep saying symbol
on is to join together across the limit
all right and that because you're
confronting the liminal you're
confronting those both you know the the
prospect and the refuge and I think what
gives you that I think is this kind of
faith that I'm talking about now and
it's a it's a faith that in my opinion
and and I argue it's more than my
opinion who cares about my opinion my
arguments are that that notion of faith
is deeply interwoven with this more
extended Socratic notion of rationality
and the wisdom project that I think
exact is invoking in the pedagogical
part of his article beautiful gas I mean
there's so many directions to go now
like I'm wondering what Andrew what what
did you have in mind what comes to mind
for me is this notion of the the post
tragic and the notion I was thinking of
the future I was thinking of the
prophetic and and the future and how we
use symbols because we can't really
understand what's going on in the
immediacy of what's happening so we use
symbols as kind of a vehicle to take us
towards the future is that does that
ring true in any kind of a way or um
does does I mean that's you know
[Applause]
the word that came to mind now is a
where the Ken Wilber corn which is mom
Dalek thinking which he was talking
about when the I of mind contemplates
spirit right when the I of spirit
contemplates peered you just have spirit
when the I have mine come to plate
spirit you get this strange language
which is a kind of symbolic language the
mandala quite a light language where
you're working with image and symbol in
a very intense way I write I talk about
the thoughts of the heart in the paper
in this notion of the thoughts of the
heart yes comes from James James Hillman
and this is the the language I was
trying to use the language that is which
is the language of care right which is
Socrates is language if yep when he has
that confidence that he could show up
with any interlocutor and be able to use
his words to express and kind of create
the thoughts of the heart between them
into this is this isn't this is a true
sense of philosophy I think that's
working with working with the thoughts
of the heart essentially and it's not
science technically right and it's not
logic and argument in the in a strict
sense but it's also not illogical and
irrational or based on just phenomenal
experience or ecstatic experience or
those kind of things so it's this hybrid
language like you're saying which which
brings the two together and then it can
take the particular take the best of
science and does not contradict that
and it can take the best of the mystical
and the purely prophetic and those
things and bring them together and good
and thoughts of the heart are the most
universal thoughts and forms of language
and so they are a kind of common sense
if I can use that way of speaking but
they do sometimes end up being cloaked
in things that look like traditional
religious forms of language and so
that's I find the biggest trick now
when I'm working with these modalities
is to not basically offend the
scientists right one issue and then the
other issue is not to to make it complex
enough that you don't get it confused
that's just being New Age alright so you
don't want to you don't want to offend
the scientists who dismiss you as being
fundamentalists or something and then
you also don't want to attract a bunch
of people who are actually looking for
something much simpler just to gratify
their ego needs for safety and control
justice a new age market coerce and so
that's the death dance and yeah I'm just
kind of overwhelmed actually the key to
getting the the the praise for the paper
I read wasn't I wasn't expecting it but
yeah so that's what one of the things
that came to mind there and then as I
was saying this notion of that the
sacred includes the kind of terrifying
and that is also that with this notion
of that post tragic being extremely
important some have talked about in a
few podcasts and the idea of being that
when tragedies there he it must be lived
through yeah it can't be avoided and
dealing with it actually it doesn't mean
fixing it or making the tragic disappear
dealing with it actually means finding a
way to have it and more and I talk about
what is within illness and what is
within death that unravel it from the
inside which is to say as hospice
workers know and health care workers now
and I've been I've been a caregiver for
many years in my life and that there is
what's the right way to say it you know
yeah so I'll use symbolic language right
which is that God will catch you
it's something like that is that you
there's nowhere you can fall where you
fall outside of God all right something
like that and and that includes all of
the horror find that God is within that
darkness and so yeah so so again it's
not about being stuck in the tragedy and
saying oh it's just horror right as I
know it is horror but humans can
withstand our they and humans are made
in the midst of tragedy so so much of
history has been humans making
personhood in the midst of tragedy and
so again the untapped semantic potential
of religious language is for protecting
vulnerable forms of human life these are
the things we've done to be together and
with glad hearts in the midst of tragedy
that's where the Bible is interesting
because it is so political so political
slavery and freedom and onion just
answers all of these stories of people
in intense and plagues of course people
in intense intense interconnectedness
and so so yeah it's not abstract in many
cases the Bible is just there and and so
yeah there's that there's that encoding
and human experience of making meaning
and personhood in the midst of tragedy
and and so that's just I'm saying when
we're bringing these languages together
you know to what end it's because I
think it impart of that need to create
the new religion right this new form of
religiosity would be that's coming at us
again now at a higher register that
demand from the world that's saying look
at look at the suffering of the pain
that's unfolding and how do we come
together in the midst of this and it's
about what we're trying to do here in a
sense with the creation of a new a new
renew resources of symbol and language
for meaning-making yeah because maybe
the guy in in the hospital in New York
doesn't have time for figuring things
out in a very reductive way he just
wants the truth and the truth has to be
deep right it can't be superficial or or
and and I guess the kind of God you're
speaking of you know this is their that
and that contains both the darkness and
the light or both the horror and and the
beauty so it's like you don't want one
you don't want to split those two you
want you if you're on your deathbed I
imagine I've never been on my deathbed
but you would want things to be as close
to the bone and it is true as as
possible and I often religious language
may be the only way to to express that I
don't know well or the heart spoken as
directly as possible but but the thing
is it has to take yeah the thing I mean
there's nothing worse than these words
being spoken and they don't take for the
person right indeed yeah right that's
what I'm trying to get out with this
this notion of faith where it's again
not willful assertion not magical
thinking are not claiming to know things
that you don't actually have any claim
to know it's not a pretense of certainty
it's not all the things that we sort of
pretend faith is no it's a it's rather
the sense there's a beauty and I don't
mean a pleasure because beauty can be
terrifying
Rilke reminds us of that repeatedly but
there's a beauty to these symbols for
people there's there they have a
receptivity that's what I'm trying to
get at so that they take the symbols
take they catch they write today they
join the worlds together they they
afford aspiration they call the person
to the depths that you're putting your
finger on Andrew I'm really interested
in that and by the way I want to point
out you know when Socrates was doing his
thing Athens was literally under siege
from without and there had literally
been a devastating plague in the city so
Socrates is not also not a figure that
is somehow
abstract in the ivory power you know
well we are in the midst of pestilence
and killing with each fact we're all of
you know everything well many of the
dialogues are actually even historically
set and that in that time period so
Socrates is completely apropos for the
situation we're in but when I'm
interested in and is is good well I
invoked him and because I he seemed to
be able to do that he seemed to be
yellow like Zack said he can he could
adjust himself to the interlocutor he
had the faith of being able to show up
and he had the faith that he could say
things that would take that people would
you know that you know the it would
tempt them towards the good that would
call them to their deaths
and what's interesting to me what's
what's the difference and I think this
is ultimately what I want to really get
to with Zack stop was what's the
educational background that makes people
capable of appropriately being called by
these symbols so that they take and
they're operationally viable to them and
people who wear it falls dead on their
chest it's just empty words or they get
all of the stuff we're critical all of
you know the the willful assertion
magical thinking senses of how to
misappropriate the sometimes that that's
for me where this is the knife edge
question that's coming down how do we
what do we give to people how do we
adduce how do we draw forth from them
this capacity for this kind of faith
well what I mean by faith is to be
caught up in the the terrible beauty of
this symbol so that one is called to
one's depth and one is drawn out
aspirationally into the depths of the
world so that one can confront the
deepest things with the deepest
resources at ones disposal that for me
is the central question that i think
well that's forgive me Zack that's what
I saw the paper as really driving
towards at the end
no no that's such a good question such a
good set of questions right cuz it's cuz
this is what what's the termite pearls
before swine
right yeah it's like and this is a
classic educational problem which is
that there's there's there's a depth to
like a you know an ancient text which
you know you wonder the level of
maturity of the reader that's needed to
actually perceive the depth and so we
get what are the prerequisites in
personality and character structure and
cognition and other things to be able to
receive the symbol that's there and -
yeah it's a it's a that's the well
there's two things I just suddenly come
to mind you know one is experiences
formative experiences where the same
symbol or comparable symbols or
modalities of expression were terrible
for you right so many of the people I
know who find it hard to be receptive to
the language in an article like the one
I wrote you know had and I think we
mentioned this last time we spoke John
they had bad experiences in their in
their youth right yeah a different kind
of bullshit yeah that happened to use
this kind of symbol thing and so so
that's one major important element there
which is that like this stuff's been
given a bad name you know and there's a
way that it's like the wells been
poisoned and so how do we make it clear
that we're drawing from a clear spring
that it's a different source and so
that's why many people leave there they
go to the yeast right or they go from
the east of the West depending on where
you're where you're from so that's I
think one component so there's a part of
it which means it's something about like
either making it explicit I'm working it
through
or finding a novelty a real novelty than
the way the things are expressed so
that's that's the issue there and then
the other the other component that came
to mind has to do with element of
practice and modeling yeah which is like
have you ever seen someone in your
actual presence do that then right and
have you experienced an elder or a
teacher truly being inspired by ideas
and I think John this is why your work
is so magnetic right because you're
modeling for people what it's like to do
what you're asking them to do you're
showing that like this is what it's like
to be taken into the matrix of the
symbol and live in it and work with it
the power that comes from that yeah and
faith and the life of ideas and that
kind of thing so another thing that it's
clear that when people see it when they
actually see it there they knit is
magnetic and people move towards that
this is a question of which points in
their lives and especially formative
phases of adolescent identity formation
and an adult like these key phases who
or the different spokespeople there for
these things and are they getting it at
the right times such that when they need
it they'll be able to turn to it yeah
for solace and and the final one I think
is really did this notion of practice
just a little bit deeper which is that
it takes sustained attention to reap the
rewards of this kind of emotion and
identity configuration so to the degree
that we are becoming as a culture
systematically fragmented in our
attention it's gonna be hard for us to
actually sustain the focus to have a
complex enough relationship to the
symbol and the accompanying kind of like
semantic web to get to get drawn in and
to get empowered I am yeah so so that's
that's key and that's not just about
meditation it's about long-form books
and other things that
defragment the attention and allow you
to what you just read for two hours
almost straight now you're so deep in
the language that when it starts to move
with symbolism you can actually get the
full range of connotations that are
implied instead of the soundbite like
tweet version right and anything that's
a soundbite tweet of anything that's not
gonna end up having that's symbolic
depth and richness that is necessary so
so that's another component I think in
terms of the kind of pedagogical look at
just how can we do this and make people
more susceptible to head to these
resources that they were that they
become available
just just one thing I'd like to sort of
add to that it seems to me that in the
present crisis that we're going through
and also just to bring it back to the
crisis our reaction to the crisis sort
of depends on how deeply we've studied
these these things or how deeply we've
studied life and if we've studied them
deeply we know that there's a crisis all
the time right this is not this is an
exceptional crisis in one sense but the
fact that we're all going to die is it's
like that's like the first thing you
learn right and if you study any kind of
religious tradition is to contemplate
the fact that there's a crisis going off
all the time just by virtue of the fact
that we have bodies that are
disintegrating and we have to live that
tragedy yeah I think that's right I mean
I think I think it was when I was
talking with Peter Lindbergh in his
online stoah about and I want to connect
this to Zac's point about long-form
attention because I think dia logos and
what we're doing here
is also a great exemplification of that
long-form attention that is deeply
enmeshed with trying to draw forth you
know a new fountain intelligibility from
all of these hidden semantic and
conceptual resources so I think that's
why idea the logos is actually crucial
and neo Lagos is not just
presentation of idea the Ilocos is an
exemplification a Zac set all the way of
life and how it is actually viable for
people being enacted right here right
now I think what I wanted to say about
you the point you made Andrew is
connected to this long-form practice you
know it's it's um so stoicism one way
Visser does this and Beyond faith you
know that our word fatal which we attack
we know Ian elevate with causing death
that's not its origin his origin is
having to do with fate which is the way
in which reality acts beyond all of our
ego centric projects and concerns in the
way which we can be struck by absurdity
or tragedy there's many different ways
in which reality hits us in the face and
says aha
you have all your projects and all your
narcissistic narrative but look
Here I am right and so yeah they're why
the associate became so strong right is
of course the event of death is the most
in that sense fatal it's the one that
makes us most aware of how reality is
involved and beyond us but then the
point is not and I think this is what
you're saying Andrew the point is not to
be considerate just considerate of the
the fact that our existence will
terminate it's that right here right now
we are meshed in fatality and the
mortality of all things because always
always everything is threatening us in
the way that it is always beyond our
narrative and are narcissistic narrative
and we've had a we've we're going into a
culture that is doubling down and trying
to sort of no no no no I can just make
it so I can just make it so by speaking
it more loudly and getting other people
to shout it with me and so I think that
against us means us back again and I'm
not trying to like Dragoon something but
I think that's again this sense of
sacredness of sacredness is to be at
home with right at home with your
mortality and the fatality of all things
well never denying it's real horror the
fact that it can always it's always
every moment capable of showing you an
absurdity or in horror
or in what's happened you know in terror
or in all kinds of things that reality
is something that is always always
always and you know not always just in
the long term but always always here and
now beyond us in very very powerful ways
and so stoicism was a lot about trying
to we order yet and right and and I
think socialism as a clear example comes
out of the Socratic tradition very
clearly in which people were trying to
Wed Socratic rationality with this kind
of faith
stoicism has been called a religion and
I think not unfairly because of the way
in which you tried to get people right a
new sense of the sacred that allowed
them right to deal with the
moment-by-moment fatality of all things
I think the good is amiss probably do
something very similar which is why
there's often comparisons drawn between
stoicism and Buddhism by the way so I
think it's really really important what
Andrew just said and connect it to what
Zacks said and I think what connects
them is this whole thing we've been
talking about this this sense this lived
viable aspirational sense of the sacred
right here right now great and just
maybe after we've said all that we've
talked about that this is being the
state that we're in or all the time
maybe I want maybe we could move to
speak about what you called you call
something great on patterning or
transition or what's actually happening
now and I don't mean about the virus in
any literal sense
I mean what's what's I mean yes literal
because it is a literal thing but maybe
what's going on now what's going on in
time because you talk about historicity
I think Zack and and and the importance
of that and the importance of time and
is my question clear it is and yeah I
mean fate is unfolding
and we're in kind of sacred Kairos right
where reality is where reality is
appearing kind of again as it were
because of our the deep simulations that
were produced by the civilization as it
was moving through where we thought that
we didn't need to have massive supplies
back loaded in hospitals just in case
there was a Mike we didn't think that
through right because we were deep in a
simulation and everything was fine and
so now yeah we are confronting reality
and so the question is yeah will we will
we pull together like Stoics and love
fate and end up in crazy and and and
moving with our identities to become to
become one with the tragic situation
then transform it somehow from the
inside in response to it and so that's I
see mostly what's unfolding now and
that's why I talked about a war in
heaven is that Jude's choice it's about
the basis of choice and who are we
choosing to be and so that's this
conflict between these ideals we have of
ourselves right are we stepping into
that so what is the war of heaven
between who and who is it between the
knee list and let's say the the life
hater and the life giver I mean it's
what is the war what is it's me it's
Matt it's massively complicated right
you remember last time we spoke it was
this sense of the divine double and then
we kind of brought home one and the room
was like no it's actually there's many
of those potential selves that are in
your arc typical imagination to move
towards us like personal ideals yeah and
so what's happened now with the great on
patterning is that everyone's sitting at
home with a lot of time were an absence
of time so a fragmentation of conti the
way you're hanging out with many many of
yourselves who usually don't get a lot
of airtime
right so there's many of these
archetypal personalities and
possibilities for yourself
are now flooding the imagination into
this opening from being unpadded and so
it happens when you travel it happens
other times in your day-to-day life when
something like if you went for an
appointment that didn't happen and now
you've got like an hour to just sit
there and you don't have your phone or
something like what happened your
imagination goes unless you're a Penn
Stater
right like so there's the war in heaven
is that it's this is a universal version
of that of like being in the doctor's
office you know waiting for the
appointment and then what happens right
right and what happens in the doctor day
we're waiting for the appointment in the
doctor's office were nervous there's no
good magazines we're sitting there and
there's all of these different possible
cells that were thinking about them
because the way the world will be on the
other side of this is also unclear it
means that we're getting in touch with
all of all ourselves the full range
right shadow and light if I can use that
kind of polarization so it's not a war
between two forces it's a war between
the many potent possibilities of
ourselves that we're going to actualize
through really unique moments of choice
in the coming months right and so it's
about that so who do we choose to be
when we make a choice and and so again
it means we have the opportunity to
become incredible people right that's
one possibility we have the possibility
to be integral and to act with character
and integrity and to know the principles
that we want to live by and to live by
them more so now than ever because you
know rehearsals over these on time and
we have space are they yeah these are
the important choices so we have that
possibility which is rare actually to be
in a moment of historical gravitas where
you have the chance to be doing really
the right thing so but we also have the
opportunity to descend into
and through fragmentation of choice and
being many different people not holding
together with integrity and catering to
those voices that are most selfish and
most fear driven etc so that's that
balance that battlin our personalities
basically as we're faced with decisions
we never thought we'd have to make in
choices goods is that we never even kind
of thought were on the table or now on
the table
so so that's that's kind of how you know
it's kind of how I'm feeling it so the
title of Tillich's book the courage to
be sort of middle mind when you say that
when we mmm-hmm it was very clear about
is that required a transformation right
in faith and a transformation in the
notion of God you had to get to the God
beyond the God of theism we had to let
the symbol change which is part of what
I wanted to bring that you know the the
ultimately you know they're part of what
this means is is a participatory stance
not not neither you know you know a sort
of passive stance or an assertive stance
it's a participatory stance we have to
participate in this because we have to
be willing to let the symbols change too
and I think that was a very clear
message and and faith isn't the holding
on of to the existing symbol for Tillich
and it's certain and it's not any
premature closure right oh now I have it
right
it's instead but it's the vector off the
Hebrew word right it's like the way you
have the way you're faithful to your
partner is not hold her that's why I'm
straight so I'm just using myself as an
example but to hold her now you always
have to be this way or you know this
here's a particular symbol I've created
for a relationship and you know it's not
up for negotiation that's it like no
that's not what it means it means you
have to be willing to be involved and
let yourself change as the symbol change
so that you made it make maintain a
continuity of contact about it
and that brings me up to a concern with
what not with what Zack said because I
think what he said but I think there's
an extra dimension to the war in heaven
and you know Chris and I our work are
thinking about this and this also goes
to work that your your your harness is
talking about need hauser
the fact that many people when they and
Hahn talks about this too right when
people are throwing into this empty time
right they have and I'm trying not to be
insulting here but this is sort of a way
of getting the gist of they have a kind
of shallowness in imagination if you'll
allow me to use Corbin's idea they have
a merely imaginary sense of the
imagination not an imaginal they have a
purely subjective sense of the
imagination not a trans jacket one and
therefore it cuts them off in the very
way they have been in cultured to deal
with their imagination right it cuts
them off from the aspirational project
that we're talking about here and so my
concern is that they you know are sort
of Cartesian the subjectivity is being
challenged really dramatically here but
I'm concerned that people in order to
let the symbol in order to grow with the
symbol as it grows you have to have an
imaginal sense of the symbol not a
merely imaginary sense of it but the the
symbol and the image doesn't it's not in
your head space that's not ready
fundamentally between you and the world
it's a joining of you to something
deeply other than you and that means you
only know you're going to it when it's
actually transforming you and changing
you and that means transforming how it
appears and shines into you and I think
so my concern to put it in a phrases
right do we have the proper you know
training in the imaginal that will
afford us you know appropriating this
Kairos in the right way that's sorry I
keep circling back to this because this
I mean this is sort of my Socratic
concern it's like I'm trying to get
people
we're trying to act as midwife what
midwives but I think there's just
tremendous difficulties in the grammar
of our thought and discourse that
prevent us from tapping those semantic
resources that harbor Nawab Ramos and I
think Tillich we're trying to put their
finger up and that's why Zach's idea of
a total revolution of education is so
important I think I think that's I think
that that has I'm trying to strengthen
the case for that point yeah unless
unless like any purely individualistic
you know you know you know within my own
home I look like of course people have
to do that and I'm not you know but if
if if there's any sense in which that's
going to be sufficient for grieving our
way and is firing our way through this
Kairos that has to be really challenged
and I think I'm trying to I'm trying to
put an argument in here that actually
strengthens Zach's point yeah radical
right transformation is needed to our
educational system well you know it's
it's the line between education and an
acculturation is completely being
blurred it seems to me and what zach is
proposing and we've got to get back to
that unique powerful way you know just
before Zach you respond I I was thinking
about the fact that when you paint that
picture John it looks very very grim but
at the same time at the same time it is
grim and it is a grim picture at the
same time maybe a few individuals doing
this properly can go a long way right
and so I think of it again I think in
the biblical Ark story are like building
an ark or just you know building the
thing doing the thing properly now just
a few people can can save save the world
if I can be as she's right yeah
no it's not it's not cheesy I never
understood the etymology of that insult
I love cheese ever Fred's
and the happens and he's the gadfly for
the entire place right and you know and
all these movements start up around him
and all the socratic low guy you know
the all that you wish it's like it's
like you know it's like yeah it's the
Leonard Cohen II it's like he sank
beneath your wisdom like a stone
although he was Jesus but all the
ripples just spread out in like and that
was deeply deep and eventually it leads
to stoicism and Marcus Aurelius right we
I yes I do want to sorry exactly bending
you from speaking but I just want to
pick up on although I'm painting a grim
picture I keep holding out the these
exemplary figures and how in situations
very very similar to ours they were able
to enact and afford that kind of
educational enculturation 'el reform
that zach has pointed to so this is this
is not in an event it's this is not an
inevitable witness of doom or grimness
of inevitable doom that's not what I'm
arguing for at all I'm arguing for
taking it very seriously but pointing
out there's real historical examples of
ways in which this can be seen through
right I think you know and I mean I
completely agree of course that that the
route here is something like education
extremely broadly construed or there the
word idea which is the work I use in my
book which is a word that basically
roughly means like the intergenerational
transmission that keeps a polity
together yeah so and that is sorely
lacking
thanks to like the exhaustion of the
modern school systems and now those
school systems have been shut off
basically all around the world and all
the kids are at home and so it's it's
really an unprecedented situation
educationally and you know the question
of in what ways after this could we
change education so that a situation
like this doesn't occur again is the
question that I'm asking because so much
of the situation with kind of breakdown
of anything like a public sphere and the
kind of polarization
post truth culture and much of this also
rooted in the educational crisis broadly
construed so yeah and enculturation and
schooling were basically separated and
then we forgot to work on inculturation
anymore
and we taught kids a bunch of technical
skills to try to prepare them for jobs
early in modernity that was okay because
the churches were still going and
convenience were still going and the
system hadn't basically colonized the
life world to the extent that the dinner
table wasn't a place of acculturation
anymore but separating those having
schooling going strong getting lots of
really technically capacitated people
through a school system up into some
extensive meritocracy right and then
alongside that lack of rich character
building inculturation own processes
right instead something like popular
culture and consumerism being the main
modality of toleration and so that's a
that's a nightmare and that's produced
the generations now that are in power
and aspiring to power so yeah they're
all of these cascades systematically
from educational failures and not just
failures of school and like TV could
have been different if you read the
early literature in the history of
Education when TV was coming out people
were talking about the way we were
talking about the internet in like 1995
or 2000 this is the thing that will save
democracy television will do that and
like didn't pan out that way for a
number of reasons
so we failed across the board in using
the infrastructures and that end
technology is we had to make the Padilla
strong enough to support the polity and
so the polity is in crisis and were
realizing the paucity of the pedido
which means we're I'm realizing the that
fourfold educational crisis I broke down
last time is unfolding so my sense is
that if we move quickly we could in a
generation start to change things but it
would require some of the social
miracles I'll I have in my book which
are on the table now things like basic
income guarantee
and adult education right where that
where we could get a whole group of
people actually a whole generation of
like food service workers basically who
may or may not have jobs to return to we
could get them into position to become
more like teachers or community guides
working in a decentralized educational
system as opposed to returning them to
their jobs right but if we just try to
reboot the schools as we knew them and
kind of go back to the way it was I
think that's actually a recipe for
deepening the mental health crisis I
think we're gonna have to basically
address what's happening with the
immediate reforms of schooling on the
other side of it similar to what you'd
have to do after a war transpired like
yeah we'd have to find a way to help the
help the generations make sense of it
together and figure out a shared vision
for what it's like moving forward and
that's that's an educational an
educational challenge it's one of the
more profound ones we've faced so we're
looking at something like as different
from the schools we've had as the
schools we have are as different from
the ones we had before the first world
wars right and that difference in
America at least is profound like you're
looking at almost like one room
schoolhouse stuff for most of the
country in 1900s and then in 1950 you've
got these huge high schools that were
basically massive innovations so I'm
suggesting similarly now we're gonna
mean that much thinking about the
educational and psychological and
cultural dimensions of this as we are
thinking about you know biometric
infrastructures and economic stimulus
packages and geopolitical security and
those things are important but if we
just pretend that the culture will take
care of itself and education will be
fine the way it was then we'll repeat
the mistake you may not be exactly
identical but there will be a breakdown
because of the failure of
intergenerational transmission so I'm
getting the the massive you know
paradigm shift change in education needs
to happen
on one hand and then the other hand the
image he uses that is there is the
kitchen table or the you know so I like
that I think I think getting back to the
table and you know I know my daughter is
home studying and she's sitting around
the table doing her school and it's
wonderful it's like she's not corralled
into the into this sort of alienating
classroom kind of thing and she's much
more relaxed and just as a person person
person exactly you and you guys are I
think you're trying to say the local and
there needs to be a universal change and
a local change simultaneously oh yeah
those are related and you you know
you're lucky like to have a table to sit
around I know there's a lot of kids in
the United States for whom not being
able to go to school his socks yeah
parents are abusive there's not enough
room in the house and school was
actually the safe place for them mm-hmm
so I'm not like wanting to return it to
the family or even to the local
community per se because there's a
parochialism that can happen there there
was something innovative about the
universality okay so it's a hybrid and
again I expressed it in my book but but
yeah right now for many people they're
realizing holy crap like education was
taken out of the house like education
was taken from us my kids are taken from
me everyday like they're gonna realize
that when it's going well and you're
lucky and the table can be a place where
love happens in those things there may
be a realization in some quarters that
you know wow many of those patterns that
have been in place that we take for
granted almost like they're a part of
nature are in fact not they have been
constructed and are now changing rapidly
so I do see on the horizon pretty
radical changes in the educational
possibilities yeah I do because one
place where Zach's notion of the
education crisis and my idea of the
meeting crisis came together of course
was in when I talked about what happens
after the personal information you have
the separation of the knowledge
institution from the wisdom institution
universities get separated from the
monasteries
and I was gonna say Andrew it's not just
that education was taken I would have
the the kitchens also taking up to the
church I was young enough that I went to
actually went to Sunday school it was
actually called Sunday school and and
and you know and the problem with that
is Sunday school is what is was a very
degenerate version of what you know what
the monasteries once were was basically
indoctrination right and once you've got
the child sort of to memorize the
doctrines but even there you saw that
for some people into something and I'm
thinking what the monasteries have been
and how they are in other cultures like
you know the Buddhist monastery is not
separate in the way that it was
separated from the knowledge institution
disagreed it is for example in the West
or something like that so what I'm
trying to get at again is this idea that
we not only need to change the but I
think this is part of what Zak is saying
too so I don't want to say sound like
I'm saying something original here it's
not just that like will be more
decentralized and will be more at home
right but it's also that we have to be
educating not just for knowledge we have
to be educating from wisdom and those
who have to be talking to each other and
meshed up together it's you know a lot
of educational theory you actually the
good educational theory because there's
a lot of crap in educational theory it's
it's untethered from good cognitive
science good psychology it's overly
politicized it's ideologically driven
there's all kinds of some time where I
can see viable stuff is this kind of
sort of core notion is sort of as simple
to say you know if you start if you if
you give you if you begin the early age
project of helping to educate character
and wisdom kids will then be able to go
take in deep kinds of complex knowledge
but if you just try to give them the
knowledge without feeding that human
need for character development and for
wisdom you're gonna find
many many people find that very
educationally challenging and they
ultimately develop a hostile attitude
towards their education in their
educational background and so not only
do I think we need to do it culturally
we need to bring back the education of
wisdom with the education of knowledge I
think for a good pedagogical reasons we
need to give that's very very C deep
thinking but I don't want that to be the
state version of Sunday School where we
just indoctrinate people in whatever
political ideology seems to be in
fashion right now so the difficulty I
suppose I'm trying to bring out because
I think I want to hear exactly to say is
because this points towards another
important point I keep all my questions
in probative because Zack talks about
this convergence right and to me the
convergence is I think the beginning of
the response of a response a deep
response to the question there and ask
how do we bring back the education of
wisdom within a pluralistic right
framework right exactly cuz it's the
world now it's not a bunch of countries
it's not Christian Europe or world no no
I saw back pointing towards that when he
when he was flagging the necessity of
its convergence between these various
traditions which is not assimilating one
to any master like Christianity
conquering the other ones but of some
kind of like a dialogo so a convergence
is possible and I'm wondering if that so
that struck me is here's how we could
get back to the cultivation of wisdom
within a pluralistic framework yeah and
I wrote about that in your essay he
wrote about a symbolic convergence
between wisdom ages and that's exactly
why I'm bringing this question up yeah
no it's a very good question and it's
it's really one of the more kind of
exciting things that I think will be
coming through education in the coming
decade I think it has two or elsewill
will come apart at the scenes because of
the meeting crisis being like the the
thorn in the side of the whole
civilizations this is lack of wisdom
starting like seven years old and so
yeah there's as I mentioned the paper a
trans lineage and symbol convergence
across religious traditions and we spoke
about last time something can neo
perennialism like a distilling of some
not essential conclusions that they all
supposedly have in common but a form of
dialogue or like you're saying LS an up
ecology of practice which is to say like
a classroom where we can put this stuff
in it
and be sure that no matter what the
unique way this kid interacts with these
materials and this teacher that they
will come for their for themselves to
create a kind of wisdom synthesis you
know let's say by the age of 18 right
and so that's not indoctrination that's
actually you know more like a Piaget
idea metaphor like a gardening like you
make the resources available with the
container available and then allow them
to grow into the wisdom that's unique to
them and there will be huge pockets of
overlap well they would just be people
like hey I'm signing up for that
Buddhism thing that was pretty awesome
I haven't really found one that's better
or though both people here I'm not
really actually buying any of this I get
why it's important but I'm actually much
more interested a specific kind of
scientific problem but I have a rich
humanistic understanding I have my
scientific identity right so we want
that possibility as well so yeah that's
that's very it's very you want to create
a renaissance person not a person who is
locked in their field correct and
someone who's used to working
with this language and with this symbol
and just working with the idea that part
of being human is having a kind of like
historically an ontological positioned
notion of self something like that
correct that it's like that that's part
of if you don't if you're lacking that
it's gifted it's very uncomfortable
experience them here in the meeting
crisis and that'll cascade into
legitimacy crises and capability crisis
etc and so yes so this is a root of it
even if we lay down the perfect
bureaucratic kind of like technological
digital decentralized classroom thing
was all great and we didn't put this
kind of content in it we could end up
with something way worse we're like more
efficiently educating people away from
wisdom and into technocratic conformity
right whereas what we need to do is like
suffuse to the digital architecture with
these forms of wisdom and it doesn't
mean giving them wisdom it means making
the ecosystem in which when they step
into it all of a sudden they're unless
they're like you know bad actors they
will just by through participation that
will become wiser or at least
appreciative of this wisdom discussion
so yeah so thank you John for pointing
that
oh you're welcome that's gonna mean we
have to I mean Thomas björkman makes
this point you know that we've sort of
we sort of defaulted to that our only
Authority is the market and what we're
doing it means we have to because I
think the point you made earlier you
know education has begun has become how
to train people for you know appropriate
service to them the one god that we
still all serve which is the market I'm
not a raving Marxists and I'm not trying
to propose the overthrow of capitalism
or anything like that but what I am
talking about is the idea that we have
to have and and I think part of what
this can afford us its affording it in
individuals I talk to is a realization
of oh wait there's a lot of things that
really matter to me that aren't you know
aren't coming from or aren't in the
governance of the market and so there's
normative
that makes a call on me that isn't just
the call of the market to produce and
consume of Hren and not denying that we
need to produce or consume I'm not
saying but what I'm saying is the
tyranny of the market and the any and
and and the religious idealization of it
I think it's something that's gonna have
to be challenged in conjunction with
this kind of educational reform that
Zack is proposing yeah and maybe that's
why this notion of the digital campfire
or whatever is is kind of coming up even
though I'm not sure if I'm in love with
this term yet because it still seems
that it's a disembodied experience on
some level it's not a real campfire but
but I also like the idea that people
would want to work on this communal
activity together and that might be just
something that people would want to do
right that they yeah is so different
than the alienation of of the market
well that's that's what I'm hoping I
mean I'm sort of talking about when I
was when I was at the store so he was
sort of stealing the culture the way you
know other kind of stole the culture
from you know the you know the
militaristic imperialism of antique
paganism right and and then you've got
you know and and you know Paul Banda
clay and other people have been talking
about how we have not forgotten because
it's become second nature to us how much
at a cultural transformation and that
was and so you know there is this medium
outside it's not completely independent
but it's largely outside of the movement
of the market and that this is a place
with the virtual camp firing where
people are finding that the meaning
making and the connection making and the
you know and this this let's call it
chaotic educational interaction is
deeply deeply important to the
independent of the things that they had
previously filled their days with
that's that's a real wakening I think of
a real potential for us you know because
that's what originally happened you know
it you had people meeting in small
groups and they started talking to each
other and then the small groups started
talking to each other and you can bet
this huge bottom up thing and I don't
think it'll go you know smoothly like
some kind of you know a wonderful home
our car can't be made into a product
right okay if he made into a product
that I and I fully expected the way the
Roman Empire resisted in powerful ways
this up swelling of a count of a
countercultural movement we might get
same sort of resistance especially by
the people who want everything to go
back to normal we might try to make it
into a product right but but not only
that they might try to clamp down on it
they might try to ridicule it they might
try to undermine it they might try to
organize that and market the slogans and
placement for some sort of a gap or that
sort of get for actually undertaking the
transformation I mean there's all these
kinds of things that I can see I don't
know what to call it you know a
socio-economic system doing our
socio-economic political system doing
well I do think that one of the positive
things that's happening right now is
that people are discovering as this
sounds so trite they're discovering how
really important culture is mmm right
really important culture is and how it's
different from popular culture which is
the part of culture that gets
commodified and marketed right and how
much really important remember that the
center of culture is cultists that which
is sacred right rediscovering how
important culture is the really you know
the cognitive cultural grammar is for us
and I think that is the gives us the
potential you know that this that we
could steal the culture in the way that
we need to steal it in order to get the
kind of I think I can't see how you
would do what Zak is proposing without
doing what I'm proposing at the same
time and say what do you think about
that I love it I mean
yeah a few things come to mind you know
one of them is yeah when when the world
kind of slips away as it has you know
then you're left with the baseline
values and needs you know and so and
then you realize as you're saying
talking to people long-form conversation
around the campfire holy crap you know
and and the confrontation with death has
part of the realization because it's
it's not just that the normal work
routines are disrupted and you can't do
your normal schedule and those kinds of
things that's also that everyone's
worried about death and so on your
deathbed usually you don't say stuff
like I wish I had worked more overtime
you know usually you say stuff like I
wish I had had more family dinners spend
more time around the campfire right
instead more time like a fire
yeah and the campfire that the notion of
the fire the hearth right yeah over
estia I think that's how you say it or
Hestia
the Greek goddess of hearth and
basically the goddess of inwardness and
composure composure and focus and so
yeah there is that returning to the
uncommon Oh fireball and realizing that
it's still there and you know to the
degree to which we get used to that it's
ironic a little bit right that we're
supposed to be isolating but I've in my
experience I've been having more calls
and more conversations with a writer or
with a wider range of people than I
usually do and so and most of them have
not been kind of work calls you know I
don't really consider this even like
work like what we're doing here is
actually yeah culture as a culture the
serious part of the serious play of
culture right and which is fundamentally
on commodify land
and fundamentally bail always will be
even if you just happen to make some
money from it it's beside it's available
to everyone it's not high culture it's
not like because no we're doing PhD
level discourse that's the thing that
makes it culture in fact the seriousness
of any conversation that's being had
right now and the ways that were
grappling and kind of like moving
through the the ordeal of it together
with language with commitment with
unspoken agreements and all of those
dimensions that's culture it's not the
artifacts books and all and the pod cats
not the culture the culture is the
living substance that binds us together
and you have to work at it to practice
to build culture family cultures right
how strong is it how resilient is it all
those things are coming to life
and that's also what illness does you
know and what death does it it it will
disrupt the routine and basically force
you into being with much most real and
most important and often what's most
real and most important isn't the
funnest stuff it's not the stuff like
that's entertaining and sort of a big
stasis but it is the longest lasting
most meaningful stuff you're going to be
grappling with and there's this
interesting studies on happiness where
it's like it's kind of a little bit
counterintuitive where it's like you
know your everyday experience won't be
happy like you're not gonna be happy
every day if you make certain
commitments right but over the long run
you have this different form of intently
reassured kind of like disciplined
well-being which ends up being not a
tried joy or happiness which was
actually kind of inappropriate right now
but an emotion that's the result of
being integrase and authentic and having
real relationships like a being fully in
solds the way I would say it down and in
your life which is not a denial of
suffering I think it's in fact the
result of it
it's it's yeah you know I mean it's like
you you think about some of the most in
telling him in wrote this beautiful
essay on war and he was just like we
love for good love for and we love war
because it makes us love one or not
they're all right and we know when
you're in the foxhole right you're in
the platoon or you're waiting for the
soldiers to return at home and keeping
like there's an intensity to that that's
what's happening now as with nothing
yeah and so more people than kind of
like quote-unquote like embrace the
intensity of it the more that we can
find the substance that these kinds of
situations give us is the substance of
real connections that matter we're like
you know like do I trust you bro
you can trust me like that bond now
today means so much more then it's like
on an every old suburban day you trust
me realize pressure Boba's the suburbs
who care so do we trust one another like
that doesn't really matter but now like
you really care dude can i really trust
this person right so the is of love that
come from the kind of the ecstatic
ordeal of the tragic and yeah so we're
finding that and so if we simmer in that
for long enough it's gonna be intense
but there's gonna be no going back
because of what we've tasted now and a
static ordeal that just quite a phrase
yeah well gentlemen I need to get going
I had a slaughter from 12:00 to 1:30 I
really wanted to first of all thank
Andrew for bringing us together again
and you'll send me the file so I can
upload this on my channel as well cuz I
think this is so I've been releasing
some of our videos together and drew on
my channel yeah I saw that thank you
great doing I want to especially I think
Zack for his eloquently
thought-provoking article and how it
afforded this do logos and I'm glad I
got to be a
part of it so thank you very much guys
yeah yeah appreciation mass or
appreciation kind of yeah it's just
gratitude friend for you guys and Andrew
for the stage and and John yeah for your
time and attention I just appreciate it
it's been it's been wonderful
yeah for me um you know this is this is
where I would like to be you know it's
like this is just where I would like to
be the most right at this in this very
moment so it's a way of life that's what
I see today that's fantastic and and the
more and take us because this
conversation has been very intense and
that kind of intensity is is
transformative
I think it's transformative for me and
maybe people who watch it will get a
little taste of that and and you know
and it just a little taste
seems to be very valuable yes