[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meeting crisis so last time we were
taking a look at the perennial problems
that are endemic to us precisely because
of the functioning and structuring and
development of our adaptive religio the
very processes that make us
intelligently adaptive also make us
vulnerable to self deceptive
self-destructive behavior and I propose
to you that we can address parasitic
processing with a counteractive
dynamical system we can address motor
confusion by the cultivation of sati we
can address the reflectiveness grabbed
by the cultivation of flow we can
address absurdity by cultivating Praja
we can address anxiety by cultivating
inner dialogue by internalizing the sage
through a process of internalization and
in dwelling that allows us to identify
with the sage we can address the process
of alienation through the cultivation of
communitas and I mentioned to you some
new sets of communal ciclo technologies
that are emerging and people who are
trying to develop thinking about how to
make use of authentic relating circling
or trying to break through our current
cultural grammar to a form of authentic
discourse and relating so that's on
offer and that we can respond to
existential entrapment by the
cultivating the cultivation of gnosis
which can be power empowered by a core
capacity for realizing higher states of
consciousness so what you have is
basically a higher state of
consciousness that is empowering
Nasus right and that right is of course
sat within part of gnosis as you
remember I argued is it has to be set
within a proper ritual context etc I
remind you all of that and that this is
being used right to cultivate and of
course is being reflectively transformed
by a counteractive dynamical system that
is going to of course get you sets of
practices for cultivating sati
cultivating flow cultivating Praja
cultivating communitas cultivating inner
dialogue etc when this is set within a
wisdom framing which
so that comprehensively that person is
developing interlocking sets of virtues
for addressing self-deception and for
affording self optimization and this
results in a reliable response
amelioration and alleviation of the
perennial problems I would say that's
enlightenment at least you know an
Enlightenment that I'm trying to
reverse-engineer the components can each
ultimately be explained and understood
by our best cognitive science I believe
at least I've given you reasons that
that we can rationally hope that what of
course needs to be done is to still try
and articulate wisdom from a scientific
perspective and of course that is one of
the most exciting things that's
happening right now something that I am
privileged to participate in all of the
ongoing scientific work or the
psychological cognitive scientific even
neuro scientific work on what does
wisdom mean and how can we cultivate it
and there's just so many people and
we're going to talk about that at length
but we need to do something else because
we need to talk about the way in which
this whole project as I said can be be
legitimized the undermined in roaded if
these whole sets of practices can't be
situated within a encompassing and
welcoming worldview so having a ecology
of cyclic technologies for addressing
the perennial problems is necessary but
of course not sufficient for responding
to the mean crisis I've been encouraged
by meeting
so many people that are trying to set up
try to train people worrying about my
language to be responsive to the
creativity of these individuals who are
trying to create these ecologies of
psycho technologies I've talked to rave
Kelly for example I mean he's done some
amazing work on trying to bring together
aspects of parkour the martial arts
people get doing something like the
circling practice right and again did
create this ecology of practices I'm
talking to Michael Nathan and he's
trying to integrate ideas about the
training and cultivation of wisdom into
the training of martial arts in order
again to try and realize you know an
ecology of practices for responding to
the meeting crisis and so there's many
people out there already doing this so I
I don't I I want to indicate that I'm
pointing to something that people are
already doing I'm not trying to take
credit for it but I'm hoping that and
this I'm beginning some supportive
feedback though that the work I'm doing
here with you of trying to articulate
that can help facilitate the these
groups and help them coordinate and
communicate and potentially commune with
each other in a mutually beneficial
fashion so a couple more things we need
to go back to this we need to talk about
the integration with the historical
forces because there's a particular
issue that comes to the fore so this is
the plan for going forward let's talk
about the interaction between the
historical forces and the perennial
problems let and that's talked about
more explicitly can we respond to the
loss of the three orders and the worldly
miss attunement and then what that would
look like and and and and again
I'm not proposing to found I'm trying to
just talk about what I see emerging and
hopefully give some suggestive steps
towards can we get that religion that's
not a religion and then put that into
dialogue with other people who have
engaged in a similar project people like
Tillich and Jung and Corbin and Barfield
and so that we've got at least I hope a
very rich and dialogue with with a lot
of momentum to it for trying to get to
this religion that's not a religion okay
so the historical forces the loss of the
three orders let's remember this and why
it matters so you've lost the three
orders you've lost the numerological and
the Noma logical basically gives us this
deep sense of coherence and
connectedness
right that is so central we know from
our current work on meaning in life we
we lost the normative order right which
gives us I would argue that sense of
significance depth that we get right
through self transcendence and of course
we've lost the narrative order which
gives us a sense of purpose or direction
and then as we've lost this right we
have a worldview again in which we don't
belong in in which our projects don't
belong etc and of course that will
interact with it'll will exacerbate any
attempts that individuals or groups have
in addressing perennial problems and
when you get that going that's when the
meaning crisis really bites you
individually or right it really it gnaws
at you as a person or as a community or
as a group now I want to talk about
first of all this interaction because it
brings up a particular problem and here
again I'm going to point to the seminal
work of Wolfe on her book on meaning in
life of why it why it matters um so I I
was interviewed by leandro on a podcast
manifested well-being and then he he
then later recently interviewed Woolf
and her work on meaning in life so I
recommend you going to that to take a
look at her work or also reading her
book now if you remember as she says
that meaning in life is ultimately about
a kind of deep connectedness that we
want so we have all these metaphors we
want to be we want to be connected to
something larger than ourselves bigger
than ourself
etc and that's what makes our life
meaningful and of course it's this
notion of connectedness but she says
those are metaphors they're what I would
call their symbolic expressions
of what what people are really saying is
the they want this she talks about it
this way and think about how this just
sings to everything we've been doing
here we want subjective attraction to
find salience right and to be drawn into
you want subjective attraction to that
meets to that connects with that
conforms to objective attractiveness
so notice here you know notice here but
of course the the transitive 'ti here
that it's actually in here that the the
meaning is to be found and notice also
the connectivity and how much this is
you know the relevance realizing you
know the deep connected the connection
the deep carrying the deep involvement
the deep participation okay so that all
lines up but then but then of course and
here's what this and this interact right
what happens is she says ah because of
this we know there's no such thing as
this we know there's no such thing as
this the Scientific Revolution and the
loss there's nothing that is objectively
attractive all right this is a
particular grammar right this is the
grammar again that you know right you
know there isn't it in there there's
nothing there's nothing there's no
meaning or relevance in this thing in
itself this is ultimately sort of a
Content argument and well sort of leaves
it there she does allude to ways in
which we can ourselves we can
pretend we have objective attraction
just by finding a group of people who
agree to value the same things we do and
that is a kind of bullshitting because
the salience of the group is actually
masking whether or not it's given us
what we're looking for and she
criticizes all of those attempts I think
quite rightly and that's where she sort
of leaves it at least when I read the
book I don't know if more recent work
she's got an answer to it so work I'm
doing with Thalia Prentice Jensen Kim
for the RZA with we're really trying to
say is there a way of addressing this
problem using
the current cognitive science cognitive
psychology neuroscience etc I won't keep
saying everything that's in cognitive
science you know philosophy psychology
neuroscience machine my network can we
use all of that the best of that to
address this issue see so notice that
again this issue is an issue in which
historical forces prevent sort of the
fundamental legitimation of the whole
project that we would try to use to
address the perennial problems ok so
what can we think about this well part
of it is I think to ask if do we need
things to be objectively valuable so
what that means is that things would
have a value independent about how I
would value them or how you would value
them and there is a particular move that
you can make that doesn't require that
the thing has objective value right
instead you could think about
the set of characteristics that need to
exist in order for meaning to be created
and so what I'm trying to what I'm
trying to point you towards and we have
to go very delicately right I'm trying
to point you towards that it's actually
the transitivity
of the relationship that we need and we
don't really need objective
attractiveness that's not quite right
so let's think about this
relevance realization is inherently
interested in itself because as I've
argued that's constitutive of it being a
self organizing self correcting self
optimizing self developing evolving
process
relevance realization is not something
in me it's not something in the world
it's in the it emerges in the
affordances that are co-created by the
world in myself it's bi-directional in
that fashion so
what I need to be connected to I would
argue is I need to be connected to
finding Li finding I need to be
connected to those conditions that
afford relevance realization itself
those conditions that satisfy my
inherent valuing of the relevance
realization process its itself so and so
what does that mean what that means is I
ultimately and want to care about the
conditions that afford meaning making
itself those conditions right are
universal in a sense not in the sense
that they are the same environmental
conditions or the same psychological but
the same set of conditions that make
possible and afford meaning making
itself and this sounds all very abstract
and now I want to try and turn it around
and this is something that I'm arguing
for right that when we care well to to
create the conditions of meaning making
because we find them inherently valuate
valuable because that is constitutive of
our capacity to be agents and to value
anything else when we're doing that what
we're actually engaging in is a gap a
agape is to love for its own sake the
process of right the process of meaning
making and the process of meaning making
is the process of being a person
ultimately
this is agape and that's why of course
the things that contribute most
significantly to meaning in life is our
sense of being connected to other people
Nagappa Klee I'm reciting to you is that
there is a way of responding to this
which is the cultivation the realization
the appreciation of agape and you say
but there's no objective value to
meaning-making
of course there isn't but it's not
subjective or arbitrary it is
transactive and it is in that sense
transcendental in a Content sense it is
at that right what I'm involved with are
the very conditions on the possibility
of meaning making itself so to agape
love people of course is not just to be
directed at that body and mind
it's be to be directed at their
conditions their community their
environment their development their
education
that's agape
that exists independently of me of you
of us of a group because agape proceeds
permeates and follows us
so part of what it means therefore and
this and of course this was also part of
the tradition but it becomes especially
pertinent for us part of how
enlightenment has to be for us is that
whatever machinery we craft together for
addressing the perennial problems has to
be integrated grounded in an a gothic
way of being and this and then that of
course makes sense too if you think
about being within the being mode having
an i thou relationship etc we have to
care about the conditions that make any
caring possible
so part of what we need to do right is
to address this issue with the gup-a the
cultivation of agave
I think we should ultimately see agape
as our deepest appreciation for the
caring that is intrinsic and
constitutive to the relevance
realization that makes both the agent
and the arena boat Arena possible is
that is that pointing to something that
in the physics of reality no but it is
pointing something is it therefore just
pointing to something that's
romantically dwelling within my
subjective II subjectivity no it's
pointing to caring about something that
is inherently transected and has a value
independent of my valuing of it because
my valuing of it does not constitute it
into existence I emerge from it and
participate in it I am NOT the source or
maker of it
what about the historical factors the
historical forces so we've lost the
three orders
we can I would argue we can make use of
what's happening in third generation
cogs i4ii cogs I in conjunction with the
theoretical machinery you've been
developing on the cognitive scientific
side of things to address that
the way I want to do this is I want to I
want to make use of an article by
Francisco Varela this is not me saying
that I think that everything that Varela
has to say or all of his particular
theories are right or something like
that but Varela is one of the founding
figures of their generation 4e cognitive
science of course that work was has been
developed significantly since him and
that's why it's important to only see
him as a as a founding figure not as the
final figure the seminal work of Evan
Thompson if you want to see this these
ideas taken into a depth you know get
Evans book mind in life is just
fantastic but we've talked about this
the deep continuity hypothesis and how
it resituated into an order because
there's a continuity between the
principles of cognition and the
principles of biology and then the
principles of dynamical self-organizing
physical systems ok but I want to pick
up on this because I want to pick up on
something that he said because he writes
this piece and it's sort of autobahn
taneous ly argumentative and
autobiographical and he wrote it in 2000
the it's in a book called the psychology
of awakening and he he talks about what
he calls steps towards a science of
interbeing unfolding the Dharma implicit
in cognitive science so he relates the
following thing he was trying to he was
even asked to write an article about
sort of and around 2000 is when
third-generation carks I was really
starting to develop and he was he was it
was asked to write an article sort of
what are the main insights or claims
about this and I want to I want to go
through that and sort of unpack them a
bit and then also unpack the elements so
sort of what are the insights of third
generation cogs I
and I have been trying to exemplify them
for you I've been trying to exemplify
them in all of the lectures throughout
the whole a series but especially since
episode 25 their generation cog side and
unpacked the 40s I actually think
there's sort of five E's but what's also
called 5e cognitive science and how does
it address these three or the three
orders he says as he was doing this what
had kept happening to him is he kept as
he kept articulating to himself the
insights that were central to cognitive
science he found that he was constantly
saying things that he found consonant
with the Dharma the central teachings of
Buddhism so he found this deep resonance
between the science and a particular
path about whereby individuals and
communities actually cultivate meaning
wisdom etc so he he lists the first one
and this is one of the for ease of
cognizance the issue of embodiment that
we're deeply embodied
and we're deeply embodied so here's a
quote from that 2001 torch note that
2000 article mind is not program
software or rule-bound manipulation of
symbols he means symbols in the
mathematical sense not in the spiritual
sense we've been developing here mind is
not programmed software or rule-bound
manipulation of symbols instead the mind
right arises through immediate coping
with the world ok so the idea here is
right that we understand intelligence
and this is something I've been trying
to articulate right we understand
intelligence as our coping with the
world the way we are evolving in the
sensory motor loop right so that we deal
with what right we deal with the
problems at hand that directly afford
our interaction with the world at large
right so
here's the word hoping because he's
trying to get us out of a fascination
and a fixation with her capacity for
theorizing not because he thinks that
theorizing is wrong or that would
because that would be a self
contradictory act he's offering a theory
but he's trying to say that we have to
he's trying to get us to remember the
other kinds of knowing and the way in
which ultimately to be a general problem
solver to be an intelligent cognitive
agent is to have this right ongoing
evolving fitted Nestico ping with my
immediate interaction with the world and
that this is the the defining features
he would argue and I would agree with
being a cognitive agent and he calls
that embodiment many people might see
that Evan Thompson as enactment right so
there's a bunch of these ease here
there's embodiment other people might
say what Varela is talking about there
is embeddedness the way we are embedded
in active this is Evan Thompson's idea
that cognition isn't inherently
something we enact right right extended
that our cognition is not in our head
but it's extended through our
interactions with the world through our
psycho technologies through distributed
cognition because those are the four es
whether or not we should pin this
specifically to this or maybe it
overlaps with some of these other ones
that's fine we're gonna see more of this
with Varela anyways but notice what this
is about the embodiment is about the
idea that right there is a deep
continuity between your most abstract
cognitive abilities and your most well
embodied
sensorimotor action I've tried to argue
that you can see this in the following
way that your cognitive your cognition
is ultimately dependent on grounded in
the relevance realization and the
relevance realization is ultimately
grounded in your bio economy your body
is not some clay that you drag around in
our Cartesian fashion your body is a
economy that in acts logistical norms of
efficiency and resiliency that constrain
your cognition so that it continually
evolves it's fitted 'no stu the world
there's a deep continuity between
cognition and biology and of course the
biology is is deeply embedded you are
engaging in what biologists talk about
as continual niche construction
so the new biology that's emerging I'm
privileged to know and I get to interact
with Dennis Walsh here at the University
of Toronto if you want to see the people
are doing the cutting-edge work on the
philosophy of biology take a look at
Dennis's work and the work of other
people there's an anthology I think what
I'm trying to remember what it's called
I think it's criticizing or reflecting
on the the the grand synthesis the
synthesis between Darwinian evolution
and Mendelian genetics I'll get the
right book panel to come up but but
there is this idea about the importance
of processes like niche construction for
understanding evolution and the idea
here is right and you see how I've been
making use of this there's the organism
in the environment right and the idea is
the organism is shaping the environment
shaping and selecting the environment
and the environment is shaping and
selecting the organism and so you with
the organisms get involved with
affecting the environments so that it is
conducive to their way of being but they
also evolve both biologically and
behaviorally right to exploit and make
good use of that changed environment and
you've got this trans jack
evolving loop going on niche
construction we do this of course on a
broad scale through culture because what
culture is is right we do this thing
where we massively shape the environment
and then massively shape ourselves to
fit that environment right so culture is
about both fitting people to an
environment and fitting the environment
to the people in this ongoing fashion
and so that takes us right into this
notion of course that we are deeply
embedded
we're deeply embedded so embodiment
leads to and there's some people that
argue that embeddedness sort of reduces
to embodiment Roland seems to be arguing
that in one of his books on the new
science of the mind
but anyways the idea here is the deep
continuity we are deeply embodied we are
deeply embedded now notice how that is
going right it's undermining the way in
which Descartes severed everything right
and if right so this is obviously a
species of niche construction the
comprehensive one right and if this as
I've tried to argued can even tell us
something important about consciousness
both its function and its phenomenology
then we can seriously respond to
Descartes and say no no the mind and
body are not disconnected they are in a
deep continuity and the mind and the
world are not disconnected they are in a
deep continuity of embeddedness and
inactive processing
so
what's the second insight that Varela
brings up emergence which is like it's a
major term now and this is something
that has been invoked throughout this
series the idea that write a system as
the system is especially the system is
self-organizing it can produce
properties all right as a system that
the component parts can't possess and so
the idea is them the mind in this sense
it emerges out of the embodied embedded
brain coupled to a living environment
right I've tried to give you ways of
understanding that that emergence and
and how it is reflected in your
spirituality by your capacity for self
transcendence and how that could be
understood at least in part a
significant part by the complexification
that is inherent in your relevance
realization machinery in your religio
so what does this mean for us this means
that we are starting to get something
like a vertel vertical dimension back to
our ontology not at two worlds vertical
dimension but the idea of emergence
through complexification of right things
like biology you've got self-organizing
things and they already right so what
processes like the processes combustion
is self-organizing a tornado is
self-organizing erosion and
self-organizing evolution is
self-organizing and the thing is
particular kinds of self-organization
like like evolution can produce things
that are more than self-organizing there
they are right they are self making this
is Varela's notion of autopoietic system
there's lots of controversies around
this right and I don't think it's like I
don't think it solves everything that
Varela thinks it solves but it is
definitely the case that unlike a
tornado
I am a self-organizing thing that self
organize is such that I seek out those
conditions that protect and promote my
agency right and then of course the self
making things right they can be calm
right more than just self making things
they can become self identifying things
you can become a reflective right self
making thing you can become aware of
come to some understanding and
appreciation of yourself making of the
way in which you are inherently
developmental because that's what we're
talking about when we talk about
development the way in which your self
making and then you can interact with
that in ways that I've tried to show to
you
and so on and so forth okay and so
self-transcendence and notice what's
happening here a normative order is
being given a metaphysical backing now I
want to come back later towards the end
of the series and talk about this
bottom-up emergence and do it does it
need to be complemented by a
metaphysical idea of a top-down
emanation and what what what might that
mean and and I'm gonna be very tentative
about that because this is something
that is you know really trying to break
free from some of the deepest grammar
that we that has gotten us into the
meaning crisis but right now I'm going
to continue with Varela ok so you've
definitely got emergence what's the
third one right so there's all these E's
so he's got you know embodiment which is
shared with a forty cognitive science
and I think whatever you think about
some of his claims about auto polices
and others he helped to really bring
this to the fore for current cognitive
science and this is going in this is now
informing the experimental psychology
we're seeing how much your embodiment
affects your cognition right and then he
right he gave the next one was emergence
right and then the third one is emotion
and this is really interesting because
the the deep divide right but between
emotion and reason a divide that I think
is enshrined and ossified in our
cognitive grammar right and the
cognitive cultural grammar in the
ongoing battle between the empiricists
and the romantics between John Locke and
Rousseau is right is - is being
addressed and and we went back to this
and right and so we can think of the
work of DiMaggio here and Descartes
Cerro and we've talked about this and
now you see this right the DiMaggio was
basically showing that people without
emotion even though all of the
calculative machinery may be operating
normally well means these people that
remember you remember in des cartes
error right that right all that although
all the calculated machinery is
operating well they're disconnected from
their emotions they are incapacitated as
cognitive agents why because without
emotion without the caring that is
intregal talk right to relevance
realization remember what Reid said that
we're different from communities and
computers that we have to care about
emotion and why do we sort we have to
care about information why do we have to
care about information because we
ultimately have to take care of
ourselves because of the kind of beings
we are right when you don't have that
you face combinatorial explosion there's
a deep interconnection between being
embodied being a relevance realizer and
having emotions emotions are what is the
way in which relevance realization is
brought up into the level of your
salience landscaping and what emotions
do is they scraf tear they shape and
sculpt the salience landscaping
such that an agent arena relationship
becomes obvious and apparent to you when
you're angry you assume a particular
role you assign a bunch of identities
and you you it's obvious to you what you
should be doing I will make this
prediction that as we move towards
making and we're going to come back to
this issue about artificial general
intelligence as we move towards making
artificial general intelligence we more
and what we're already having to give
these machines something deeply
analogous to attention and we're going
to predict to have to give them
something analogous to emotion
so I think it's better to talk about
this I would put the two together write
that within religio you always have
caring coping caring coping
and that's the core of your cognitive
agency
the emotion also carries up to the
relationship and of course this goes
back to agape that emotion is how we
coordinate the attachment I don't mean
it in the Buddhist sense I mean in the
psychological sense the attachment
relationships between individuals such
that we create persons that we create
persons who are capable of dwelling
within and coordinating their efforts
within distributed cognition we create
persons within communities of persons
that shape themselves their community
and their world to fit together in an
ongoing agent arena fashion
the last it points to is kind of
excellence this has to do with
connections between third generation for
econ ative science
dynamical systems self optimization and
an aspect of psychology that has become
known as positive psychology positive
psychology is a way of doing psychology
that is complimentary to our standard
way our standard way of doing psychology
is to see how things break down how they
fall apart and there's two and I'm not
trying I'm not I believe most people in
positive psychology are also not trying
to dismiss or debunk or any crazy thing
like that no sort of standard psychology
but standards because standard
psychology studies the mind by how it
breaks down for two very good reasons
one is by studying how it breaks down we
can analyze it and we can thereby
understand its parts and how they might
be working together and also by
understanding how's that the mind breaks
down how the psyche breaks down we can
potentially therapeutically and
pedagogically intervene to fix it repair
it right therapeutic intervention
therapeutic and pedagogical intervention
so that's very noble and I'm not trying
to I'm not trying to diss that in any
way but what positive psychology says is
you shouldn't study the mind only in
terms of how it breaks down
you should also study the mind in terms
of how it excels beyond the norm
how do all the pieces fit together in a
way your brain is a machine of machines
that can make itself into a new kind of
machine how can the brain put right how
does the brain right the embodied right
inactive right embedded brain body
sensory motor loop mind right how how
does it transcend itself how does it
excel how do we should study individuals
who have optimized their cognition
better than the norm because here's the
idea very often you can only understand
something deeply not only in terms of
its parts in how it breaks down but you
can only understand in terms of the
whole and how it excels because that
reveals properties and powers that you
don't see in the norm and so positive
psychology studies things like happiness
meaning in life importantly and this is
where for acog sigh and positive
psychology really come together right
wisdom wisdom is the term we give for
people who have or who are excellent in
their cognitive capacities for coping
and caring and for I would argue
responding to issues of self-deception
helping people deal with the perennial
problems of human existence and so this
becomes a topic a topic to which we are
going to shortly turn because as I
argued in the end we need an account of
wisdom both for cultivating the
perennial problems and also for how to
make the best use of this science
there's one thing to have the knowledge
that's coming from this
but we need the wisdom of how to use it
best how to understand it and use it
best
the deep continuity and emergence and
development they give us back a normal
logical order we we see how we fit in
how we belong and we see how our
meaning-making
belongs fits in we see a normative order
we see what it is to self transcend we
have to do more on this especially with
the topic of wisdom but how it is we can
cultivate enlightenment how it is we can
respond to the perennial problems
how it is that we can bring about the
best internal optimization the best
external reciprocal realization how we
can afford it and agog a
I think this brings with us wind brings
within an important point this is the
work of good enough which is a perfect
name and her work on the sacred depths
of nature and she talks about how as a
scientist and she's trying to recover
that sacred depths of nature sacredness
ah and wonder in a way that helps her
cultivate wisdom and of course
transcendence is integral to this and
she talks about that we and you and you
can see what she's doing she's trying to
challenge the fundamental grammar that
we've in hand in inherited from the
exhalation she talks about a new sense
of transcendence instead of
transcendence above which of course
invokes the two worlds mythology what
she talks about is we need this new
sense transcendence into transcendence
into the depths of nature transcendence
I would also argue and I don't I don't
see her as opposed to this I see her
actually enacting transcendence into the
depths of the psyche and the two deeply
integrated and coordinated together in
reciprocal realization remember the
opposite of reciprocal narrowing the
reciprocal opening up the mutual
disclosing which is experienced as a
kind of love transcendence into
so the one that remains the order that
remains unconnected for us to this
argument is the narrative order because
right the narrative order points us
towards a t loss Kosmic t loss and
evolution and relevance realization are
non teleological they're open-ended so
if we're looking to find something that
will bring back the narrative order in
that sense I don't think we can find it
but perhaps we should think differently
about the narrative order perhaps we
should think of the narrative order now
as more to do with gnosis we should
think of it as an open-ended
optimization an open-ended optimization
and that we may have indispensable need
for symbols and stories to afford that
but we do not need to think of those
symbols and stories as existing
independently in the structure of
reality we certainly don't want to get
back to you topic visions or their
antithesis their antithesis in nostalgic
visions because both of those have been
the source of a lot of suffering and
distress is it possible because you see
this in stoicism you see this in
Buddhism you see this in Taoism is it
possible to move to a post narrative way
of being in which we are concerned not
with our historical narrative or
horizontal identity but we're concerned
with the depths to which we are capable
of living that perhaps what we need is
not a grand purpose a narrative of a
grand purpose that is connected with the
history of the cosmos perhaps instead we
can move to getting beyond a narrative
way of conforming to reality to a post
narrative the kind of experience people
have in higher states of consciousness
where the narrative drops away and
nevertheless they experienced themselves
as deeply connected deeply at one with
themselves and with reality and that
this seems to have given their life
these moments
and significance to it and again there's
no mystery to these higher states of
consciousness because there's right
there is no theoretical mystery because
there's the cognitive continuum from
fluency to insight we're just exacting
the machinery over and over again to
flow to mystical experiences to mystical
experiences that drive transformative
development the higher states of
consciousness we'll take a look at this
proposal drawing this all together
coming back to the talking about the
religion that is not a religion -
setting up the discourse with people
like colic and Barfield and Jung and
Corbin and we also need to come back and
take a look at the cognitive science of
wisdom because all of this is being done
within a wisdom framing the wisdom that
captures the excellence which was the
fourth insight Varela thank you very
much for your time and attention
[Music]
you
you