[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis last time we were talking
about this interaction and confluence
between Macy and Christianity the
transformation that's undergoing the
platonic tradition in neoplatonism and
Gnosticism we had ended up by talking
about Latinas and how he brings about
this grand unification of the best
science of the time Aristotle the best
therapy of the time stoicism and the
best spirituality of the time Platonism
and this is done all in a way that
powerfully integrates mystical
experience achieving higher states of
consciousness and rational argumentation
things that we now experience is
diametrically opposed science and
spirituality reason and transformation
therapy and realness all of these things
were not they were instead powerfully
mutually supportive now platanus is
around 270 or so of the Common Era and
after him of course the Roman Empire
starts to go into decline and we're
seeing the end of the ancient world and
there is a figure there a towering
figure who basically brings this
configuration this triangle that I've
mentioned of Christianity Neoplatonism
and Gnosticism together he's deeply
influenced by all of them although he
will eventually give priority to
Christianity and that's Augustine so
Augustine is a Roman and he's alive -
and the 4th century into the beginnings
of the fifth century as the Roman Empire
is entering its final stages so as you
can imagine the alright that call that
in
pending collapse is bringing with it a
very dark vision of the world and for
that reason Augustine is attracted to
manic any ISM now this is a religion
that was started by many from Persia and
many people argue that it is a gnostic
religion some people disagree with
applying the term Gnostics to it again
it doesn't matter
it was seems to have picked up on a lot
of the same kinds of ideas about a
machinery in which we are meshed as
creatures of light and that light has to
be liberated by a special kind of gnosis
and and Augustine is deeply attracted to
this religion he's attracted to this
religion precisely because it is as I
said it has Gnostic components in it and
therefore promises to address his own
personal loss of agency which I'll talk
about momentarily but also to address
what is becoming more and more salient
to people of Augustine's time which is a
world that is darkening around them so
he's influenced by that which means
ideas of evil and evil powers and
structures in the world are very salient
to Augustine he also deeply suffers as I
mentioned personally he is riven with
inner conflict to put it I think in
terms that would make sense to us today
Augustine is a sex addict he is deeply
addicted to sexual behavior he described
it this way and I think this is a
particularly apt way of describing his
addiction he said I was always licking
the open
or of lust which gives you a very
telling image of a compelling desire and
yet and something disgusting and
degrading and it's also exacerbating and
making worse the very affliction that
you're suffering so he he suffers
tremendous self-loathing because of this
tremendous loss of agency and he
struggles to try and find a way of
getting free from his own personal inner
conflict and degradation and also
providing an answer to the evil that he
sees in the world he writes the first
autobiography in the history of the West
the confessions and in there he relates
an experience which deeply deeply
affected him I would say it came close
to traumatizing him so when he was young
he relates this story he and some of his
friends broke into a courtyard and stole
some fruit and you're thinking most of
us would think yeah you know a young
adolescent performing you know a
misdemeanor act of minor theft stealing
some fruit who cares but this is
Augustine he's already a meshed in a
Manichaean worldview he's already deeply
sort of he's becoming aware as an
adolescent of how powerful his drives
can be and what affected Augustine about
this very profoundly as he said he did
not want the fruit do not desire the
fruit he wasn't really trying to impress
his friends he wasn't desiring that he
came away with a very strong experience
it's almost like a reverse of a higher
state of consciousness he came away with
a very strong experience that he stole
the fruit simply because it was the
wrong thing to do that he wanted to do
this that was something in him that was
dragging him down
and this is again why this worldview
appealed to him there was there's these
it's like again Manichean ism is very
much like the Star Wars mythology of the
light and the dark side there is a dark
side and it's drawing people down and
it's the side of desire and anger and
destruction right and Augustine sees
this alive within his own body in his
sexual addiction so he travels around
the world he teaches rhetoric and he
becomes eventually connected and
familiar with philosophy and something
happens to him that's quite profound he
reads the work of Latinas he reads the
work of plutinos he has very high
opinion of Latinas he later writes in
Latinas Plato lived again and he writes
very glowingly of the plate myths and in
Plato and especially in plutinos
Augustine sees a different way he gets a
world view other than the Manichaean
world view he gets the naplan the
Neoplatonic world view and he gets it I
mean this in the gnosis sense he gets it
Augustine has a mystical experience well
reading Latinas he has that ascent up to
the one he rises through the levels of
reality and levels of his self and he
has this mystical experience but he
can't hold it he can't stay there the
the darkness in him is so has so much
gravity pulls him back down and pulls
him back towards that world of lust and
addiction that reciprocal narrowing that
mark Lewis talks about so powerfully and
he wonders
ice what why what why is the gravity
pulling me why is the darkness that
pulls me down why is it so powerful is
there anything that more can can more
can overpower it and pull me up he says
I get what Latonya is talking about but
the evil within me it's too strong the
darkness pulls me down too much he
lightly he later come to say that this
is like a hole in being and it's just
sucking the light away and so he he has
what some people have reported having
after they have some mystical
experiences he has a rebound effect of
despair it's like if I was to show you a
beautiful place this beautiful beach and
when you stepped on to the beach you
finally felt at peace like the peace
you've sought all your life and there's
beauty around you and you feel alive and
vital that you can't stay you can't
somehow you just can't hold and you're
drawn away and you can't stay there now
the place you're in the darkness and the
squalor that you're in is so much worse
because you have been in the light and
you know you were incapable of staying
there
so he's falling into despair and he's at
his mother's house and his mother as a
Christian Monica and he's in the
backyard like the courtyard and he's
listening and he hears a child's voice
say take it pick up and read and there's
a Bible there or an early version of a
Bible and he picks it up just where it
is and he happens to of course read the
work of Paul and in Paul he finds an
affinity a deep affinity that kindred
spirit because in Paul he sees that same
inner conflict that same tortured inner
conflict and he sees a worldview that
makes sense of that inner conflict and
Augustine has this insight he says look
look look
pay attention to Platonists pay
attention to Plato what are they saying
Plato and Platonists are ultimately
saying we're driven by two powerful
loves word riveting driven by the love
of becoming one within and becoming one
with what is most real just what's
driving all of our reason is love a love
that a love for what's true a love for
what's good a love for what is beautiful
and then he says at the heart of reason
is love and what's damaged in me is my
capacity to love not my capacity to
reason that's why I have this sexual
addiction my capacity for love has been
thwarted and twisted by my sexuality
so I need something that can heal
remember the gnosis the healing I need
to be healed there's a love that is
within reason that can help you grow
beyond reason - what reason always
sought how do we grow in love
well agape that's what the Christian
message is agape by participating in
agape we grow in love we grow in the
love that is driving us to becoming
persons fully realized persons so
Augustine says Neoplatonism needs
Christianity and the healing and the
response to evil that Gnosticism was
looking for can actually be found in
Christianity and so he synthesizes them
all together so notice what we now have
let's put this together very carefully
in Augustine and notice the way he's
putting it he's not putting it out there
as a theory he's writing an
autobiography he's talking about it in a
perspectival and participatory way he
writes the first autobiography the
confessions this is not a dry academic
treatise this is an existential manual
how you can also go through the process
that he has gone through it is gnosis
through and through okay so from
plutinos what do we have well Platonists
already has given us because part of
plutinos is the Aristotelian worldview
that's the Noma logical order we talked
about right the conformity theory right
the geocentric worldview the two things
in attunement they say is your this is
the best science account of the
structure of reality and how reality is
known from platini's himself we get now
what I'm going to call the normative
order so Tinus gave us an account of how
we can move in a coordinated fashion up
the levels of reality up the levels of
consciousness up the levels of the self
from what is less real to what is more
real what's Augustine going to do with
that well look what's less real what's
down here has less oneness less
integration it makes less sense look if
when I destroy something what do I do I
take away its structural functional
organization I make it more disordered
right as I go downward things are
fragmenting becoming having less and
less form less and less i daus they're
less and less intelligible they're less
and less understandable this becomes
more and more pure chaos I'm losing
truth I'm losing goodness I'm losing
beauty I'm losing what makes things to
be and what makes them to be sensible
and intelligible this is evil down here
is that that's the whole that's the tear
in being towards which things can fall
but I can also move up to what's more
true more good more real
and of course what Platonists knows is
that this is driven by a love a love to
love of knowing what it's real and
simultaneously becoming what is more
real and so for Augustine this of course
and Plato even called it if you remember
the good this is the normative order the
normal logical order tells you how
things are structured the normative
order tells you how you can become
better how you can deal with evil and
how you can increase realness meaning in
your life
Augustine takes that and as I've shown
you it says wait the thing about
Aristotle is well you know what
everything was moving to get where it
belongs all right
but that's all it is in Aristotle but I
think Augustine is basically saying that
everything is moving in a way in order
to try and move us away from evil
towards goodness and so he says I think
Christianity puts these two together the
world everything is moving on purpose
and the purpose is to try and afford
realization both cognitive and in the
world things are becoming more real
we're becoming more real we're realizing
that and then he says and you know what
all of this is driven by love and about
the transformation that happens in me
the gnosis agape that's the narrative
order of Christianity there's this great
narrative there's this great story about
the course of history and the course of
history is a course of moving right
towards a final consummation the
promised land and
is the history of God's love of God's
agape of God intervening and creating
the open future but that agape isn't
just a historical force it's also a
normative force in me it's also leading
me upward towards the good
what Augustine does is he says
Christianity can put all of these things
together the world is organized this way
so that it moves through history this
way so that all of us can self transcend
this way all three orders come together
in a mutually supporting fashion now we
know from current cognitive science
right that the three components of
meaning that people talk about the
things that contribute to meeting in
life and this is Hensel men's work and
others are a sense of coherence I'll
explain what this means in a minute a
sense of significance and a sense of
purpose I got to talk to Samantha
Hanselman about this the more coherent
the more intelligible the more things
fit together for you the more real they
are the more meaningful you find your
life well that's the normal logical
order how things fit together and make
sense in a coherent fashion
what about significance significance is
this how valuable house how how deep in
reality how good are the elements of
your life that's the normative order
purpose does your life have a direction
is it moving in a course that's the
narrative order human beings want things
to make sense they need a noble logical
order and Augustine says I have this
it's the Aristotelian worry of world
order and I can give a Christian
explanation of that
they want things to be significant they
want to satisfy the anagogical inner
peace and contact with reality and
Augustine says I can tell you that
because I can tell you how to put reason
and agape together
that's what Christianity does and they
people want things to have a purpose
they want there to be write a story
Christianity is offering the ultimate
story Augustine puts it all together and
he puts it all together as the Roman
Empire is literally collapsing he's in
hippo in North Africa when the
barbarians are literally at the gate
laying siege to the city and he's
basically laying the foundations for
what's going to come next
he's lying laying foundations for the
medieval worldview but what do we have
from this what we have right and we'll
come back to the cognitive science what
we have is a very long and powerful
history that tells us how our our
culture has articulated the axial
revolution how it has given a grammar a
way of understanding what the axial
revolution has given us it has given us
a system for interpreting and inhabiting
a worldview in which meaning and wisdom
as understood by the actual revolution
have been developed and have been
articulated in a sophisticated and
compelling fashion meaning is to have a
neurological order that connects us to
what is real it is to have a normative
order that connects us not
intellectually but existentially to what
is good so that we can become better
meaning is to have a narrative order
that tells us how we can move forward
through history both collective and
individual history but what I've tried
to show you is that these are not three
separate things
they're like the three dimensions right
of a space the space of meaning they're
the three axes of the space of meaning
this is a beautiful synthesis it's the
culmination of tremendous amount of
historical development it's profound and
it's not just an intellectual thing it
is some as I've tried to show you it is
simultaneously a scientific thing a
spiritual thing a therapeutic thing an
existential thing this is why this is
going to last a thousand years because
it is such a powerful and enriching
vision
imagine if you could what if I could
offer this to you and make it deeply
historically scientifically and
intellectually viable for you what if I
could offer to you a worldview that had
the deepest scientific legitimacy
totally integrated with the most
profound spirituality no antagonism no
irrationality in it could join
seamlessly with a personal project of
therapy of therapeutic change in healing
and sappy entral education the
cultivation of genuine wisdom and track
self and self transcendence in community
with yourself your world your culture
and other people would you not want this
so here's the question y'all have to ask
yourself why don't you have it because
we know from the science that's what you
want we know from the history that
that's what our culture has like our
foundational culture from the axial
revolution built for us why don't we
have it is it irredeemably lost when we
lost the gnostic mythology when we lost
the axial mythology the two worlds
mythology when we lost the mythology of
christian do we are we now
bereft forever so
part of the way I can start to answer
that the the short answer for a long
series of arguments that are forthcoming
is no I think there is a response that's
why this series is entitled awakening
from the meeting crisis not despairing
because of the meeting crisis but we're
only halfway through right we're only
halfway through posing the problem we
have to we need to understand we're
getting an understanding of this meaning
in this wisdom we're getting how it was
articulated and developed and woven into
our cultural framework our cognitive
machinery the very grammar of our of our
existential modes but we still don't
know why does it all fall apart how does
it all come apart and where does that
leave us we need a better understanding
of the genealogy now of the crisis now
that we have a better understanding of
the nature of the meaning that was lost
we need to understand we need to
understand the process of loss so as I
said this world is the world that
Augustine bestows and this is what you
need to understand there's tremendous
loss when the Roman Empire collapses
it's not as great as the Bronze Age
collapse but it is its major so there's
this but it's only in the west by the
way not in the East the Byzantine Empire
survives but nevertheless there's a
traumatic loss traumatic not dramatic
traumatic loss of cities literacy trade
commerce the standard of living that was
lost in the Roman Empire he's not
recovered again until 1750 in London
England takes that long for that
standard of living to be recovered again
so this is very traumatic but the
Heritage given by Augustine is so
powerful that it serves as and I'm using
this word very carefully now I hope you
understand it serves as a home for
people throughout all of this turbulent
turmoil but some things start to happen
let's start to pull it apart this sacred
canopy starts to be torn apart and can
no longer shelter us from our terrors
and our despair so one of the first
things is in 1054 there's a division and
I'm not going to go into all part of it
has to do with that that the Roman
Empire and the west collapses but it
doesn't collapse in the East the East is
greek-speaking the West is lot and
speaking that in addition to Augustine
the East is deeply influenced by
Dionysus pseudo pseudo Tania's also the
case in the West there's a but there's a
lot of cultural historical
socio-economic differences in how
Christianity was understood and they
split apart there's what's called the
Great Schism so Christianity splits
between an Eastern Orthodox and what's
going to be called a Catholic version of
Christianity
this of course weakens Christianity it
also has an impact on it by separating
itself from the East Christianity loses
some of the connection that leads to
Christianity in the West Western Europe
Christianity loses some of its deeper
connections to that Neoplatonic mystical
theology that sorts to have an impact
the West starts to become less and less
platonic and more and more Aristotelian
now as always this starts right this
starts with a change in psycho
technology so Ivan ellic has done some
work looking at the the work of hue of
st. Victor who was around from 1096 to
1141 and what he points out and Chellam
talks about this in his book in his
books and katham also refers as Corbin
does too
Corbin talks about this chatham talks
about this refers to the work of Krantz
and others trying to summarize a lot of
this what's happening is there's a shift
in reading how people read right and
it's after the schism so before that and
this is something I can speak to from
first person before that reading is done
largely aloud people read aloud they
read the Bible for example because
that's mostly the only thing that can be
read and some of the church fathers
people like Augustine for example the
read aloud reading is often done
communally so first of all you're
embedded in a cultural context you're
embedded in a central community you read
aloud and more than you read aloud
you're reciting so let's try and get
something in your experience that might
bring this out okay think of the
difference between reading a poem and
reciting a poem and it's no coincidence
by the way that when Gabriel spoke to
Muhammad he told him to recite not to
write okay
what happens when you I was something
wonderful last Saturday was my birthday
and so it was a surprise party my
partner she organized a wonderful party
for me and I'd always said that instead
of gifts I would prefer it if people
brought one of their favorite pieces of
poetry and read it aloud so it was a
poetry party and people read it aloud
and there's such a difference between
reading a poem silently and reading it
aloud because the intonation and the
sharing it with others makes it very
different what was a particularly
beautiful is my girlfriend actually
she's she's a gifted singer she actually
sang her version of the poem by Robert
Frost it's a famous one about the two
roads diverging and I took the road less
traveled by and that has made all the
difference but when somebody is singing
a song singing a poem and most songs are
poems if you if you think about it right
it is appealing to you not just
propositional e it's not just write that
kind of knowing it's not just trying to
create beliefs in you first of all by
reciting the poem right you you and
trying to communicate it to others you
have to bring in all your know-how of
communication being able to share with
other people you have to know all your
ways of paying attention much more
embodied there's a perspectival stuff
what does it feel like what is it like
to be here in this space in this context
with these people
uttering these words and that and with
that it has the potential to be
participatory because people are these
are poems that have changed them have
made a difference to their identity they
know these poems not the way you know
the words on the back of your cereal box
they know these poems because of the way
in which they have been changed by them
their very sense of identity has been
altered by it so when people were
reading their
they're reading the Bible they're
reciting it
they're reciting it communally they're
also doing something and I do this
practice now and other people do write
it's called lectio Divina it's a way
it's a way of reading a text right in
which you are not speak at the point is
not to have the propositions and to
speak it is to let the text as much as
possible speak to you it is to engage
with the text in a meditative mindful
fashion opening yourselves up to the
possibility of it transforming you it is
much more like going to listen to a
piece of music and having prepared
yourself prepared the receptivity to
have a profound aesthetic experience
it's analogous to that your reading and
your reciting in such a way that you're
trying to open yourself up to this
protects speaking to you people that our
religious will often talk about this as
if God is present in the text and
speaking to them through the text this
is how people were reading it's a form
of reading that is ontologically
remedial it's designed to heal you
transform you it's designed to trigger
activate and educate your procedural
perspectival and participatory knowing
not just give you propositions it's
about helping you in your reading
remember the being mode and not just
have beliefs and propositions but people
start to read differently shortly
thereafter
what's happening is people are shifting
from right so have a Cinna which is an
anglicized form of Benson who's a great
Persian philosopher he was up until this
time very the dominant interpreter of
that ERISA that Augustinian worldview
that whole Augustinian way and he gives
priority to the Neoplatonic
and Corbin is going to make a lot of the
fact that Persian philosophy was always
trying to keep the neo platonic and
Gnostic elements of spirituality alive
Persia has played a much greater role in
world history and cultural history than
we have properly given credit to in the
so-called West but he he gets replaced
by Averroes right and Averroes
is more purely purely Aristotelian and
what that really means is a shift a
shift to giving exclusive priority to
definitions remember Aristotle try to
understand essences the I das as Evans
essences and essences as definitions and
that's very problematic as many things
don't have definitions but definitions
and propositions so people now start to
read silently to themselves and what
they're trying what they give priority
to right is coherence within a language
rather than transformation within
themselves in the world so what matters
is how the various symbols and I don't
mean that in a spiritual sense the
various propositional terms and logical
connectives fit together coherently
so a new model for thought emerges see
the old model was thought is a
conforming to the world and and then we
get this this we got this articulated
and developed and expanded into this
whole process of gnosis and an agog a
and self transformation that model of
knowing that's also a way of being
that's also a way of becoming that's
being taken away and it's being replaced
by a different model thought knowing is
to have coherent propositional language
thinking is to have a coherent set of
propositions in your head so Kranz talks
about we shift from the extensive self
the self that is transacted li connected
to the world that understands itself in
terms of its conformity to the world to
right and the intensive self this is a
self that's inside my head it's inside
my beliefs my self is primarily the way
I talk to myself by affirming my beliefs
through propositional language so people
start to think that the primary way in
which we know things is to get as much
coherence within our inner language then
instead of conformity in our outer
existential modes now why would people
make this shift people make this shift
because the world is starting to open up
again people are starting to get
interested in knowing the world
scientifically
we're getting its and it's gonna it's
gonna it's just slowly beginning here
right but we're gonna get the move
towards the value of having and by the
way I believe in this value I'm a
scientist write the value of logically
coherent well-organized propositional
theories the power of this is being
discovered so when I can read in this
other way right
I can empower my argumentative skills
tremendously what I'm losing right what
I'm losing is I'm losing reading as a
psycho technology of psycho-spiritual
existential transformation reading is
now becoming the consumption of
propositions and they're structuring in
logical coherency why
well as I said there's the beginning of
this reorientation towards the external
world and it's being driven by the fact
that Aristotle is coming into prominence
because he's being rediscovered so
because of the Crusades there is a
rediscovery of the works of Aristotle
that had largely been lost to Western
Europe and in Aristotle there is a
problem for Christianity there's a
problem for Christianity the problem is
we have a figure that can't be ignored
Aristotle is is part of that whole
ancient world that Augustine gave us
he's the author of the Noma logical
order that Augustine has baptized with
Christianity's approval so aerosol can't
be ignored but Aristotle describes a
world that does not have a lot of the
Christian mythology attached to it and
offers explanations for things that
Christianity makes no effort to explain
so there is this tremendous attraction
to the power the new explanatory power
provided by Aristotle and the model he
gives of getting clear definitions and
clear syllogistic inferences and
building up a very clear picture is a
meshed with this new way of reading and
this new way of experiencing knowing and
experiencing oneself primarily inside
one's head inside one's language so
Aristotle can't be ignored or rejected
because of his eminent Authority
but neither can he simply be assimilated
into the Christian worldview because he
talks about and explains things and does
things in a manner that you don't find
in the Bible so more and more people are
reading in this new way they're starting
to emulate the new right Aristotelian
science but this is starting to cause a
crisis within Christianity and so
there's an individual who arises who
sees the looming threat that this poses
who sees two things happening there's a
change in the psycho technology of
reading and there is a change and how
people are starting to look at the world
both of these changes are associated
with the difficulty of assimilating the
rediscovered Aristotle into a Christian
worldview the Thomas Aquinas takes up
the task of solving this problem
he's going to be a pivotal figure
precisely for that reason now again
Thomas Aquinas volume is writing and
there's a whole group of people both
theologians and philosophers two mystic
and there's all kinds of controversy
around you know how Aristotelian aquinas
is how platonic he is right I'm going to
again try and present the way I think he
was historically taken up and basically
understood so
for the coin it's how do we how do we
salvage both the Christian worldview and
the new science the new science of the
rediscovered Aristotle he he does
something really brilliant he goes to
the fundamental grammar of all of us
what's the fundamental grammar of this
it's the mythology of the two worlds the
axial revolution is there's two worlds
there's the real world and the illusory
world right and that has been a constant
throat all of this and he comes up with
a way of trying to assimilate it right
so we have the two worlds right you
seriously in Plato in the Platonic and
even in the Augustinian here's the
everyday world right and then here is
the real world but what Aquinas does is
he changes that he says this world is
real too there is real knowledge of this
world possible this is knowledge that we
can get through reason and science so
reason in science study this world this
world
and they can discover real truths about
that through reason through science but
this world up here is still somehow more
real how do we do that well he invents a
distinction that we tend to
anachronistically push back on people
before and there and there are
definitely precursors in
pseudo-dionysius and Augustine but the
idea is this is the natural world that
can be studied by reason and by science
this is the world above the natural
world what's the word for above super so
this is the supernatural world and this
is not a world that can be studied by
science or reason this is a world that
is only right accessible by faith so
there's now the two worlds have been
made sort of fundamentally two separate
kinds of worlds and there isn't a
continuum between them now there isn't a
way of moving through them by love and
reason United together what now happens
is the following and what's going to
happen is the notion of faith is going
to be changed to reason is down here and
love is up here and the idea for UGG for
Aquinas I should say is that love moves
the will see in plutinos and even in
Augustine love moves reason but for
Aquinas love moves the will love moves
the will to assert things that it can't
know through reason so love now become
sort of faith now becomes the act of
willful assertion now to be fair to
Aquinas this is not willful in the sense
of my will this is a will that is being
by the love of God but nevertheless
what's now happening is love and reason
are being pulled apart faith is going
from this participation in the flow of
the course of history to the assertion
of propositions the assertion of
statements giving a Creed and more
fundamentally right science and
spirituality are now being divorced from
each other in a profound way such that
if it's scientific it's not spiritual
and if it's spiritual it's not
scientific and if you're talking and you
can see the beginnings of Romanticism if
it has to do with love then it has
nothing to do with reason and if it has
anything to do with reason that it has
nothing to do with love and all of these
things are now being pulled apart now he
is I mean he Aquinas is a wonderful man
a wonderful writer he is trying to save
right the axial worldview by
reformulating its fundamental grammar of
two worlds into a formulation that is
now becoming familiar to you but here's
the danger and this is not a danger that
Aquinas foresees as this becomes more
and more successful and we less and less
find our assertions our will being
driven by love but just by willpower
alone this world becomes less and less
real to us the supernatural world and if
there is no supernatural world if it's
no longer and listen to my language if
it's no longer viable to us we can think
about it and imagine it but if it's no
longer livable to us then the whole acts
your world myth all
the whole axle world grammar that
grammar that gave us the grammar of
meaning and wisdom and self
transcendence that huge heritage is now
threatened to fall apart we'll start
looking at that next time together thank
you for your time and attention
[Music]
you
[Music]
you