welcome to re-inventors roundtable where
every week we basically take on a big
swing at an area of America that needs
really rapid reinvention fundamental
reinvention we've taken some big swings
in the past weeks we've looked at how to
fundamentally reinvent regulation using
more beefed up computer power how would
we take on new notions of privacy why
would we reinvent patent law how would
we read think essentially higher
education these are big swings and
they're very ambitious kind of goals but
this may crashy taken out in the wrists
really swinging for offenses on this one
we're really trying to think about how
would we really reinvent governance
itself this is really just how we even
govern ourselves in the 21st century and
how do we take advantage of the
technologies that are available now in
the knowledge base we have now to do
things very differently than we we did
in the past and to do this when this
whole kind of thing started with a
conversation when I met Jordan
greenhalgh about a couple months ago
who's going to be anchoring this
conversation and leaving the roundtable
today and Jordan I met him at a at a at
a conference around future governance
kind of lab essentially put on by one of
the people who's gonna be in the
roundtable here and we'll get to him in
a minute and Jordan actually over the
course of a lunch kind of put up out of
a thought experiment he said look at if
we were if you were back in 1775 there
was a lot of people saying hey we don't
like the politics we don't like our
current government system let's reform
the current system and if we would have
done that it would have been pleading
for representation of the colonies in
the British Parliament in London and
that would have gotten if only so far
but there was an luckily enough people
thinking let's really think clean slate
blue sky let's think how could we do
this very different and of course coming
out of the revolution a dozen years
later there was essentially the
Constitution convention had built the
kind of foundations of a way to govern
ourselves essentially going forward well
if you look at it today there's a kind
of a rough parallel to today where
people are frustrated with our governing
systems and our politics and there's a
growing number of people who want to
reform the current system and let's say
tweak it change and I amend me make a
constitutional amendment or do things
differently that could kind of change
the way we do things and there's some
fantastic efforts doing that Lawrence
Lessig is doing a big one effect is to
do
roundtable on July 11th aired for us as
well but Jordan kind of poses sets the
questions like what if we just started
to think more about how would we design
governing governance systems just
knowing what we know now with our
technologies with our basic knowledge
base is how we can organize things today
how would you actually start from
scratch and really figure out a way of
governance in the broadest sense which
is collective problem soft how would we
actually maximize the intelligence you
could say and draw off of all the
capabilities or as much as we could of
let's say the 300 million some 1 million
Americans if we think of it in terms of
American context here and so it's a kind
of interesting blue a clean slate fresh
look that we're gonna do today and
Jordans gonna lead us in that discussion
but one of the great things about the
roundtable is that we're not just about
Jordans ideas and in fact what's
beautiful about this is we've got a
fantastic group of people come up from
literally all over the world right now
for this discussion that Jordan helped
select them and have actually brought
them into that the right kind of mix of
folks for having this conversation so
what we're gonna do now let's go around
the roundtable just have people give a
little bit in action who they are and
what they bring to the roundtable so
let's say Jim do you want to say start
off and tell us who we are wouldn't
bring a table and we'll kind of go
around introduce everybody I'm Jim rut I
recently stepped down as chairman of the
Santa Fe Institute I sort of played
amateur scholar and amateur research
manager for about 8 10 years after
retiring from business did various
things in corporate America
entrepreneurial startups mostly internet
a little bit of high-tech software these
days I'm working on some fairly
audacious social political economic
change things okay good yeah how about
Jake Jake Jake was the one that had this
conference that initially connected me
and Jordan did the roundtables that Jake
gave us a little bit about your
backgrounds sure thanks Peter and thanks
Jordan
and everyone for having me here this is
a great group and look forward to
conversation right now I'm research
director at the Institute for the future
a nonprofit research foresight group in
Palo Alto California and I'm heading up
new initiative at the Institute called
the governance features lab which is
mandated with our goal is to create a
world of social inventors to do exactly
what you said Peter - to rethink the
fundamentals the structural fundamentals
of governance as we've known it and to
give ourselves the license to think
broadly about it so I'm a political
futurist in that sense not who's gonna
win the next election but how do we
redesign our systems for the 21st
century for the Anthropocene epoch when
humans are the dominant force on the
planet
what kind of ideas values theories
methods and tools can we implement and
and Marshall for that goal so that's the
goal of the lab and that's we've just
kicked off recently as you mentioned
that our reconstitution convention that
we held last month and we're looking
forward to continuing that goal
fantastic great to have you here John
Rob do you want to basically jump in
until it gives you a little bit of who
you're sure um John Rob my background is
a little buried it's a Tier one special
ops it was a pilot Astro engineer was an
analyst at Forrester their first
Internet analyst back in 96 and then I
ran a bunch of companies some did pretty
good and most recently I have been
focusing on warrant peace issues the
global guerrillas blog was on open
source warfare and how that has
transformed how we fight wars and how
the world is going to evolve and then
most my most recent effort is to start
changing society at the ground level
through building or resilient
communities fortunately all the
technology and capability to produce
more of what we consume at the local
level is now available and so I'm
helping people get their arms around
that implemented fantastic great to have
yours Tommy do you want to you want to
give us a little bit about your back on
what you bring it in
good you meet it off you gotta unmute
sorry about that
so my name is Tanya Yamato I'm a
visiting research at the program on
liberation technology at Stanford
University where I'm studying the
impacts of collective intelligence on
citizen empowerment and and topics like
that I'm looking into their methods of
crowdsourcing and co-creation for
instance in policymaking and as a part
of my studies I'm advising the
Parliament of Finland namely the
committee for the future about open
government practices I'm from Finland
originally and we are just right now we
are running a pioneering experiment
where we are actually crowdsourcing a
law an off-road traffic law in Finland
so that's one of my research cases great
thanks and great to have you here um I
tell you what let's how about we share
why don't you give us a little bit of
your background but also tell people
where you're calling from the symbolism
where you're coming from
hahaha yes well actually I'm about 100
metres from the Acropolis which I guess
you could save the birthplace of
democracy which means my my opinion
carries more weight haha I'm joking of
course
yeah I'm a Belgian person originally but
I've been living ten years in Chiang Mai
in northern northern Thailand I'm the
founder of the p2p Foundation which
studies the production peer governance
and peer property basically a bit the
same as John rabe is doing but focusing
more on peace and constructive aspects
of the open source revolution that more
and more communities are able to create
their own value and to self organize
around these processes and thereby also
reinventing democracy at the you know at
the level of their communities and and I
think we can learn a lot from there
because they are emergent new practices
and just to make a link with Tanya I
wrote an essay for a book called the
production of public of public services
in Finland so a whole book about paper
doxygen
in government just about one country
and that country is Finland so I think
Finland is really interesting as a
pioneer and in in these fields that's
great to have you know great to have you
from math and it's not from Athens and
then we got the final one is Brett Brett
give us a little sense of where you're
coming from and what you bring to the
table sure I'm Brett Weinstein I'm an
evolutionary theorist my professor at
the Evergreen State College in Olympia
Washington and I'm very interested in
the way selection effects both culture
and genes and the way those two levels
of selection interact which has
implications for the way history has
unfolded and the way it will unfold in
the future which has a great to have you
here so that's the the crew here at dom
i just want to remind it even though
we've got fantastic brilliant crew here
in the round table there's people
watching who also have great ideas great
question could add ideas you're free to
do that on the reinvented site on the
the page words last name on the arena
and governance page you could also do it
in the g+ environment in the environment
of re-inventors network and you can also
always through twitter with the hashtag
of re-inventors ask questions that way
we'll be looping in those that are
relevant and flow that in a discussion
as well so feel free to do that we
really encourage that so now back to
Jordan Jordan I gave you the
introduction so no need to actually
elaborate too much I'll actually no
that's not true I should actually give a
little bit of it better
he's a Jordans essentially I'll speak
for him and then get him teed up here
you know he's a co-founder of did that
which is a kind of a new media digital
media company a large one working in
high quality video randy co-founded and
ran that from 2000 2007 he's also one of
the folks in mp3.com and actually helped
crack their kind of content and business
model at the time he's done allies and
entrepreneur and a ton in the tech space
he has a ton of tech jobs for on the
other hand he's also a big think guy and
he's done quite a few things as well on
the side of that including he was a
trustee to Santa Fe s into which deals
with complexity theory and issues of you
know systems thinking that at sentient
adults can bring to this so it's
fantastic
here and Jordan why don't you kind of
tell us layout to set the table a bit on
some of the thoughts you can have it on
this subject okay
so as an outline what I want to do is I
want to start an initiative the set of
axioms just instead of basic assumptions
so that we can not have to spend too
much time trying to get our basic models
of the space that we're talking about
figured out and then after that talk
about some boundary conditions of what
any kind of a new model of Governments
is going to have to deal with and in
particular the boundary conditions that
are currently challenging to our current
model of governance so these will be you
may call additional conditions to what
you traditionally think of within the
notion of what governance has to deal
with then do a quick walkthrough of a
time on in a particular domain and then
find the concrete example of what that
my model might look like just that we've
got everything from the high levels of
abstraction down to at least a a
simulated concretions at some fine
absolutely throw them in alright so the
first major assumption is that the that
our current institutional toolkit is
deeply broken and what I mean by that is
that it's the the mechanisms by which we
satisfy four different governance
functions it's the the mechanisms for
diagnosing what our problems are
deliberating on those problems and then
designing solutions for those problems
and implementing those solutions and
regardless of what you think about the
scope of the challenges that we face I
think it's a good axiom to at least
begin thinking about what if that
particular system is so broken that
incremental modifications at the edges
is not going to be adequate to the
accelerating paces of the problems that
we're facing
so the first axiom is that we're going
to have to contemplate a major break
some sort of qualitative break that
might because they're very historical
break depending on so the 1775 example
is a good starting point
okay now three more assumptions and the
idea here is this this is a framework of
a diagnosis actually that when you're
engaging in some reasonably large
transformation you almost never are
going to be inventing your major tools
all at once in point of fact what you're
actually doing is you're trying to go
suss out what kinds of key innovations
have been going on and been lying at the
edges and been made playing a larger and
larger role in the the social
infrastructure for possibly decades and
we don't want to do is you want to
diagnose those and then up regulate them
and coalesce them into it the new
structure actually ends up becoming so
within that framework the the three
axiomatic would be that the new form of
government's governance will be
decentralized which stands as a
significant breaking point from our
current model and it will be
decentralized enmeshed in information
and specifically in some sort of
reputation architecture all right so the
idea is to to try to break the the false
double bond that exists in the twentieth
century between products hierarchical
systems and pure anarchy but rather to
actually recognize the degree to which
you can generate effective structure in
a decentralized system by meshing it in
an appropriately designed information
environment the next is that this thing
whatever it is will be fluid in
polymorphic which is to say that it will
be able to create ad hoc structures to
deal with specific problems that require
concentration but by virtue of tuning up
what you might call viscosity rather
than by attempting to instantiate
concrete architectures that stand
outside the network itself and
polymorphic meaning they will then be
able to adapt itself with a high degree
of fit to the problems that it's trying
to solve
I understand this is very abstract hope
for the big homework more clear as we
sort of walk down the co-creation path
the next is that it will be Omni
centered and increase on increasingly
empowered individuals so in a very
strong way we can actually think about
this thing as being deeply about
empowering individuals to play a strong
role and actualize in themselves and
that the governance structures are
decentralized networks or
around these individuals to resolve the
various problems that governance needs
to resolve without inventing a super
human or non-human entity or entities to
be able to resolve those problems all
right so there's the axioms we can
challenge some of them if we want to but
we'll spend a lot of time doing that if
we do now the next one the boundary
conditions are much more food for
thought these are the things that I
believe are almost certainly things that
any new governance situation will have
to deal with they may be these may be
conditions that are in play right now
there's may be conditions that will
become more intense over the next 20 or
30 years but certainly if we're going to
be designing anything it needs to be
able to deal with the next call it 50
years of problems that we expect to have
happen so in no particular order the
transition from scarcity to abundance
which has a number of different
manifestations what that looks like but
the notion that we have at least the
potential to move from an environment
where scarcity is a ontological
characteristic of our being in the world
to something which is a function of the
way that we actually manage ourselves is
something that our new model of
governance needs to be able to handle at
root level the second is that this by
the way John comes largely from your
work is that it needs to be able to
deliver active peace on a global scale
which is to say that we seem to be in a
situation that has so it's three
different forks on fork number one is
that the emergence of empowered
individuals and in particular the
proliferation of discrete individuals or
small groups to be able to deliver a
significant asymmetric destructive force
into the larger global system means that
we're either going to have some very
significant badness as we can't deal
with that or we're going to have to
invent some extraordinarily invasive
degree of the panopticon gone mad
observation or we're going to have to
actually figure out how to deliver
active peace so that people are managing
themselves in a very effective fashion
at the edge the third is it has to do
with healing our relationship with our
environment and ourselves you can pick
whichever piece of bed and appeals to
you most but I think it's relatively
economical at this point where the as
human beings we're going to have to
figure out how to Koval
with our environment we can no longer
expect it to be able to survive our lack
of capabilities and so our governance
system has to be extraordinarily
effective actually dealing with those
sets of problems it's going to have to
deal with the fact that existing elites
might understand their self-interest in
their transition to this new environment
so our new system has to have some
mechanism by which existing elites who
are in positions of authority in the
current governance environment become
aware of the fact that this is a better
model for everyone including themselves
and do not try to prevent it from
happening in sort of a French Revolution
fashion and then the last is that it
needs to be designed at least with some
intent to construct something that is
highly resilient over the long term
resilient both to capture and to
internal corruption and this is a unique
design problem actually because if we do
design something effectively it will be
for the first time in human history
global and scale although not
necessarily homogeneous in fact
certainly not homogeneous and as a
consequence will lack a significant
external competitor to force internal
discipline and so designing something
that is simultaneously capable of
maintaining itself over the long term
without falling into infighting or
without falling into significant capture
is another significant design problem
that we make sure that we we capture I
do not expect us by the way to invent
that entirely today I just posed those
as being a design requirements we have
to keep in mind now to do a quick walk
through the model women do is I'm going
to focus on an area that is not
frequently talked about and what a track
called liquid jurisprudence that the the
juridical function is a fundamental
function inside governance but it's not
one that is typically on the front
burner so I thought it'd be a good place
for us to spend a little bit of time
walking through a twin model and the
notion here is to first imagine a
network of people let's say for example
a thousand people that you could scale
it up to a billion people are down to a
hundred people if you'd like and then
think about what a reputation
architecture might be able to do to
enable this network of individuals to be
able to self organize to solve specific
governance problems in this case the
governor's problems associated with
jurisprudence then we'll have to think
about the notion of how the reputation
architecture is actually implemented and
how it spreads across the social field
and then
finally how it's used so now to jump
through the concretion will imagine our
network of a thousand people and
building on some work that actually
happened at the Santa Fe Institute by
Jessica flack and David Krakauer I call
them something different sad not use the
nicknames which might be a bit
embarrassing
that within human tribes there seems to
be a pretty continuous sending of subtle
social signals around who is empowered
by the tribe or by the band and the to
resolve conflict and not just a power
but actually sometimes require this is
goes to body language grooming
activities said effects it's not just
humans it's primates in general and the
the notion here is to potentially think
about there's being an abstraction
currency that we can model an
information space let's call it wisdom
which every individual in the in the
social network is signaling out to every
other of individual the social network
to represent the degree to which they
esteem that individuals being good at
resolving conflict at generating
alignment between themselves and others
and in some sense actually are willing
to accept the individual as a an actual
lived vital Authority in doing that sort
of thing okay so that's the thought
experiments you in a technical level you
simply imagine you've got a variable
called wisdom you've got a network of
individuals who are linked together and
that variable calls wisdom flows from
each node to every other node creating a
differential and point of view field of
wisdom so for example John Rob might
esteem Michelle but Michelle might
esteem Tania and so that's a the point
of view from John we have Tanya is lower
than Michelle the point from Michelle
would have time is higher than himself
perhaps and the idea is that this gives
us a really flexible and rich
multi-dimensional fabric to work with so
how's it work implementing it can either
be done passively or actively I don't
want to get too deep into the
implementation architecture because that
can take us down to the weeds pretty
quickly but you can imagine either being
simply formal that everybody goes
without and starts engaging in is called
a stack ranking you simply rank every
individual in the network according to
who you think is in fact the most
capable at this sort of thing or you can
simply have it happen actively by
watching their interaction
in real social engagements and then
begin to synthesize that particular
status as sort of a heuristic if what
the imputed relationships happen to be
remember we have an underlying
hypothesis that hominins arranged
themselves in this fashion naturally so
it's the sort of thing that should
simultaneously plug into our our
behavioral architectures easily and the
design challenge and the information
perspective is simply to be able to
might those hominid elements up
appropriately in practice once you have
this field in place you can imagine a
situation would say John and I are
engaging in a conflict and everybody
else is as proceeding this conflict at
some level of intensity Michele notices
that he thinks that is moving out of
alignment that John and I are in fact
engaging the conflict which is not in
creative conflict but actually a
conflict which has the consequences
potentially probably my relationship
with John or creating negative
relationship consequences across the
social field and so Michele can flag
this in information space you can
imagine sort of is a stigma JEDEC
intensity signal that goes out to the
broader network the networks that can
then actually perceives this is being
fact it could be objective or it can be
something that actually happens John
you're talking
okay talking midnight to me because I
actually have my camera on you because I
can see your lips moving
and at some point in time what can we
actually ends up happening that is the
network identifies and routes
individuals who are perceived by both of
us based upon our particular perspective
location in the network as being the
kinds of individuals who respect and
resolving conflict we can imagine say
for example three individuals one of
whom is very close to connected to John
and reasonably connected to me one is
closely connected to me and was
connected to him and one who's sort of
in between both of this and some of
these more distance who then are
convened to take a look at what's going
on and of course the more the social
network is in fact indicating this is
creating a breakdown arise in conflict
as a kind of thermodynamic metric the
more resources are actually oriented
towards it and the more significant
individuals might be actually flagged
and rather to deal with it and then
resolution happens in real time as
specifically determined by the
individuals involved and ideally in
highly transparent fashion with the
output of that particular resolution
then being evaluated by everybody else
for the network as it is in hominid
environments with two specific outputs
one is the the actual deliberation what
happened with the effort to make that
part of our collective intelligence or
that our collective wisdom an
understanding of what this company was
about how it emerged how we dealt with
it and the degree to which we feel like
it was actually resolved and then a
continuing adjustment in the actual
wisdom field so that it sounds like
you're just you're describing a very
specific design for governance right I'm
trying to get on trying to put together
a toy model of a specific instantiation
of a generalized concept yeah I I'm
worried that most of the people watching
the search just at the beginner stage or
maybe even on the training wheels I very
well may be true and maybe we actually
well actually you know yeah I would not
worry too much about you know I mean you
would keep it at a very high level so I
wouldn't worry too much about that but
you know it's a good point John but I
think I would just carry on for now and
Jordan and just just keep laying out the
pieces there and then we roll into the
conversation but that this stage is just
like let's let's keep
that you want to basically play out here
Jordan yeah I said the way to go yeah my
hope John is that by virtue of if the
people on this call can get to the point
where we actually are making any sense
together
that that creative process will help
everybody else as well okay if not then
it fail no yeah I think I think your
discussion of the assumptions is going
to be very productive absolutely and
then it's a last component for those
people who consider the allocation of
social resources to be important another
piece of a potential design model might
be something that we or at least I call
Commons currency and the notion here is
we can actually determine to allocate
resources in a pool let's say for
example we allocate over a thousand
people a million dollars a year so a
hundred thousand dollars a month that is
actually allocated according to your
wisdom gradient so this is solves the
mechanism have we actually go about
financing ad hoc institutions that if
individuals find themselves called upon
to resolve conflicts and find themselves
esteemed within their local network as
being good at this sort of thing then
there are social resources allocated to
that particular sort of thing and they
can find themselves resourced as
necessary to do we which is either
motivational or enabling them to engage
in activities need to engage in for
example flying to Athens to meet people
need to fly and meet in Athens so that
comma Commons currency concept is
another piece that might be applied as
part of the toy model to create a
scalable system that is fluid in
polymorphic and yet is able to adapt to
the specific set of problems that we
deal with we can run that one very far
if we'd like to so that's it so that's
that's sort of the setting of the stage
so walking down from a series of axioms
a series of boundary conditions a basic
concept of what these sorts of models
would look like in any given domain and
then a sort of a very concrete toy model
of what it might look like in the domain
of jurisprudence which hopefully creates
some bias against what our current
current set of institutions look like
it's obviously very far distant from the
set of institutions that are invented
back in Hammurabi's time of creating a a
transcendent transcendent institution
called the magistrate of the Justice
who's invested with simultaneously the
authority of
the community to adjudicate and the
power to use the police power to
implement that adjudication with the
effort to provide some kind of machines
attached to that to make sure that the
justice produced by that particular
machine maps to some preferred model of
justice inside the social field which is
our current model some evolved Arian on
that this is very distant from that
particular model and I think that's the
the point that I want to drive home is
how far can we run with a new model that
has this more fluid structure okay
okay great so that's a good kind of
setting up of the table here in I just
don't open it to the table just go
around a little bit I just build on what
he said I mean John you mentioned for
example the assumptions do you want to
jump in and just kind of talk about
others you know feel free to actually
let's just kind of build off of what he
said there and push it and proud it and
think about a little bit in and see
where it goes from there yeah um you
know Jordans description of a specific
design in you know for governance
structures is amazing and we've had you
know a lot of discussions on this in the
past what I've done recently is started
to think about more you know basic
assumptions and basic models I mean it
was clear to me that it national
governance global governance is failing
primarily because the political process
hasn't gone global whereas you know
finance economy culture and
communications have gone global and
we're not going to be able to scale that
that political structure up also the
political structure the basic
organizational principles that we use
for the economy and for poly politics a
you know combination of bureaucracy and
markets doesn't seem to be able to
handle their current technology so it
was built for an industrial model and
now it's a globally networked model and
so that's failing what appears to be
replacements for that would be you know
given that technology tends to dictate
you know how we're going to evolve in
terms of governance is a combination of
like a peer-to-peer and hot
kind of work that Michelle does and then
the few too many systems like you see
with Google we're a couple hundred
people can deliver a system that handles
you know the needs of billions and that
kind of those organizational models will
deliver the services in terms of what
I'm doing right now I think that the
combination of these online models you
know peer-to-peer and few too many
operating an online realm delivering
information and connecting us will have
resilient communities the communities
that do most of the production clearly
most of the technologies now at least in
manufacturing production are moving
towards doing things at the local we're
doing almost everything we will be able
to do a produce almost everything we
need at the local level which tends to
point towards a you know social
governance occurring more at a community
level maybe at a city state level and
then interconnecting at a global level
using peer-to-peer and few too many
networks so that you know those core
assumptions for me you know kind of
drive the situation and specific
instantiations of governance models like
you know we were talking about in terms
of this design would be designed by
people and then spread virally now like
for instance say Singapore adopted many
of those items and said okay we're going
to attach a passport to it and we're
going to expand our city state to 200
million of the best people in the
country or the world and we're going to
adopt them as citizens and we're going
to stitch them together in a variety of
unique in interesting ways well in that
instance that you have a city state the
virtual city state that could be
extremely powerful and you know do much
much more than what we see with the
current of physical government
structures so just tossing that out man
people you know feel free to disagree
with me or correct me or give me
feedback on that and Jordan if you want
to stitch it into your structure that's
fine too
I'm out I'll steal all of your ideas
Jenna no question about that make sure
it sounds like we show and then and then
and then and then Jim will go to use yes
sir I you know I have some issues also
with the assumptions actually and you
know this I can find myself in New York
I DS of Jordan but of course the key
issue is how do we get from here to
there and you know my sense is that
governance and democracy are very much
linked to issues of power I was reading
yesterday that 8,000 occupy activists
have been arrested and 0 bankers so this
is you know kind of a if you look at the
harm but potential harm has been done to
society between occupying the bankers I
don't think there is a match and yet
there's no bankers in jail but 8,000
activists so how do you how do we have
is you know it's not it so it's not a
technical fix democracy is not a
technical fix if you look at American
democracy and European democracy they
were originally proprietary democracies
right there were only people who had
property had a right to vote and at the
same time the workers didn't have a vote
the women didn't have a vote the slaves
didn't have a vote so all these things
came through pretty much intense social
struggles so I'm just kind of wondering
you know who is going to do that change
you know what's the agent that is going
to put into place this this beautiful
system that we have in mind so this is
just a kind of open question I would
like to put out there I mean I mean one
thing I would just say about that and
maybe we could hold that that kind of
dimension towards the end of the
conversation here but one of things we
try to avoid a little bit in these
reinvention roundtables is we're really
thinking about let's first think about
what's possible what's what other
knowing that the technology is knowing
the kind of capabilities we have now as
opposed to hundred twenty-five years ago
or remember this last systems were built
um you know what's possible because I
think too often we get too constrained
by what's the politics that's gonna take
it to go or what will take it and I
agree that what you're saying is
fundamentally is are also a very
critical issue and at some point we
would have to make that transition but I
feel like at this stage we're just
trying to open up the space a little bit
so maybe we could just think of like you
know what could we pull off setting
aside the difficulty of the politics to
make it happen but but or maybe we could
get that question a bit later Jim you
want to jump in Jim and then and then
Brett you and then the content on you go
ahead Jim
you're really Jim yeah Jim you're you're
muted you got to go off the mute off on
the upper right hand
here
here we go all right can you hear me now
yeah all right I think I will we're
gonna take a brief swing at McHale's
question actually when I think of a very
large-scale state transitions in a
complex network of networks operating at
lots of levels seems to me the
transition strategy has to be a fractal
one where things are created at the
local level which are self-consistent at
an intermediate level call it the region
or the state in u.s. parlance the
province and France etc and then at the
national and the global and if a system
is well designed the same principles
ought to be applicable at all those
levels simultaneously and hence efforts
should be operating in parallel at all
effort at all levels and some levels
will operate change will happen more
rapidly at some levels and others my
strong suspicion is it will be local
will come first and then examples of
things that work locally will be tried
regionally I was we tried nationally and
then finally will be adopted globally so
at least that's a call it a high level
way to prune strategic rules they should
be fractal and operate self consistence
assistance assistant Li from hyper local
to global now back to the assumptions I
might quibble a little bit with the road
from scarcity to abundance and might
describe that as a transition into a
hybrid world where there's both scarcity
and abundance where there's you know may
well be scarcity of certain material
things like for instance energy while
they'll be abundance of things like
intellectual property where especially
if we can figure out how to build a
truly non-rival rest's economics those
things that should be essentially
universal will be so I think that's a
little twiddle there with respect to
living in the environment and probably
resilience I'd highlight a classic
with primates including primates with
clothes and that is the hyperbolic
discount rate so far humans and other
primates seem to absolutely discount the
future at very high rates even higher
rates emotionally than financial markets
do we all know that a 3% economic
discount rate basically says 5 500 years
now is worth nothing but a human
emotional hyperbolic discount rate
produces even lower values even earlier
so I would say that's a sort of a deep
issue that any system like this has to
figure out how to finesse and then the
third is your concept of the elites
going gently into the night may not be
the way it actually plays out is that
actually necessary just a just a quick
response so I accept the probably the
twiddle on abundance of scarcity I don't
think I tried to premise it by saying
that it does assume you switched from
them but scarcity to abundance but
rather this system has to do with the
fact that for the first time abundance
is a variable we have to actually
process the current system is very bad
at that on elites the specific boundary
condition is that we have to do with the
fact that existing elites might not
understand their self-interest in the
transition which may play out in a wide
variety of different ways but it's going
to be played out and that I think is the
specific thing we have to be thoughtful
about what are the variable scenarios on
how that might be played out and how
would those specifically be dealt with
what about discount rates how do we
finesse the fact that primates were
evolved to eat all the fruit they found
because they might not find anymore for
quite a while I think that's a very
astute point attaches very well to the
notion that we have to figure out how to
deal with our our governance system has
to be able to contemplate intelligently
how we he'll deal effectively with their
global environment because we can no
longer treat it as a pure sink Brett you
were up and then in Tanja after that
just in and then
Jake looks like oh they yeah a couple
things first I wanted to take a crack at
maybe slightly recasting what I think
Jordan is said to see if I understand it
correctly I think Jordan what you're
getting at is that there are certain
features of a functional society that
work very well at small scales and
without hierarchy and this is well known
in entropy illogical circles and that
those things come apart as you scale up
above a certain size and what you need
initially to solve the problems of you
know for example tragedies of the
Commons above a certain scale is a
hierarchy that is capable of delivering
costs to individuals who violate the
collective interest but then that
creates a secondary problem we are now
living the consequences of it which is
that those hierarchies are corruptible
and capturable and that when they become
captured by forces which I would argue
are evolved responses to an opportunity
they become predatory and so in a sense
what you're outlining is a mechanism for
getting the necessary benefits of
hierarchy that allow you to scale beyond
those points while circumventing the
problem of capture the fact that the
hierarchy itself becomes an opportunity
for those who would figure out how to
control it so your your liquid
jurisprudence example seems to me to be
able to deliver the benefits of
hierarchical jurisprudence without
having to empower individuals to do it
who then are tempted into corruption or
positions that tend to accumulate people
who tend towards corruption is that a
fair a fairy capsulation of your point
yeah that's precisely it I mean if you
look at just the history of
jurisprudence you have a series of I
guess dialectics to use a word I don't
particularly like to use where if you
have relatively empowered jurists like
say magistrates in medieval England or a
and judges in the American South after a
reconstruction you ended up in a
situation where you run into these sort
of the worst case scenario the best case
scenario is if they're good at what they
do you get good quality justice out of
it but the system tends to start to
select for individuals who are at least
able to navigate the the past the
corruption reasonably effectively and
our current environment tries to deal
with that by clutching it right it adds
various kinds of attempts to formalize
the role of the decision-maker and
implement various kinds of process to
reduce in principle that ability to do
to be corrupt for example quitting the
appeals process or creating mechanisms
where particular activities are
prohibited you know creating a healthy
view calling them mandatory sentencing
guidelines etc etc and this is a
generalized process that we can actually
see across a wide variety of different
systems which I call them high
participation or at the rokoko which is
to say it becomes increasingly nuanced
in detail increasing complexity with
decreasing returns on complexity until
you have to go through some sort of
strong reboot reboot because institution
is no longer delivering on even a sort
of a variant of what its original raison
d'etre was and so the intent of this
particular design is to try to implement
something which doesn't require the
implementation of adjunct checks but
none that actually hasn't built as an
imminent set of dynamics as part of the
actual structure and lacks entirely the
notion of an evident of a position that
lives above the horizontal field but is
able to emerge a sort of a virtual set
of hierarchies through viscosity as I
mentioned earlier to play those roles as
necessary on an ad hoc and fluid basis
great well then I think this is
interesting because it actually points
to the answer to Jim's question about
the hyperbolic discount rate that you
know in fact you've provided a toy model
for solving problems and that that model
actually can be applied to lots of
things you know the reason that that
primates evolved to have that discount
rate is actually quite parallel to the
reason that animals evolved to senescent
to to grow fragile in age which is not
the senescence isn't negative from the
point
you have selection but that many
creatures don't live to suffer the
effects of it and so from selections
point of view the future though it is
all-important is less visible to
selection it is subordinate to what
happens in the present so what we find
humans doing is prioritizing the
immediate because they have vastly more
control over the immediate even though
in the end if if you build a system that
functions in the short-term at the
expense of its ability to persist in the
long-term obviously the whole project is
a failure so your your solution about
taking essentially modern tools and
using them to correct the defects in the
system allows us to deliver the costs
that will be realized in the future for
certain behaviors and to deliver them in
the present in the way that allows
people to well initially suffer the
costs of the harm that they do to their
own system and ultimately to intuit
the harm that they will do to their own
system and to regard it as negative okay
good yeah you know one thing that's
implicit in all this which is
interesting is you know we have the
technologies which you didn't really lay
out exactly Jordan but it's implicit in
all this is that we finally have the
technologies to do this in a way that we
could not have designed these systems
even twenty five fifty years ago and I
think that's something we could get to a
little bit in the conversation but Tania
you you've been wanting to say something
why don't we go to you and get your
reactions from what you got sure yeah so
thanks first of all thanks John and for
laying out this fascinating model I
really like it and it's a very
thought-provoking but I really like
about it one thing that I like about it
is that framing democracy and police and
making a straw men solving rather than a
struggle like a power struggle or a
struggle of values because if we frame
democracy as problem-solving it helps us
actually to find solutions and kind of
tackle problems as we tackle problems as
engineers and computer scientists and
looking for the best solutions but yet
for instance in the case of the
crowd-sourced of road traffic law in
Finland just like Peter said
we have this technology which is very
easy to use to actually find a lot of
like hundreds of solutions for problems
that we have when we try to regulate
off-road traffic for instance how - one
question that we have is how to monitor
off-road traffic in an cost-efficient
and in a transparent and good way and
now we have several different solutions
for that which is great but yet then we
easily return back to the Crescent of
values and power like who how can we
actually make a decision what is the
best solution and what is the solution
that will be implemented and that those
criteria are typically based on the
existing values and the existing power
structures in the established democracy
in this case there in Finland they
established society that we have there
but now now if we take children's model
and think about the transparency the and
the aspects of a fluid like like trans
transformation and movement of
information between and across
nation-states that can help us solving
that problem because then we don't need
to have a criteria that's only
functional in Finland or in one country
but we can actually use the information
and knowledge that people have in in all
different countries in the world and
help and they can help us build that
criteria that help we can evaluate the
solutions for these these problems we
are trying to solve for instance with
crowdsourcing just that's one of the one
of the very basic questions that we we
face as researchers and practitioners
when we are using these new forms of
participatory and more transparent
democracy because you end up having the
same fundamental question of who is who
is going to make the decision and if
that you have you lay out all these
fantastic solutions that might work or
might be at least worthwhile considering
but if there is no change in the system
if the change is only incremental in the
grassroots level it's not gonna
transform the whole whole established
system at all and then the impact that
the citizens could have that's going to
disappear in between
okay hey Jake let's go to Jay that's
terrific and just keep going to everyone
wants to jump in here and go we've got a
lot of go for tickets yeah so just a
quick level up of abstraction with what
Jordan did there which I love and is
what you know I'm interested in the
process of governance design itself and
how we even go about that and some
structure thinking for getting there so
I love the step by step method that
Jordan laid out here which was to first
state your assumptions about what the
problems are to define a design
challenge as you see it to talk about
the resources that are available the
tools and technologies and other things
that we have at our disposal and then to
come up with a prototype so just I want
to reiterate the the benefit of that
kind of structure thinking I think we
don't hear that much in political
debates now even with people think about
this deeply that kind of fundamental
discussion and I love the fact that
we're talking about physics and
complexity and neuroscience and
evolutionary biology and philosophy and
myths and metaphors maybe we'll get to
that a little bit as well but all of
that is critically important to the
discussion and we can't shortchange that
before we want to run into a policy and
I you know even in this discussion that
step-by-step method that Jordan went
through I think should should be a model
that we all follow when we think about
governance design on the point of your
design it's just I want to point out
there's a lot of things I'd like to
discuss with representation we'll get to
that hopefully later but one of the key
tensions that's coming out already is
this idea of following a naturalistic
biological model and the benefits of
doing that so a hominid based way of
doing representation ranking and all of
that that's great we also have on the
other end which has been discussed the
need to overcome some of these legacy
features that have come with us the
cognitive biases the short-term thinking
at the expense of long-term outcomes
some of these artificial techniques that
we're going to have to overlay on top of
some of our biological limitations and
the toggling intention between those
things that that are organic and come
naturally that we model it on but also
thinking about
artificial improvements that we might
make with our institutions that we built
around those systems so just wanted to
point out that tension I think we're
getting at and it's a critical one for
how we think about designing new
political systems yeah excellent
a couple of things just immediately
spring to mind as a result of the
various kind of comments that have come
so far
one synthetically bridging your comment
Jake with periods yes we do live in an
environment right now the technical and
scientific frontier is vastly further
out than our actual institutional
capabilities take advantage of and so we
should be frankly ashamed of ourselves
if we were not taking advantage of the
current cutting edge and insane places
like evolutionary biology cognitive
neuroscience complexity systems
information technology etc etc when
we're building something new because
only idiots wouldn't use the best tools
that they have and I hate being it it an
idiot and clearly our current
institutional structure was built in
1950s technology across the board right
psychology information technology etc
etc the second is just as a quick caveat
yeah I would not by any stretch to
mention you should try to advocate the
notion of constructing something
designed to put a golden crown on the
hominid it's rather sort of the opposite
we the the negative condition is that we
are likely going to be building some
sort of governance structure for the
purpose of hominids and so we have to
understand that as a design constraint
and we should have at least some degree
of optimism that the sorts of things
that we're talking about right now are
possible because hominids or at least
capable of this sort of thing at a low
level without any additional technology
and in some sense the challenge is to
figure out how we can use our our best
capabilities in science and technology
to enable something that scales and yet
and you know steams a lot of the values
and virtues that you're talking about
and the last thing is that one of the
things that popped into my mind at least
when Tania was talking is that the
initial assumption that I proposed was
this notion of the major break and that
is because the you know do you could put
the most beautiful thing into a garbage
machine you can take garbage out and the
challenges that our current
institutional structure is in some sense
designed to output gar
regardless of what you put into it it
has a very large number of implicit
assumptions about everything right it's
been doing it for a very long period of
time it's Cluj based upon those
assumptions and so if your design
requirement is that you sort of side
load a very large number of really good
ideas and then you're going to implement
them I put in the back end of the
machine in some sense you're wasting
your time you might get a little bit of
increasing sort of filigree at the edges
that is existing ly a currently rokoko
institutional structure but you're
wasting a very substantial amount of the
good work that was put into it actually
finally sorry Michelle so walking all
the way back I can increasingly believe
but it's probably I just said that
there's going to have to be a side load
opt-out peer-to-peer at least peer to
peer at the local level based governance
structure that people simply start to
weave up themselves largely leveraging
new ideas and new technologies to be
able to build something completely aside
from the existing governance structures
and then this is why I highlight the
challenge that at some point there will
come a tension with the existing elites
and there needs to be some mechanism by
which this evolving structure deals with
hopefully in a piece for a gentle way
that potential tension you show seems
like a natural pass to you because go
ahead jump in this well you know I think
one of the issues that we have to deal
with is the tension between individual
freedom and collective decision-making
and you know when we look at peer
governance the the self governance of
communities that create common value
like in free software open hardware
etcetera one of the things that I like
about these systems is that they
consider democracy as a scarcity
allocation mechanism that doesn't need
to apply when there is no scarcity in
other words there's a lot of things we
can do as individuals through self
allocation and self choice so we have
these permissionless systems where
everybody can contribute and the hard
issues that
the Democratic issues are relegated to
when actual when conflicts actually
arise and I think this is an interesting
kind of way to think about democracy in
terms of you know making it a lighter
thing that you know one of the things
that I that I see with activist
movements and that includes occupy is
that there is so much process there's so
much attention on collective
decision-making that you you know when
you come out of a a peer production
environment you you can feel somewhat
oppressed as an individual because
everything has to go through this
assembly discard bring it up as a you
know as an a key issue that has to be
addressed you know what what is this
fear of governance in terms of
collective decision-making versus you
know what shouldn't even be part of it
gotcha um you know Jim it looks like you
want to go but also John rabe has been
with it you know for those there is a
private chat going on here amongst the
people on the roundtable and John you've
been pranked and you're good to get some
of those thoughts up there but Jim you
want to jump in right now go for us now
uh echo Miguel's statement about
understanding designing governance is
critical that the occupy to my mind is
the degenerate case where even the
smallest decisions took five hours of
debate and ended up with horrible
muddled results and so that any system
of network governance has to be truly
thoughtful about applying expensive
tedious painful process as only to those
things that actually require that kind
of process now what general principles
might be to the design of such system
you know I'll leave the systemic thing
but from a operating guy mode I know
that the occupy model is far far far on
the wrong end of the spectrum so the
remember this principle of fluid and
polymorphic the the dichotomy between
individual and collective is a 21st
century false dichotomy that we simply
need to dispense with think of it as
fluid so I didn't call it collective
jurisprudence I called fluid
jurisprudence or liquid jurisprudence I
think that's the right metaphor that
decision-making needs to be done and
deliberation needs to be done at the
scale that is necessary for the
particular object it needs to be done
using ad hoc mechanisms designed to flow
the best potential intelligence wisdom
capabilities to that point as rapidly
with his little viscosity as possible
and we can actually spend enormous
amount of time diving into specific
implementation details on that but I
think the fundamental principle is
critical is it there's actually an
another concept fluidity which replaces
both in a at a conceptual level I wanna
I wanna jump in with the notion of
incentives because Ronan's model assumes
that people really want are the citizens
they really want to participate and also
that there is like a Latins potential
for civic engagement and also what the
michelle's that about peer peer-to-peer
democracy peer to peer economies that
people actually want to want to work
towards a better society so what would
be because we have this awesome group of
people here today so what would be the
incentives that we actually get people
to participate because I kind of feel
that we're talking about elites we are
talking about information hierarchies
and decision-making hierarchies but that
we're kind of like building we have that
hierarchy already we have a digital
elite we have the ones who always
participate online but then we have the
big mass of people who might not be
interested who might not even
participate even though we brought them
parties like means to participation to
their hands like laptop iPad or mobile
phone or probe and connection like we
have in Finland like almost at every
household but people might not be
interested in these topics so how can we
actually make Jordan's model work from
the
rude level what would be your thoughts
about it join us tonight
okay well go ahead John or about Jordan
if you want to jump in that tooth I
think we have a little bit of a bias
here we we tend to think in terms of the
the old style of government the
industrial kind of ubiquitous mass
ideological forms of governance and men
were passed ideology ideology is dead I
mean nobody can agree on anything and
and the only systems that seem to work
or you know on the p2p side are opted in
there won't be one single government you
know form of governance and they'll be
competing forms of governance multiple
systems multiple networks and you know
when you start to think in terms of
opt-in versus universal suffrage or
universal kind of you know by
geographical area you're automatically
included that changes everything it you
know we it it fits the the kind of
economy that we're going towards a lot
better too you know we're going to be
able to produce most of what we consume
at the local level very very soon I mean
very very soon if you're looking at
what's going on in 3d printing and
what's going on in terms of food
production and what you can do at the
local level you know we're only the
information for how you produce it is
being shuttled around the world at an
increasingly efficient level because the
computing becomes more efficient with
the every year and a half or so by 50%
um you know let's let's not think of
trying to bring everybody along with us
it's really marketing to compete with it
or you know compete with other systems
marketing to attract them to your system
you know launching with something basic
that's compelling that you can they can
evolve over time and get better think
like a game designer like an
entertainment company building you know
a form of governance they can can go
viral and go global that becomes you
know a source of wealth production
and maybe a new type of wealth
production but it's it's a opt-in kind
of mechanism that we have to really be
focusing on okay go ahead sorry no no
please I just wanted John said something
at the very beginning of the statement I
think it's super crucial even more so
for the people who are outside of this
particular discussion and it has to do
with these cognitive biases I actually
used to turn malware we have a why our
cognitive toolkit is the one that we're
trying to deal with so the reason why we
tend to go around doing things in
certain ways because we actually have a
cognitive toolkit that tells us what is
possible what kinds of tools to deploy
to solve different kinds of problems etc
etc a large part of what we're dealing
with right now and we're dealing with
here is figuring out how to actually
build a new toolkit from the bottom up
and so what that means is that if you
have a so this weird subtle notion that
something is either obviously impossible
or you have a set of basic tools that
spring to mind that come from something
that was built in 1947 be aware of that
fact and begin the process of actually
thinking about well it's a 21st century
approach to that and how might you be
able to work your way through it and
John just gave a very nice solid 21st
century approach to how one goes about
constructing something in an
autocatalytic fashion which attract
people to it so and endeavor to do that
to Tonya's question of incentives I
think there's a sort of three-stage
hierarchy the first incentive and
anything that is constructed to run
individuals is that individuals must be
focused on the things that they are most
passionate about and that sounds like
hippie talk but in point of fact it's
actually real and most people will not
be passionate about many of the things
that are involved in governance and
that's fine right it's what you're
passionate about is planting tomatoes
then you should go plant tomatoes the
second is that this concept of Commons
currencies will help individuals sort of
be oriented towards those things that
other people in their social field
considered to be very important and
which they themselves may be
particularly capable of doing which may
be you sort of within the field of
passion so in my particular toy model
example if you have a particular
grandmother who simply legendary and her
local community for being able to
resolve disputes there will be social
resources allocated to providing her
with material rewards I
money for doing what it is she has
esteem for doing within her local
community or by the way if she's
terrible at it she could still do it she
just won't make as much headway he won't
be given as much access pretty good to
do that by the sort of matching
algorithm the third and I think this is
crucial as part of our cognitive toolkit
is the the notion of governance I think
we need to have this basic model that
every individual doesn't really ever
desire to have a voice with the desire
to have is often Ted authenticity in the
environment they're engaged so if the
people I'm surrounded with are
authentically engaging in good faith to
try to solve problems and I feel good
about the fact that they're doing so
then that's what I really want right I
don't care whether I'm with a bus driver
an airline pilot or somebody who's
working on my water system that's the
thing you're really looking for
so we're designed for that oddly enough
this notion of designing for giving
universal suffrage or giving a voice is
another example of a kludge that well
 if I can't count on authenticity or
if I don't have any mechanisms of
transparency where I feel good about
that actually happening then I need to
be willing to go in and wait in myself
like I'm stressed through my elbows
around to make sure that I've got a
voice as opposed to actually having an
authentic community that engaged it
wants to jump in which is great but I
will say this I just want to say we're
actually getting quite a few questions
from outside in the audience and
fantastic ones I will see one I would
loop somebody's into the panel here we
might be able to deal with a couple of
them here but the general thought here
is there seems to be people from outside
words are trying to talk about examples
of things that are already working
somehow someone mentioned how the anti
anti SOPA efforts you know helped
pressure the existing system to move in
at least the right direction or we have
someone in G+ talked about how it would
there be ways to tweak the tax system to
start moving more in this direction and
so there's something to be thinking
about because I know there's a lot of
concern of like there's an extract ideal
way to think about this there's also
kind of what can we do here and now kind
of what I think it's useful to put it
out there but on the other hand let's
let's go to Brett Brett you want to talk
about this it's opt-in thing and then
maybe Jake yeah I wanted to disentangle
two things just so we don't end up
confused so John's point if I understand
it was that things that are not opt-in
things that are coercive don't function
in the modern environment and there's
certainly some truth to that but he
suggests that the future of governance
will therefore have to be opted in and I
just want to point out that at a game
theoretic level pending your assumptions
it's hard to imagine something that will
function to accomplish what needs to be
accomplished and the opt-in in other
words if somebody wants not to opt into
your system of government and to build
nuclear reactors that are unsafe to
operate they can't be allowed to do it
if the costs of those nuclear reactors
when they come apart is borne by other
people perhaps did opt in and when you
look at the way in particular energy is
delivered in the modern context it is if
if you allow those who wish to opt out
of your system of governance to do so
and then to procure energy and
distribute it in any way they want that
effectively I believe we've surrendered
the ability to govern and we will simply
suffer the fate of whatever choices
those who have not opted in have made
for us
so and then Jordan picks up the point of
opt in from a different perspective
which is that not everybody needs to
participate in architecting government
which really this is a place where we
truly can be opt in it's not an it's not
something everyone has a interest in
thinking about and indeed most people
don't need to think about it for
governance to function properly but they
really are two very different kinds of
opt-in and the first one I believe
simply can't be made to function so yeah
I have another tangental point hopefully
relevant on opt-in and representation in
fact going back to Jordan's idea of
reputation architecture what I'm
concerned about is other entities other
than human beings other than those who
we've can already
voice or representation in the system
having a voice so something like nature
how are you gonna opt in how does that
as head of nature itself opt into the
system or how does it how does it stack
reputation what kind of voice who's
counted in this system nature future
generations the people and other
entities that are going to be impacted
by our decisions today where does their
scoring reputation input voice role play
in this how do we how do we get that
they can't opt in on their own how do we
include them in the system so I mean I
began by talking about the Anthropocene
epoch but I think if we do this right
the Anthropocene should not be
anthropocentric we're gonna have to
think about other entities that need to
be considered that need to be governed
governance is not just a human practice
it's it's a planetary practice
I'm not actually sure at a technical
level if that has to be true at a
practical level it does nature needs to
be protected by whatever form of
governments are governance we Institute
but at some level the well-being of
future generations if it is included by
the governance structure in a way that
circumvents Jim's discounting point will
include the well-being of nature in
other words that that functionality of
natural systems is essential to future
generations and therefore they have an
interest even if we focus strictly on
people in preserving it the question is
do they do they see their collective
interest in preserving it in a way that
results in their individual behaviors
protecting it for the future all right I
mean I might I might just as we're
looking at as we started to turn the
corner here a little bit on the
conversation um it's possible just
hearing what everyone's saying here that
you could imagine that kind of an
emergent situation here where where the
opt-in systems that would essentially be
aiming for this more superior way of
governance would essentially be an
opt-in situation and would just prove
the concepts and actually would you know
at a local level potentially and at a
better a fractal and scalable kind of
design level and that over time you know
it might compete or start to compete
with the existing system and then that
then the ultimate kind of clash or
transition is something we might be
pointing to here but there is for a
while at least you could imagine an
opt-in system being the way that you
could actually get the the initial work
on on this in a way that would start to
prove the concept in ways that is very
abstract and difficult for people to do
now and I know there was a kind of talk
earlier in the side chat here with the
group here about how in the past
historically we've watched essentially
old systems essentially new systems
emerged alongside the existing systems
like you know early cap of them with
feudalism and then over time the one
just kind of being superiority and
attract more kind of folks and there is
a kind of natural kind of collapsing on
the other systems to I mean gonna be too
idealistic but there's some interesting
thoughts there and folks who we've been
chatting on the side might want to jump
that's what I'd like to hear Michels
yes well I you know I think we we cannot
confuse the governance of small groups
where people are voluntary joining them
and therefore give legitimacy to
whatever choices they make inside the
group where opt-in for example is a
totally natural phenomena but we all
also live on a territory with other
people who may totally disagree with our
options and so I don't think that we can
have an automatic jump from looking at
affinity groups virtual groups resilient
communities to the field in which they
operate together which for me is you
know is the field of the poet's now that
doesn't mean we can't learn one from the
other but we can't make the assumption
that an opt-in decision by a few self
judging experts in a political domain
has any legitimacy for all the people
who are not involved so this is why I
think we we need to be very careful in
our assumption that we can just jump you
know from one practice to a
generalization of the practice we you
know I don't know what form the polis
will take you know it may not be the
nation-state but I'm pretty sure that we
will have territorial entities where we
need to make decisions together all the
citizens not just you know those who opt
in or are particularly motivated to
solve particular problem
so actually I don't know Jordan if you
want jump in there but I will say this
we're at about 15 minutes left and
obviously we've teed up a ton of issues
here Jordan putting it out a lot of
reaction to a lot of kind of pushes and
pulls on where to go here and given the
finite quality of this gathering here we
might start thinking about you know the
kind of if we were to continue this
conversation you know some of what are
the kind of really rich and deep veins
that kind of issue areas the questions
that you know that would be interesting
to kind of move next just to kind of
start to think but but I think I would
rather go back to Jordan right now and
as you start thinking about 15 minutes
out here what are you learning and
hearing and where would you see the
thing going and what kind of things are
starting to emerge to you for what might
be next
yeah first I'm not going to reframe I
think the Michelle's point within the
original framework that I laid out
because I want to contextualise it and
this sort of emerging I think at least
in my head
John's experience in Michelle's
experience so the places that the
Michelle points out we have a police
where groups of individuals are in
physical proximity yet have very
disparate sets of value structures are
precisely the places where I would
locate this design requirement for
delivering on active piece and this is
very much informed by John's insight
that the ability to enforce police power
in a top-down fashion on any group of
people is in the process of fragmenting
and so the solution of attempting to
enforce peace in a way which is
unsatisfying to no one is at best a
short-term solution so what I would the
way I would respond to that is we have
to get very good at identifying the
points of alignment and the individuals
techniques and groups are good at
crafting alignment in a highly violent
and then point them at these hotspots
that I believe you're identifying
locations where groups happen to be in
physical proximity and also have very
diverse
specific sets of local values because
that is the place where active peace is
most important
they have pilots had police next step so
I think my initial response is that this
I thought this actually went quite well
I think we got our feet underneath
ourselves relatively rapidly and as I
sort of had hoped and maybe to a lesser
extent expected we were able to jump
pretty quickly to Lightspeed I mean I'm
sure the people out there in the larger
environment are sort of scratching their
heads with some of the things that we're
ended up talking about and frankly
talking about rather fluidly I'd like to
quick quick shout out to Lerman Leyland
Lerman you're dead on that's exactly
right and that is the right way to think
about how we're going to do this thing
in more of a networked environment do
you want to just you will just mention
what you talked about there that you're
referencing a G+ actually I mentioned
Leland Lehrman on G+ posed questions
thing you know this is great but I'm
hopeful we can discuss customized tax
models where you get to choose what your
taxes pay for imagine the force of all
tax payers getting to choose some please
some of the some of that anyhow there's
a kind of idea of how do we start
working with the system even in this way
is that what you're referring to Jordan
yeah yeah and it is that there's models
that you can employ novel concepts likes
comments currencies and information rich
networks to deliver a lot of the stuff
that he's talking about in the fashion
which is actually pragmatic not
hand-wavy
I think frankly would I'd like to do is
I'd like to get the next steps from
everybody else and see where the kind of
the conceptual tensions actually are
located I think John and Michelle's
conceptual tensions got a lot of
opportunity for creative bridging and
it's a place that I think we can get a
lot of value out of doing work on that
particular piece at some point in the
future well we do this when we go around
with a roundtable because it is we're
getting to the towards the end here's
what doesn't everyone just kind of tf1
kind of way to think about it is if
there were another round table what part
of this discussion would you want to
push further or what aspect is missing
or what's that what would you want to
devote a lot more time to that might be
a fun way to think about this as a way
of some amp or at least just give you
I'm what you'd like to see next is if
this discussion kept getting deeper and
more more real they want to jump in to
start John maybe okay Jim go for it okay
you know the number one tension I feeI I
felt and I think will be highly useful
to discuss in more detail is and I will
call it sort of John Michell tension the
tension between opt-in on one level and
the need to defend Commons on the other
I think both of you had some right
things to say but neither of you are
correct and whatever the correct answer
is is extremely valuable now who wants
to go next John go for it you look like
you're leaning in there no no how do you
know we're not correct there's a there
is definitely a tension between the you
know how much we can do to you know
patch the current form of government
versus building something new for my
part I tend to take more of an
entrepreneurial approach and I challenge
the existing system with something new
and that's just the way I am I mean I
was an outsider you know my whole life
in terms of even in my military side so
I'm you know patching legacy systems is
really not my thing
I'd rather challenge and put them out of
business so I do think opt-in is is it
is the way it goes in the future it
doesn't mean that the existing system
the nation state governance goes away we
don't throw away anything it just
becomes increasingly dysfunctional it's
not delivering results already
unfortunately though we do have a timer
on everything there is a countervailing
force here it's kind of default setting
of the way the system is going you know
what happens when you when you scale up
markets to a global level as they become
totally co-opted
and markets are all about allocating
scarcity and and when they get to a
global level you get this kind of a
tourniquet Copernican wheels within
wheels of markets all interconnected
that nobody quite understands but
everyone knows how to co-opt and that
hyper concentrates wealth and power and
over the long run that destroys middle
classes and drives them off to the
periphery drives them all to a low level
of sustenance where we all compete
against each other for the limited
number of jobs and wealth it that the
the hyper concentrated entities allocate
to us so that's that's what the future
looks like and you know if if we don't
come up with something better that can
compete with it there's really no way to
shut it down through you know pure
violence leverages few too many systems
and BOTS and it can scale I mean with
BOTS you know software bots in
particular you can scale system like
that to a you know where a couple people
can can manage billions so on as we gain
in sophistication so that's that's the
timer on us on what we're doing here so
we better get crackin Tanya why don't
you give us if you had to go next what's
the round table question you think we
should look deeper Alex sure so first
first of all little recap so I'm pretty
optimistic about our current forums of
governance and government both of them
maybe because I grew up one of the best
countries in the world
Finland not here in the United States
where if democracy might not be working
as well as it works in Finland and I'm
optimistic that with changes in the
current system we can actually increase
people's ability to self govern
themselves and that's that's already
happening so I'm not ready to throw the
current system to the garbage can
because I think it doesn't belong there
and also I'm very pragmatic so I want to
see change happening starting from now
so I
to work with with the current system
because I can see the change immediately
and also if my research shows that
people are not like even though there's
a lot of distrust in in the current
governmental forms but there's a lot of
also trust and also content like
satisfaction with some of some parts of
it so we should build on the positive
sides and try to improve the negative
sides and going forward so I'd love to
hear more about existing functional
models of transparency transparency in
policymaking civic engagement in
policymaking and and learn from best
practices and listen like lessons what
others other people have learned all
around the world in these experiments
and I would like to have like maybe a
little bit more global approach in terms
of I just heard that for instance in
South Korea there is sort of increase in
the use of participatory budgeting for
instance so that was news to me I'd love
to hear more about that so it'd be great
to collect some more global experts and
and hear from those experiments like it
Jake do you want to jump in with what
would where would you go next thinking
but this I want to help design a
political system for our Mars colony
explain that a little bit I kind of get
what you're saying but give me some ah I
couldn't leave it like that I it's not
gonna happen for a while but every time
humans have moved to a new place they've
come up with a new political system so
the exhaust even the idea of designing a
political system for a Mars colony or a
sea setting Institute or wherever we
want to go the idea and the license to
think about that will pay dividends here
on earth so I want people to think about
that use that tool use that opportunity
to think about if we took a hundred
thousand people to Mars what kind of
system will be built where one person
when empowered individual could do so
much damage if we had a dome one on the
colony for example so there's a lot of
interesting constraints and ideas and
license and opportunities to think about
political systems here on earth by
giving ourselves
that vision of a Mars colony so I want
to I want to design that now I love I
love that idea maybe we'll have to do
one of those Brett do you have a few
thoughts and then and then we'll go to
you shovel right fun ideas
absolutely I think the central issue
from my perspective would be the one
that Jake raised about the cognitive
biases that we have and in some ways
it's the hardest to deal with because of
course we have cognitive biases that
make it impossible to see what it is
that we don't yet understand but um you
know we unfortunately are like all
evolved creatures we are adapted to the
environment from which we came and we
don't live there anymore and the
problems that we are arranged here in
this roundtable talking about are
largely the result of the disconnect
between what we are evolved to intuit
and what our actual constraints are so I
would like to see us unpack what our
biases are and what a system that
corrected for them would inherently have
to look like I said yeah great idea well
maybe dudes or some like that let me
show did you have some thoughts on what
where would you go next and what you'd
want to think through yes oh well you
know when I look at the tension that
that people see between join me I think
the way I would formulate it is that we
live in a two-speed society in other
words we have a rapidly self-organizing
civil society that is operating on a
global scale
that's inventing new forms of governance
in democracy and then we have a much
slower democratic governance system that
is a bit in crisis and that seems to be
except maybe for Finland quite slow in
in adapting new practices so I think the
key is the bridge is that we we have to
find a way that representative democracy
can look at civic practices and inspire
itself by these new civic practices and
one a particular thing that I think that
we should really be pushing is
see boring which is different from
obtained right you proxy voting is the
ability to choose people that you trust
to choose in your place and to retake
that vote whenever you lose a trust and
so my feeling is that we have a
democracy based on batch processing
based on a computing vision of the 50s
and the question is how can we modify
the existing forms of governance and how
can how can we experiment so that it
becomes acceptable to change the
existing form so this is for me an
important debate love it what these have
been some fantastic ideas let's go back
to Jordan and Jordan what what are you
hearing is we kind of look in a head
here we got a couple minutes how about
some final synthesis from you and
thoughts on what what what we've
accomplished here and what you might
think of next
yeah I think the the the key synthesis
or at least the key message that I'm
receiving is that people should have a
higher degree of optimism than many
people currently have about our ability
to actually not fall into a collective
failure of imagination when I take a
look over where michelle's focused
I believe what ended up happening is the
Michelle is focused specifically on what
I would call transformation which is the
bridge right and and we may actually
share some commonality on what the the
end state looks like and then we have
some sort of creative tension and with
the transition area states look like and
more specifically we can actually
collaborate on figuring out how to make
those bridges work as long as we tend to
sin and share some basic assumptions for
example that we're gonna have to figure
out a way I think a large part of his
intuition about making bridges is to you
know avoid catastrophic failures in any
form of transition these existing
systems to control various resources
people power center etc you know even if
we opt out in large numbers there still
needs to be some way to gently
transition that power from one place to
another but the key thing is that when I
go around I sort of spend in time an
environment other than this particular
one my primary experience is either of
so the very nominal malware responds to
any given set of problems which is
clearly not effective or a sort of
almost equivalently autonomic sort of
cynical response that's it just checks
out I think the key message is that if
we can get our collective intelligence
high enough that which is to say that we
get the right people talking to the
right people in the right ways we
actually have a vast territory of
exceptional ideas both the terms vision
on how this thing plays out and in terms
of tools and how we effectively
deliberately move our way from where we
are to where we need to get it really is
almost an organizational challenge more
than anything else and I suspect it may
actually be self producing that in the
process of figuring out how to solve the
problem of thinking about it we'll also
be building the solution itself perfect
quit in I really appreciate it
join and we are kinda at the end of our
90 minutes and we do like to keep that
pretty tight but I'll tell you what this
is a lot of fantastic good news Twp and
a lot of good ideas for follow
roundtables which we'll try to do and
keep this going with this group and and
as drawing other folks as well and
anyhow you'll be able to see this entire
90-minute session it will be on the the
page in the ream interest website we
basically got edited versions of that
which we'll be doing with some of the
best ideas we'll have a written synopsis
so that which talks about what we've
accomplished we've got the best of the
social media we appreciate the folks
giving their ideas and questions out
there too but I really want to thank
Jordan for sure as said in the table
notes and really kind of bring into
ahead this really really fascinating
conversation also all the all the people
from the roundtable here who came in
from from all over including the
birthplace of democracy in Athens there
and all over the country and thanks for
really a very high-level conversation
very one that I think actually could
really help move the ball forward over
time so thank you everybody and hope to
see you again I wanted Ron to take you
better thank you thanks all thank you
goodbye