[Music]
conversation that a lot of people are
very sympathetic to which is questioning
the gender roles that we've been have
been handed down but it also seems that
there is almost another perspective
that's being smuggled in at the same
time which is an attack on the very
concept of gender itself people who are
knowledgeable about the questions of sex
and gender as they intersect evolution
are to my knowledge without exception
interested in being compassionate and
allowing people to decide how to live
their lives as much as as practical what
we are not interested in is allowing a
naive desire to make everything
perfectly identical overwrite the actual
rules of biology and there are places
where this matters a great deal the fact
that a person may identify as a woman
does not necessarily negate the athletic
capacity that they have inherited as a
man should we allow people simply by
identifying as women to participate in
women's sports including fighting should
we allow you after you've been convicted
of a crime to identify as a woman and go
to a woman's prison I mean does that
make sense from the point of view of
protecting the women who are in a
women's prison so there are real
questions and one thing that concerns me
a great deal is it seems to me that a
great many people get some early
unpleasant experience with science they
decide that they are not scientifically
minded which is a tragedy in and of
itself and they walk away from science
and then they start solving problems in
their mind with how the world should be
structured and they do so in an a
scientific way then they announced their
solution having realized well the whole
problem can be solved if we simply allow
you to tell us whether you're a man or a
woman
and the result is they have some
incredibly arbitrary set of cascading
effects that stretch off into biology
classes they stretch off into the law
they stretch off into the rules of
civilization and these people have no a
they have no sense that they have caused
a serious problem that the fact that the
solution looked simple to them was only
the result of the fact that they were
looking at an artificially small piece
of the puzzle and by trying to solve
that one small piece and letting the
chips fall where they may with respect
to the rest of the the issue they have
made a much worse problem than we had it
is not difficult to make society
compassionate to those whose gender is
not one of the two most common genders
it is very difficult to write a solution
that solves every problem all the way
with no ambiguity we are going to have
to deal with the fact that if you are
born in one sex and you decide at a
gender level to transition to the other
sex there are certain things that are
not going to be altered and from then on
you are going to be in this third
category you are going to be somebody
who has transitioned rather than
somebody who has completely jumped the
gap and do you think that there are two
forces at work here
because usually with with with most
trans people they they are either a man
who wants to transition to being a woman
or all the nuance to transition to being
a man but there is also this kind of
seems to me there's this third force of
an attack on the concept of gender
itself do you think that this is part of
the same phenomena or do you think it's
something different well I have some
experience with this evergreen had quite
a number of trans students and some
trans faculty and so although I had
never encountered a trans person prior
to coming to Evergreen by the time
Heather and I left it had been a fairly
regular experience and it became normal
enough in my experience none of the
trans be
people I was interacting with were
aggressively interested in rewriting the
laws of logic or telling biologists what
to think they did want to be treated
with respect and decency and they
responded when you did so my sense is
that the attack on gender which seems to
focus on trans people is not primarily
being driven by trans people it's being
driven by other people who have an
agenda and trans is the excuse for
bullying those of us who would say
actually biology Trump's these other
considerations you cannot overwrite the
biology you can make allowances for
deciding to identify this way or that
way but the biology will remain what it
is so what is that force if that is a
different agenda what is that agenda the
agenda has to do with gaining the right
to hard-code solutions into the rules of
civilization without inviting comment
from experts in relevance which is a
balancing pure and simple I would say it
is a power thing I cannot say for sure
if it is pure and simple I don't know
how this runs in the mind of people who
are pushing this perspective but I do
believe that whether they understand or
not that their objective is to
accumulate power and wield it in their
own self-interest that that is in effect
what it's taking place take the trans
issue as a really good example we've got
trans people who want to be known by the
other gender they want to transition men
transition to women all in transition to
men but then there's this also this
sense of a different fourth which is an
attack on the whole concept of gender
itself do you see the same thing that
there are these there's almost two
different perspectives and two different
forces at work I would say there are
definitely those two and and many more
as well and but that framing at least
those two is
apt for sure and among those who want to
transition to the other gender there are
there are many good kind heart and smart
people who are in this what must be
completely miserable position of feeling
that they were and some people who use
this language of being born in the wrong
body and some people don't use that
language but you know need to transition
in order to feel whole and for those
people we we owe them a society our
compassion and any help that we can give
that doesn't run afoul of what else we
know to be true and there are a whole
lot of other people who seem to be
claiming that but actually seem to be
gaming the system and looking to either
just disrupt things or make some kind of
personal profit so there's there was a
problem with some number of the people
who claim to be trans
who actually look like they are not
really playing in good faith at all as
for the other so all these people who
are claiming their 84 genders and using
as evidence that I can't even remember
what you know two or three cultures have
names for a third gender this is more
baffling actually and it's it's much
more sort of standard authoritarian left
stuff where they come up some something
has been generated that actually has no
relationship with reality
and some very small fringe group is just
claiming you know what it's not real
chant you know gender isn't a thing
which is then forced a number of sort of
good people who didn't even want to be
talking about this to say well you know
what gender is just a made-up thing
anyway we're only talking about sex and
I would say you know
is real and in animals it is very close
to a binary what kind of gamete do you
produce is it small and mobile and has
almost no muscle cell machinery
whatsoever then your male and if it's
large and has all the cytoplasm
including the mitochondria and can't
really move much than your female
there's new research out I think
actually just this week providing
evidence yet again that actually yes
male brains and female brains have
differences now that there isn't a ton
of overlap we're not talking about male
brains over here they all look like this
only and evarin female brains over here
they all look like this only and ever
these are popular these are
distributions widely overlapping
distributions but on average you can
tell researchers who do this work can
tell the difference so what is gender in
non-human biology we would call it sex
roll so you have sex roles in sex
switching we fish where they do entirely
female stuff until if you're the
dominant female and the male in your
group dies maybe if you're of the right
species you can switch and become a male
and you actually become a male like you
start producing sperm instead of eggs
and you've got testes and you've got all
the male coloration and further when you
start behaving like a male
so the behaving like a male part that's
the sex role that's what we would call
gender so no gender isn't a human
construct it's not it's not something
that we created just for us it's the
behavior that goes along with all of the
foundational anatomical physiological
chromosomal genetic you know stuff that
they came before is it much more fluid
is it much more variable is it
especially in modern times with modern
economies are some of the traditional
expectations of gender roles outdated
unnecessary and frankly you know
somewhat alarming yes for sure we can
throw a bunch of those out but
pretending that they aren't based on
millions of years of evolution
is batshit crazy it's nuts
so yeah the the people who are saying oh
there's 84 genders Jenner isn't there's
no relationship and gender and sex of
course there is and of course there are
84 genders and are there as many ways to
express gender as there are humans on
the planet yes I thought I would sign up
for but then that's not useful all right
that's not useful as a category
categories are about generalization and
categories always have in biology
categories have fuzzy boundaries they
just do that doesn't render the
categories untrue or meaningless fuzzy
boundaries being able to point to like
intersects and therefore claiming that
male and female aren't real things no
sorry that's just fuzzy boundaries
because I guess the fear on the left is
that if you accept the reality of that
binary then you're accepting a lot of
fixed gender roles you're or you're
accepting that that tends to be where
the conversation breaks down they they
hear that and they think yeah you want
to keep me barefoot you want to keep me
barefoot and pregnant in the kitchen if
you're good if you're gonna claim that
male and female are real then I know
what happens next
and we frankly we see this in the a word
with an unfortunate history in this
context but the hysterical reaction to
Jordan Peterson who is not a misogynist
and he's a little bit of a
traditionalist but not really that much
actually and and he's new he's certainly
not sexist
there's just no universe in which that
that is true and yet what he is is
unflinching in in claiming in in in
looking at the biology and saying yep
male and female are real and what's more
male and female traditional roles were
built on those realities I would say
that we can do better than the
archetypes and we can you can look
forward abandoned some of the old myths
that we don't need anymore and that may
actually be harmful and have even more
even more flexible norms around what's
what's acceptable for for male and
female but
pretend that I mean I've said this
before but I'm sure in this context if I
were growing up right now the way I grew
up I would be someone who'd be labeling
me trans because I was a tomboy I was an
out-and-out tomboy who far preferred
dirt to dresses and math to spending
time of museums and oh well that's
that's gendered like since when is math
a male thing that's not okay
yes more men end up choosing
mathematically intensive careers and
that that is true but you're now going
to say that if I as a woman you know
from this largely overlapping population
of interests over in math space because
I'm interested in math I'm there for
acting male that's actually regressive
and sexist and and backwards and this is
why I said you're the authoritarian
leftists are actually the bigots you
know who are claiming to be anti bigots
it's actually sexist or aggressive and
backwards to make a claim that by you
know not wanting to dress in a in girly
clothes you're secretly a boy no I
cannot I'm very paradoxical that in in
this kind of trans ideology what often
comes in is this this assumption that
there is such a thing about a female
role and a male role and if if someone
is displaying those things there is not
the Flex it's almost bringing in fixed
gender roles very much so yeah it's it's
like it's creating archetypes it's it's
it's sort of culturally essentialist
if you will in which these even somewhat
fictitious ideas of what traditional
sort of nuclear families from the 1950s
looked like you know post-world War two
Mad Men style family politics are the
model for masculinity and femininity and
you know they're a model but they're not
a model I ever saw growing up and you
know most people I think didn't see
those except in in fiction and imagining
that those are the ones that we are all
like that's the Platonic ideal of
masculine well a there is no Platonic
ideal of masculine that's not how
masculine works
and and B if you were gonna if you were
going to force me to pick one that's not
the line pick you know I think about men
and women in terms of the average
proclivities that they tend to have and
you know that and then the anatomical
and physiological truths that you know
men are going to be on average taller
and stronger and have deeper voices and
be more likely to take physical risks
and intellectual risks and you know
they're much more likely to live fast
and die young than women and to say hold
my beer and then do something that looks
really stupid but you know the one time
in a hundred those sorts of things work
they end up the hero all right then so
it looks like stupid risk-taking
behavior but it actually works some of
the time and that's why it persists and
those are things that are more likely
that men would do I tend to do those
sorts of things that doesn't make me a
man but it puts me over in that you know
more like the kinds of things that men
would do but I'm not at all confused
about generated gender identity there's
the phenomenon and there's this small
number of people who are pushing this
but also there's the the reality the
realization that a lot of our
institutions in particular the media
seem to be wide open to to this and seem
to be making decisions based on this
ideology what do you why do you think
that is and what do you think we do
about it
there is an aspect of game theory which
I believe explains the odd behavior of
let's say our tech companies and our
colleges these are places where you
would expect enlightenment values to
reign and you would expect resistance I
mean tech people are inherently next
door to the sciences how is it that they
are signing up for these foolish notions
I think it has to do with the difference
between the collective interest and the
individual interest because stigma is
the weapon that is being wielded an
individual has to ask a question an
individual who might ideally want to
steer their tech
bini to some sort of middle ground where
it dealt compassionately but it held
fast to the Enlightenment values and
scientific perspective that person has
to ask a question am i personally ready
to suffer the costs of stepping out of
line when this power grab is in motion
and most people will they will buckle
they will say nothing and allow the
power grab to take place and then even
worse than that not only does their
cowardice cause them to be quiet but
they can't live with cowardice as an
explanation so they will then
rationalize that the explanation that
they have allowed to take hold is
actually a right and so this is what I
saw at Evergreen I now see it in other
colleges and universities and I think we
are seeing it in a great many places
including the tech sector people are too
afraid to speak up and having been
unable to speak up they start lying to
themselves in order to make it feel
better and that is causing fiction to
spread across the landscape most
frightening lis into places that are
capable of booting you out of the public
square if you say things that violate
these ridiculous assertions what do you
make of the term patriarchy because it
can easily turn into a conspiracy theory
but also is there not some truth in that
we have been running society along that
effectively male values for quite a long
time patriarchy is a myth that is not
the same thing as saying that there is
nothing patriarchal patriarchal
structures can exist but a long-standing
conspiracy of male against female does
not make evolutionary sense the vast
majority of the genes in your genome
spend half their time in male form and
half their time in female form so at the
level of a rauzein veil of ignorance
they are ignorant of whether they will
be the oppressors or the oppressed in
some patriarchy that they set up and in
fact they are condemned to be
parts both so patriarchy makes no sense
as an evolutionary product it does not
mean that groups of men don't sometimes
gang up on women no doubt that happens
and it's a very serious problem but the
idea that this is society wide and that
we are defending structures that put us
at advantage is preposterous logically
now it may be that the inherited
division of labor that explains the
difference between what males and
females have traditionally done than the
kinds of power they have traditionally
had that that division of labor has not
aged well that in modern times that puts
burdens on females that exceed the
burdens it places on males that's
perfectly plausible but that's different
than alleging a conspiracy that has
organized this transfer of power from
one sex to the other you have a lecture
where you talk about how the magic trick
is done could you summarize what is the
magic trick in that context the magic
trick is how power is usurped through
certain kinds of arguments so we are all
watching something move across the
landscape and alter what can be said
where it can be said at what kinds of
language have to be used and many people
will tell you nobody really believes
that and then others will tell you oh
it's a tiny number of people so it's
you're blowing the danger out of
proportion but those of us who are
paying attention to it are watching
institution after institution be
lobotomised by these arguments that
really don't rise to the level of a good
discussion and a college dorm these are
not high quality arguments they are not
robust in the face of what is understood
as a result of decades or in some cases
centuries of study and different
disciplines so how is it that these
wrong arguments carry so much power
that's the question the answer in
general is that game theory provides
loopholes where people can
have power that is disproportionate to
their numbers and disproportionate to
the power of the logic underlying what
they are saying so the wielding of
stigma in such a way that causes people
to be much more likely to voice one
perspective than the counter perspective
understanding the the biases that exist
as a result of a sometimes cynical use
of game theory is what that that lecture
is about you've described yourself as
deeply progressive on the Rubin report
and one of the one of the questions
would be given that the authoritarian
right seems to be on the ascendancy
politically a lower place in the world
why focus so much on what a lot of
people say is a small corner of the left
or the excesses of the left well I think
this is actually something of a bum rap
I'm a biologist I'm interested in
phenomena to the extent that the
phenomena I'm interested in have caused
me to run afoul of different populations
I'm responding to them to the extent
that there is a fringe on the far right
that has a racist view and wishes to
turn that racist view into policy I
challenge them and this is something
I've done repeatedly to the extent that
there's something on the left that wants
to pretend that gender is an invention
of men who wish to oppress women I've
challenged them so what I would say is I
didn't choose my antagonists they chose
me and in choosing me they simply
started saying things that run afoul of
what I know to be true and my job is to
elucidate why those arguments are
incorrect and help people see the
arguments that are correct I can't
really be faulted for doing that in an
even-handed way and if the burden of it
falls more on one side than the other
that's a result of the fact that that
side is spending more time levelling
absurd charges how does the left get its
house in order how does identify the
people who are actually antithetical to
its interests and draw boundaries around
what is acceptable what is not
acceptable I see myself playing
new roles since May of 2017 one is I am
allowing something on the centre-right
to understand that the left is not
completely insane that it actually has a
noble decent history that has been right
about a tremendous number of important
topics and that we are all collectively
benefiting from what it has been right
about and the fact that it is presently
having spasm of insanity does not tell
the whole story the right needs to
remember that and I very frequently run
into naive arguments on the right where
people are saying can we just finally do
away with the left everybody can see
their crazy that's the only thing over
there and so it's very important that
somebody says no that's not the sum
total of the left and it never has been
the other thing I'm doing is I am
demonstrating to people on the left that
it is possible to say something that is
not in the current fashion and live to
tell the tale and simply by
demonstrating that it is possible to
make sense as a progressive and not fall
victim to this cabal is I think also
very important it's keeping people from
fleeing to the right now one of the
things I also said on Rubin is that I
was never on the left for social reasons
I wasn't on the left because there
cocktail parties were more pleasant to
me I was on the left because logically
that's where I landed so the fact that I
have taken an awful lot of flack from
the left doesn't alter my position on
what's true because why would it what's
true is true irrespective of whether
there's anybody to talk about it
[Music]
you
[Music]
you