hello Internet I have been shinned
before probably but my university degree
is in ecology so I very much look at the
world as an ecological system there's
this idea that people say that's not
true
that's like humans are the most evolved
species and that's not true at all
because there are no more evolved
species than another if you believe in
evolution which if you're talking about
they evolved then we're talking about
evolution all came from the same single
cells
so therefore bacteria are just as
evolved as humans and this lighting is
really gonna get to me but I'll try to
stay still in the Sun so and if you look
at like humans are we've amassed culture
and cities and done amazing
technological advances but we still at
the same time lock a human in the in a
room with a tiger my money's on the
tiger if you have humanity against the
Ebola virus although humanity might not
be wiped out by the Ebola virus
individuals are we aren't more evolved
than any other species
we just happen to have certain
characteristics that other species don't
have when you look at an ecosystem it
takes diversity you need to have both
carnivores and herbivores and d'Ãªtre
wars you need to have nocturnal and
diurnal species if I said that right we
need to have species that breed really
fast and get eaten and ones that breed
really slowly and eat others like that's
part of how we have an ecosystem but
then when we look at our economics which
by the way is very tied to ecology it's
very much based on ecology a lot of the
same formulas go into it except that
ecology is an actual science that we can
see and study and discover and economics
is like theory that we've put into
practice and then I don't know like we
force it to be what we we think it is
but looking at our species singularly
just humans I think there's a parallel
that
we aren't all supposed to be Tigers
we're not all supposed to be this top of
the food chain like there's a hierarchy
because there is no top of the food
chain the tiger dies and gets eaten by
the bacteria same as everyone else and
so we don't look at a cat and compare it
to a dog and be like oh that cats lazy
it's like no the cats doing its own
thing the cat needs to lay around for 4
hours a day to get enough energy to hunt
and that's including Lions in the in the
Sahara that having the diversity of
humanity is how we're going to save us
having allowing people who are like cats
to be like cats people that are like
dogs to be like dog sounds about right
carnivores people who are bumblebee is
to be bumblebees like we need the
diversity in humanity we need neuro
diversity we need physical diversity we
need diversity of experience and
interests in order to save the planet
because but we are all sitting in our
own little species in this like I'm a
cat I've become a cat because of my like
I spend a lot of my day sleeping and I
also eat meat there's nothing wrong with
a cat sleeping all the time why is it
wrong for us well because your sister
work 40 hours a week you're supposed to
write but that's based on an average
that's based on the average of what
humanity is capable of not based on
either side of the spectrum there's
people who 40 hours a week is nothing
and they only need to sleep four hours a
day they have unlimited energy and
they're like I can just go go go 80
hours a day maybe out 80 hours a week
then there's people who like me who like
even 5-10 hours is too much and there's
all along the spectrum that's every
spectrum exists and instead of elevating
one side we need to honor that we exist
along a spectrum and not just that like
oh but then those lazy people right but
there's something that comes from it
like there's something that comes from
cats being like that that they're able
to hunt that they're able to do that
side of things and having all this Todd
downtime that I wouldn't have chosen to
have it's not it's means more of my life
is spent sleeping and resting and I'm
not able to do things which is what
society values but I also know that like
that's where my thoughts come from
that's where the ability to create comes
from is that downtime is that the beam
force that I can't physically do it I
have to grow I have to get to the point
where I can recruit other people to do
it and if I don't get to that point then
it's never gonna happen but to and I
don't know I'm not doing this this topic
justice and it doesn't always be a
little bit because I want to be able to
convey like species in nature are all
important to come together and work to
have an ecosystem that runs all of
humanity disappeared the biosphere would
thrive if the bees all disappeared if
the ants all disappeared if the
earthworms all disappeared the ecosystem
would probably most likely collapse and
so just because we are more intelligent
doesn't mean we're more important and
similarly in our species just because
someone has a particular form of
intelligence or physical strength or
something that makes them more elevated
in our society's culture our cultural in
what we decide is more important doesn't
mean they're actually more important
that's just our current view of that
every single human being on this planet
is needed in exactly who they are and
what they are and that coming together
is how we save our species all of us
thanks