good morning YouTube the universe has
been testing me it gave me a cold see if
I'm in show up last week it was the
climate March this week is a cold and
technology problem say what to connect
to the internet it had to restart our
update windows and when I did it
wouldn't actually connect to the
internet so I am here I also it's funny
when I was working I think every job
I've had even when I've liked them if I
was sick I definitely called in sick
this is like I'm not working I'm say um
when you find what you are here to do
nobody can pay you not to do it and I
don't want to take a sick day
like I want to create a better world and
so if what I'm doing is showing up at
11:00 a.m. on Fridays and answering
people's questions on how we do that I
don't unless I have like literally can't
do it like there's no option I'm in the
hospital or you know if you like my
voice is kind of going I'm still still
wanting to be here so this morning I was
watching I'm just going to talk to
myself if there are questions because
that's what I do
I was watching Norah Bates and the
complexity of Kult climate change and
cultural revolution hey Stephanie
glad you were here does show zero
viewers it's lying it was will end which
I highly recommend her her talk on
future thinkers talking about how this
idea of climate change in how importance
it is and it is life or death but in the
solving it were kind of breaking the
system because if we do what let's say
extinction rebellion and people want us
to do not even so sure if they know what
they're doing but if we do it then we
are like complete collapsing a lot of
the complexity and a lot of the issues
and creating new issues and we don't
have a way to deal with that and so if
we don't do anything and continue along
our trajectory we're screwed and if we
do what people want us to do which is
like everybody goes vegan
just like shut everything down hone and
everything we're also screwed and part
of what she talks about which is much
more better at this than that I have but
part of it was her talking about how
she's talking with her children on these
on these issues and that for her to say
that she has an a solution would be
wrong
that she like is gonna get lost in and
the like raw lostness with them and like
we're gonna figure this out together and
that is what I feel we are going to do
is I'm not really in the raw loss
witness anymore because I have this idea
on how we can co-create a better world
together which involves us a little bit
getting lost in the wrongness of it
making the safety net making the
emotional support and the community
support that each of us needs to go
through that process without ever
demanding and anybody goes through that
process anything that has game be
anything that is coming out of what out
of this chaos that is game a has to in
my opinion include everyone exactly
where and how they are and then if we
need them to be better demanding it is
never the way to go
loving them where they are and asking
how can we help you how can so like
there's so much that I deal with in this
project of people saying like what about
the people who do X or do why are people
who way I have a question that something
just chimes on my computer does everyone
else hear that - they do writes the
might we pick it up 50 don't window I
don't know how to turn that off of my
computer so things don't pop up there
should be an easy button there isn't and
I'm sure there is an absolute way to do
that and it does not work for my brain
and that what we need to continually be
doing well we're creating the technology
that gives us the choice you want to
collaborate on a massive scale thanks
reddit I don't I don't want to know that
there are new reddit things like of
course there's the reddit things there's
millions of people on it um having
continually asking what's not working
here
and then making it work and so part of
Nora I what kind of remember people's
last names
Bateson is that she was talking about
what we need to do is feed the babies
like that is the the essence of what
needs to happen in order for climate
change in order for empty poverty in
order for all of it to happen we need to
be feeding babies and so that is what I
am talking about is how do we create the
tools that make sure all of our needs
are met without relying on the old
system which is either you do it
yourself either literally by yourself or
with a tiny community you rely on
corporations to do it so you go for the
solutions in the marketplace or the
third entity has been the government the
government will fix it and I for many
reasons I've talked about many times do
not think our governments are designed
to do that nor they even looking to do
that in some areas I think they're
starting to look to do that they're
trying to figure a climate change but
they're how to to figure it out i tinker
with the system they're benefiting from
while hopefully magically fixing it
which is not that's not going to fix it
even with like the feeding the babies
the solutions are what are you currently
doing to feed you and your family and
how can we improve that and continually
look into improve it
extinction oh I'm sorry I'm gonna put
this up on the screen send all over the
provincia I think he may be over some
point as far as I can tell Nora wasn't
getting that specific your filly with
their platform hi Amex Merliah with
exchanger millions platform but I
infected last weeks on how we could
actually said I didn't because my kid
was interrupting me and I was about to
go to the climate March and no one was
here to watch so I wasn't answering the
questions but I do think like what they
say their issue is they need the
government to do it though and I don't
think our governments are going to be
able to do it so why not like what they
want is is is citizen assembly is to be
created that our governments then have
to listen to instead we could just form
citizens assemblies in order to
understand the complexity of climate
change
in order to understand what tools are
needed to feed the babies to get our
needs met as individual users slash
consumers let's write the word of and
not have it have these horrible input
reverberations in the in the world just
an act I agree
sorry I takes it well to get to thanks
well Shelley that's treason declaring
climate is an act of sense making it is
but the issue is listening to tune or to
talk is that being a climate change
activists kind of creates more enemies
than it creates co-creators because of
how it's showing out for the world and I
think it's very necessary with
extinction rebellion is doing like what
do you do when you think your worlds on
fire you don't sit at home and hope your
government's gonna solve it because
they're clearly not so the only solution
is to go out in the streets and March
and demand our governments do something
I don't believe our governments are
capable of doing all of the masks
because it's not just about mass change
whatever mass change we do is gonna have
new change and new things that come
about and so we need a much more dynamic
and livable system that reacts to things
as they occur that isn't what our
governments are capable of our
governments are designed to be there for
four years which is what the citizen
assembly is supposed to overcome right
it's supposed to be well if we have a
citizens who understand it then we can
then go beyond that for years the issue
is I mean I had put out like well we
could do citizen assemblies we can do
them ourselves what I didn't realize is
people aren't me and they don't actually
want to be on citizen assemblies they
just want them to exist it's like jury
duty they want them to exist and like
for that to be something in the future
but they don't actually want to sit on
them they don't actually want to
understand like be one of the hundred
people in their country who understands
the climate crisis and tells the world
what to do about it they want somebody
else to do that and the whole point of
the citizen assemblies isn't that those
people are experts it's that they are
representative of the population
that are then informed by experts or
truly understand the complexity of
what's going on and then give guidance
to the government on what to do and that
the government then has to act on it
because this political back-and-forth
between right and left and no one's
taking action because that's why our
governments aren't designed to take
action
you can't implement a solution make
everybody happy or enough people happy
that they're gonna vote you and again in
a four year period it just doesn't
happen
so they especially well you're working
against the forces that are not going to
be happy with either outcome so it's
like not enough for one side and too
much for the other side no matter which
side you're on whereas we can come
together and create the solutions that
work for us because we're the US so if
we want to eat vegan what is stopping
you from eating vegan one of the weird
things is you have to stop concerning
yourself with everybody else except for
the system the system as a whole the
corporation is the government the whole
system that is happening we have to be
concerned about we have to make sense of
it and we have to be able to to tinker
with it and figure out what's going on
well we're still allowing it to exist
that we don't descend into chaos but
what if that looks like a lot of the
time is this pointing fingers that
everybody who's not doing what we're
doing and not looking to what we're not
doing and not like it has to be an
individual choice of what are you doing
and how can we help you do better not
yelling at people to go vegan right
instead like what are you eating is that
good for your body do you want to be
eating better what would you like to be
eating how can we help you get there not
by making you have to do it all on your
own and the bootstrap method not Byron
definitely not by relying on the
marketplace to do it they do in a fairly
great job of that of getting food at the
supermarket but not everyone's fed we're
definitely not fed in a healthy way for
ourselves or the planet and that's
costing all of us creating the system
that looks at what are you doing and how
can we help you make it incrementally
better is how we make the global system
we can work backwards and recreate the
means of production instead of
overtaking them instead of going in and
demanding we now own Amazon which is
violent and chaotic we could recreate
Amazon we're not going to do that with a
million people even but 10 million 100
million could absolutely overnight creep
recreate Amazon the issue is Amazon's
the leaf is the hardest one to recreate
because they have products and we have
to recreate all of those products before
we actually recreate Amazon but with a
hundred million of us looking at what
we're buying putting that down into the
system in a way that we trust it in a
way that we can where it's a direct
benefit to me right I'm not gonna put my
data in the system if I'm not getting
something from it what I'm getting from
it is access to that data my own data
right like oh look like I dunno what I
spent on groceries knowing where I spent
it knowing what I could have done
differently for my finances right
because that's the that's where we have
to meet people is where they actually
are how they're actually feeding their
babies and then asking how we help them
improve it how do we and I think for
everyone the improvement that we can all
get behind even if you don't think it's
a solution to the entire global issue is
that we want our food to be nutritious
delicious and have less resources input
it into it we want to give less money
for it we want there to be less labor
per thing that's there we want them to
be less labor per calorie we intake and
together we can create a more efficient
food system that does that ethically we
will never do that ooh just correcting
what is here because like shopping at
Walmart is a solution for people in
poverty you get fairly good food for
fairly low prices but you're feeding off
of other impoverished people around the
world you don't have the option to do
anything more ethical than that when you
yourself are in poverty when you
yourself don't and when I like there are
a lot of people who aren't under the
poverty line who are in poverty they
don't they're not they're living
paycheck to paycheck they don't know
what's going on they don't feel like
they have
enough resources to deal with the things
that lights throwing at them so Walmart
is the option yelling at people not to
use Walmart is not the solution giving
people an alternative to Walmart is the
solution to do this in public health
through policy and systems change change
your behavior increase access to healthy
food yes that is what needs to happen
Stephanie like asking people cuz and
then like in my mind should we just keep
asking people like theoretically if the
food was really cheap really easy to
make and it tasted good I would make it
then we make that system turns out I'm
still not making it now what's stopping
me
now what's stopping me like keep looking
at ways to make it better
don't yell at people that they're not
doing what you think they should be
doing and yeah which is great it's great
that I'm sorry I keep responding to
these like people can see them this is
what's happening the creating but it's
it's not because it's not done in a way
like I can't give that up I can't be
like right I don't have the spoons to
cook for my kid or to cook for our
family also when I do cook my kid won't
eat it she were like I don't have access
to how to solve that problem I could go
to the doctor and maybe get you know put
in touch with a nutritionist they're not
gonna tell me what my kid will eat my
kid won't tell me what my kid will eat
and so it's not actually gonna help
unless it's like meeting me where I'm at
meeting her where she's at which I'm
trying hold it like what do you want to
eat I will buy it I will figure it out
no from the time we like it just doesn't
I don't know what it is for her but
asking people like I have a lot of
experience very few folks are yelling at
people about it even vegans I mean
that's not my experience in the medical
community and in with vegans some of the
vegan some of the vegans are awesome and
they're not yelling at other people and
it's the least effective thing I don't
think yelling at someone to unique and
has ever gotten anyone to be vegan I
know when I was a vegetarian and I did I
was in my early 20s I totally was like
well that's gross you can't eat it's
disgusting you can't
never did anyone change to vegetarianism
because of how I presented it but when I
just shut up and ate salads every day at
work it was just and I think I'm
sleeping eating media them because I
wasn't a vegetarian at that point in
time people were like oh yeah you've
inspired me to let I was like this this
wasn't about inspiring you know this is
like me doing me and I'm like that is
the key you do you show that it's a good
idea and other people will come on board
especially if it is a good idea if it
actually feeds people if it actually
gets the solution made without demanding
that it's the solution without saying I
know I'm saying I have the solution but
it's not going to be the solution till
it's actually made and the only reason
it is the solution is because within the
system is designed that it will
incrementally get better
there isn't a utopia we get to its proto
Pia constantly looking for improvement
and ways to make our system and our
technology which is what we're
concentrating on is making the
technology that makes it possible for an
individual to eat more healthy whatever
their version of health wait I'm sorry
to improve their their diet whatever
that is to them and so looking at it as
a full system of okay well where are you
currently getting your calories where
what are you currently doing and helping
me help you make it better isn't about a
tiny group of us fixing it for everybody
else it's about creating the system that
anyone at any point in time can put into
here's why this isn't working for me
here's what would improve it and they
can be empowered to co-create the
solutions to that through tools and
systems or that is enough if you just
put into the system yes and I'm not
capable of doing that because I don't
have the spoons I do not have the energy
of making my own food oh well just know
there is no just if you're not listening
to the person telling you what the
problem is we're not fixing the problem
the actual problem so the only way to be
concerned about what everyone else is
doing is to ask how can I help you
how can I help you actually eat better
whatever your version of better is I
don't get to demand what your version is
better is I don't get to demand that you
eat vegan
or that you eat meat or don't eat meat
or you eat Keita or you don't it's like
what is gonna be good for your body and
how do I help you do it in a way that
you feel better about because I know
when you feel better when you actually
get health you're also gonna care more
about the people around you and the
planet and probably eventually the
animals and if that isn't the case okay
so the you know 10% that's left not
caring about those babies doesn't ever
care about those things the issue is the
entire system is kind of based on us all
pointing the finger at each other and
Eleen and debating instead of actually
solving the underlying problem actually
how do we feed the babies how do we make
sure every child on this world is fed
without making the individual wrong for
what they are currently doing and it's
by continually asking and I'm only going
to be on for 12 minutes because I am
already really that I shouldn't be
talking at the moment Thank You Dean I
did have notes
thanks for happening good that I just
that the old system is the system oh
that's I could have kind of ready said
what is I don't even if what he said is
actually how I feed my kid in my life is
part of what works part of what I would
love everybody to have access to is
community dinners even if my kid doesn't
eat it
she ate a tiny piece of it she tried
something and I didn't have to make it I
didn't have to make it cuz the worst for
us as a relationship is me putting in
hours of my limited resources into
cooking and then she doesn't eat it and
then there's leftovers if she's still
not going to eat at least when I go to
community and eat I didn't cook it I
paid for it but then I take her portion
and I go and so how the community
dinners work is everyone in the
community who is an adult cooks and
cleans once a cycle you cook and clean
on teams of three when you cook you
decide on what you're cooking you do the
shopping and you do the prep you do the
cooking and you serve it in whatever way
you want to the people eat it people
clean up their plates move into the
kitchen and we do all the dishes the
clean team that does all the dishes puts
everything away it makes the kitchen go
back to how it looked before anyone
touched it um in that way we each get to
show up not do the labor experience
community and connection and we pay the
cost of food even with less than 40
people doing that the cost for most of
the meals is cheaper is it always
cheaper than what I could prepare that
Samuel for at home but it's even cheaper
than like the cheapest like even
macaroni and cheese but like other and I
love that Stephanie free dream of a free
cafe
what soup for everyone there's a I don't
know if they still do it there was one
here called rhizome that had a one meal
on their menu every every time that was
like every day sorry they have a meal
it's usually a soup where it's pay what
you can so there's like a box you go up
and pay you don't pay there and so you
know people don't know you can be paying
ten bucks for the soup
if you're paying two bucks you pay
nothing and it has like dignity rolled
into it because it's you know you don't
have to ask for the free soup you just
order it and then they're like yeah pay
what you can at the tote which i think
is a beautiful way of doing things like
that there was also a cafe here that was
not in the best location that is no
longer here wasn't even called I
remember start with an L and they their
entire menu was on free food so it was
like found food and then they gave a lot
away a lot of food and I believe the
meals were pay what you can all of it
like the whole meal every day but you
didn't know what it was until you kind
of showed up and they required like
their social media was how you found out
when they were open and how they liked
so it was not like we need to find
solutions that like work where people
are and that was part of what didn't
work for this cafe is that this location
didn't work and um what's called the
lungs cafe that's right Lulu it's gonna
bug me my brain moment
yeah you'd love the payment you can sue
if they still do it I want to see you in
rhizome called now I will let you know
in Vancouver what they're called I'm
sure if you call them they will it will
talk a church bought out the rhizome
cafe and I don't remember they called it
something different something roots
I don't remember it's in the same
location at least it was a few years ago
I don't go out anymore so I don't know
what is actually still happening in the
city like what's still open and what's
not still open as well as I'll think of
the free one because they still have
their social media they still do events
and I'm sure they would be down with
talking to people about reproducing that
in their own City in doing it the other
one of the other things I have access to
because of a single month or on
disability so I'm below the poverty line
is this food supermarket in Vancouver
called quest and quest is a place that
I've used the food bank before and
although they perform a very important
role in society I will no longer give
the money because there's no dignity to
it there's no like they require people
to line up for hours and spend their
labor in time like getting food that
isn't even equivalent to what you did
for four hours you don't really get a
picket it's not nutritious they like you
have to go and get whatever there's a
lot of non dignity where you have to
prove you're poor and you have to like
go into one location and get IDs so you
can then bring that to all the other
locations and I get why they do that the
quest you go and you pay you pay for the
food but it's way less than what you
would pay in the supermarket so you get
to pick out what you want and they have
a lot because it's Vancouver they have a
lot of organic and a lot of like stuff
that comes from Whole Foods and stuff
that comes from the local amazing
bakeries so it's like day-old bread
that's ten cents or 25 cents a loaf
which they could do better because they
don't put in plastic so it's definitely
very stale but like they don't wrap it
in plastic out there they just keep it
in the same paper thing um their milk is
also their milk is not ten cents and
it's like thirty it's maybe thirty
percent less than what it is in the
store I'm like and it's expired that
makes no sense but a lot of their other
stuff is
it keeps us in junk food at least junk
food and produce are kind of like what I
go to quest for and then there's a local
market that I was part of I was on the
board of called Cedar Cottage Food
Network where they bulk buy from the
produce places where people but like
where produce people buy their produce
from they bulk buy it and sell it at
cost so every Saturday you can go to one
of the locations and you can pick up and
most things are a dollar or a multiple
of the dollar so maybe you get two
apples or three apples for a dollar
or you get a cantaloupe for a dollar
someone so it's subsidized somewhat
because it's actually somewhat sold less
than what it's cost a lot of the time
but those are the kind of things that
are done the last two options are done
for the poor but they don't need to be I
mean that the leftover food that so that
sold at Qwest has to kind of be because
he like that's coming available first
it's based on the overproduction
expiration of food
not everyone can necessarily go there
and shop but every we could bulk buy
produce together we can both buy our
groceries together we can create
solutions that aren't needing to go to
the farmers market which is
astronomically expensive and not
accessible to the poor it's not
accessible to the poor it's not
accessible like it's not and the reason
why the farmer markets a lot of times
are so expensive is that well the
farmers put their labor into it of
course it's grown locally you they pay
decent amounts for their labor but like
they're sitting at the farmers market
for an entire Saturday or four hours of
their Saturday after picking this stuff
and coming there and then driving back
like their time is worth something and
they're sitting there answering the
questions and they're sitting there it's
like you're paying for the experience of
meeting the farmer and being there we
can create systems that honor the farmer
the farmers time that their time is
spent better basically anywhere than
sitting in the farmers market and create
the system that's like where is our food
grown how can we make sure they make
enough money not just the farmer
themselves but also all of the people
who touch that produce how do we make
sure that
every because even in Canada we have
laborers coming from from exa code to
pick because no one here is gonna pick
it
there's also though abundance farm which
I'm not part of but I love the concepts
of is a not-for-profit farm cooperative
farm I know what their legal structure
would be called but basically you go and
participate in the labor and in the
planning and in all of it and they get
like they get your labor and you get
food and that same model could be done
over and over again where you get to go
and participate and so it and it's not
back-breaking labor in a field where you
have to like quota quota keep to the
quota you know like your kids have to do
is you can your kids are doing it and
it's not child labor right like it's
like yeah we're all in the fields
picking this where food comes from this
is an important part of learning that
like this is come when we grow food and
we eat it and then there's of course
systems in the cities of 3d farms or
some is called 3d farms vertical farming
and greenhouses mixed with fish so you
know like one feeds the other one and
there are ways to produce food that
we're not even utilizing and if we do
it's gonna be done in a for-profit model
and it's again a beautifully accessible
to the ridge whereas if we can look at
okay oh how much for one of those farms
actually produce and how many people can
be involved and then what is the word
franchisee that like fret like make it
so you can create one easily you don't
need to pay the franchise fee and pay
like when one city creates a tool
library when one city creates a thing
called quest that anyone can easily get
in contact with like right here's how we
did it there you go
go ahead and do it we can co-create
solutions that actually work by working
on what's done before and working from
where we're at and finding ways to be
like okay if we're putting our data into
the system we can find ways to use each
other's intellectual labor on what to
cook to solve the the food crisis and I
so the what are the other ways I've been
getting my food needs fed over the last
few weeks and it's actually a bit more
late
for intensive and any of the other ways
and it's supposed to not be is I've been
using the market I've been using these
meal prep companies that are way too
expensive per day's produce way too much
waste and I'm still doing most of the
laboring and cleanup I'm like this is
not I don't know what you're solving but
I'm still using you like it's like
you're not it's way less work way more
work community supported agriculture
oh is that what abundance farm is called
human Community Supported Agriculture or
CSA I'll CSA boxes yeah those ones okay
I think abundance farms might be one of
those and then I know a bunch of people
who use CSA like boxes of produce but
even that like we need to make it better
because then you I can tell you that
would not be any it would not be helpful
to me like getting a box of produce that
I then have to figure out what the to do
with it is if you know what an option
it's just going out of my house in the
compost bin which means they like the
world grew it transported it to me and
then it's going just back to to create
more soil because I can't think of what
to cook with that I can't necessarily do
the labor to cook the thing on the David
that it's there and that's where
creating something that is like CSA box
meets our shared intellectual knowledge
of like here's three things you could
cook with it that are in your CSA box I
know they do that they will give you
recipes that then it's missing four
ingredients right like bulk buying the
ones that were not growing and making
them into CSA boxes that are like fresh
prep in these places that are in the
marketplace and they're all
cannibalizing off of each others that
are all 12 to 15 bucks per portion or
you know ten bucks per portion which is
still I'm like if I'm buying two
portions that's 20 bucks I wanted to
ride hot and not have to pay for it like
not have to prep it myself and do all
the cleanup she's not to change their
behaviors because they were told to do
something there is much to unpack there
yes yes and that's part of it it's
allowing people the process of unpacking
not allowing people the space to unpack
that because like going to the fresh
prep places solves a need were over
and people don't know what to define
that's the only thing it solves in my
life is that I don't have to think what
to make for dinner someone else thought
about it for me and that's enough for me
right now because it's the introductory
prices and not going past the
introductory prices on any of them and
I'm trying them because I want to think
about how do we create this system
citywide that isn't this that is not for
profit gets people's food needs met in a
way that works that's continually
improving which is more like my
cohousing community meals meats fresh
prep and how do we do it with way less
packaging and it's by doing it together
it's my brainstorming right can we get
it mason jars can we get like well
there's a cost to that like the literal
cost of mason jars and also transporting
stuff that is heavier but how do we
share in the labor how do we share the
economies of scale and make a system
that you want to use if there was a meal
prep delivery thing because that's clear
that we're calling it uh-huh
that gives that brings you food it's
vegan that brings you food that is super
easy to make and or it's already made
for you and it's cheap who's not going
to use that system the issue is if it's
you know ten if the price point is too
high or the convenience thing is too low
it's like this is inconvenient I sell to
make all of this stuff well to cut it
itself don't wash it i stuff to do all
the stuff that i what don't really want
to do and which i don't have to do at
cohousing I show up I eat a delicious
meal and I get to cook for everybody
else once every cycle which is also fun
because it's not again back-breaking
labor you make it fun you're with people
you want to have a conversation with I
don't have to do the mental work of
thinking how to cook the meal because
there's always someone who's more time
like wait what do we do with this which
could be might be annoying but it seemed
to be okay with it right instead of
assuming what they are five wise what
are the five wise is that about what
specifically that about asking about
their barriers instead of assuming
they're I'm gonna look up five wise
why that was up for so long since I
could be renu-it I would've gone past
the hour if anyone has a hour a half an
hour um I think I so that's a bit of how
we feed the babies a bit of how we do it
together even though I know I didn't
explain to any of it thoroughly the
first step to creating the technology
cooperative which is what we're creating
and what I'm talking about on fixed
world Fridays is to will the personal
the one we all can do is lift more
towards your happiness find what makes
you happy and live from that space the
more you're allowed to live from the
happy space the less you consume on this
planet because you're actually happy and
if your happiness involves consumption
you're still gonna have a better impact
being happy and consuming than you would
be being happy then be miserable and
consuming when they can constantly get
you to buy more and more and worse and
worse stuff because it's filling a void
which should be applied to social
questions that's for the QI thing right
the five why's I will look them up I do
not yet know them and so creating right
now I'm creating a homescreen quest I'm
not creating quest right now I am
creating the idea cafe which will be a
platform that connects humanity in a way
that we can have an effective
conversation which I'm still figuring
out right now it's a YouTube channel
which it just changed completely last
week because I was how it was was we
were going live on Wednesdays and I was
I was picking the question and finding
guests they wanted to talk about that
question to showcase publicly what a
private conversation will look like up
the new platform I wasn't finding that
fun after a few weeks because I found it
hard to get people to come to 11:00 a.m.
on Wednesday and I didn't want to ask
thee um
oh just asking why five times I loved it
so like a kid just really liked it why
why why but why but why I can do that I
could do that all day long
that's what I need someone to come in
here and do every every Friday but why
why the
yeah I gets deeper and deeper I love it
I love it
HIPPA we can call we have no platform
called the five wise but why do you do
it that way
now what will help yeah once we have a
way for us to connect and have a
conversation with humanity then we can
open we can create everything with a few
added tools you a new project management
we need to be able to find groups right
and resonate with but all of that comes
from showcasing that a conversation is
not only possible we also need like we
need it to be fun we need it to be
enjoyable and simple to save the world
and part of it is we don't see that in
society because our interactions with
other human beings on mass early social
media where we're disconnected and
there's a lot of trolling and a lot of
debate and a lot of you're right and I'm
wrong and they're never gonna close that
chasm and so requiring us first to close
that chasm is not a great first step
whereas creating the system that
showcases our similarities and showcases
that everybody has something to
contribute not only a fraction of us
every single person has worth every
single person is perfect exactly as they
are right now in this moment and the
only way to get them to anywhere else is
to accept them and love them how they
are now and a lot of people aren't
capable of that so that's a lot of
requirement to be part of it the
requirement is show up as you are speak
from your heart and hopefully listen to
others as they do the same and so that
is what the idea Cafe is but what it is
now because I didn't like what was doing
on Wednesdays is that I'm finding one
person to have a conversation with this
is what happened last Wednesday I talked
to Jessica we met in the game beat
coffee shop and she was like I can do
Wednesdays at 11:00 we co-created the
question which this week was how has
your sexual or romantic orientation
affected your worldview it was just the
two of us talking we each tripped the
five minutes to answer and then we
talked for the remainder of the half an
hour and it was great and so I'm
following that same format I'm finding
one person to have a conversation with
we're gonna co-create the question and
then we're going to put it out to the
world this is the time this is the
question who else wants to come and be
part of this discussion
and if no one ever shows up with the two
of us I'm really enjoying these covers
x3 set up for next week so instead of
having 11:00 a.m. on Wednesday I have
three set up four just in case just in
case anyone would like to participate in
them they are October 7th at 1:00 p.m.
these times are all in Pacific Standard
Time
how has your mental health crisis
affected your life Tuesday at 5:00 p.m.
what is your donor conception story and
is there anything you would change now
knowing what you know something along
those lines Thursday October 10th at
6:30 a.m. we are having a conversation
on how has your autism diagnosis
impacted your life these are all
questions I want to have a conversation
about the other person I'm having the
conversation with wants to have a
conversation about and I have
communities around them that I'm also
putting it out to so it solves my easy
simple problem I'm like I can meet up
with one person and figure out a
question that works for both of us and
pick a time that works for both of us
and then I can put it on to the universe
because even if no one else shows up I'm
fine with that I'm fine with just two of
us having a conversation and if other
people show up and they want to start
participating then that will be amazing
too and eventually showcasing all of
these different types of conversations
that we can have with a platform
designed around an actual conversation
we will eventually create the platform
this design drone an actual conversation
part of which is like working out the
kinks live like working and figuring out
what can go wrong
allowing things to go wrong and then
figuring out how you fix them and that's
basically how we say if the one else
meet people where they're at start with
something and incrementally improve it
okay can I get bumper stickers made all
right Thank You Stephanie and human for
commenting and for participating and
anyone else who's watching because the
system doesn't seem to show me I am here
every Friday at 11 a.m.
even when I'm sick and are going to
climate marches and I will be here next
time I'm gonna put this up so I can read
it so you've read a bunch better okay
Nina I hope you feel better
sue let's feed all the babies including
us for babies right Stephanie
baby I'm a baby right now someone has to
feed me I know iPod today I'm looking
around like who's gonna adults Mike oh
he almost a 40 year old person I can
make the chicken soup I can do it all
right thank you so much and I will see
you next Friday if I don't see him
between ah yes