welcome back to future thinkers podcast
part 2 of the three part series with
Daniels Franklin Berger on the generator
functions of existential risks in this
episode Daniel gets into the past and
present systems of sense making and
choice making that we have as a humanity
and how those will need to change as we
transition into the future to get all
the links and show notes from this
episode go to future thinkers org slash
57 you can also find all three parts of
the series there in one place this
episode is brought to you by quality at
a premium a nootropic supplement that
helps support mental performance and
brain health it's specifically designed
to promote focus support energy mental
clarity mood memory and creativity UV
and I have both used it in the past we
really liked it and we actually met the
founders and interviewed them on future
thinkers and you can check out those
interviews they're one of our favorites
at future thinkers org slash Daniel and
future thinkers org slash jordan they've
got a new formula up called qualia mind
it's got more natural ingredients and
you can get it at future thinkers org
slash brain hack and you can get 10% off
if you use the code future all right
let's get into the show
welcome to future thinkers org a podcast
about the evolution of technology
society and consciousness I'm Mike
Gilliland and I'm UV Ivanova if you new
to the show and you'd like a list of our
top episodes and resources go to future
thinkers die org slash start and if you
like our podcasts leave us a rating and
a review on iTunes and elsewhere
it really helps others find the show and
we really appreciate it can we talk
about some of the specific examples of
the generator functions and what they
look like in a society okay so I want to
look at these same two generator
functions through a couple different
lenses that end up mapping to the same
thing but these lenses are valuable so
one way of saying what needs to happen
is that we need systems of collective
intelligence and collective sense making
and choice making that increase with
scale effectively and I'll say why that
makes sense
if you look at Jeffery West's work out
of Santa Fe Institute this book scale is
a classic example we see that you've got
productive capacity or intelligence
capacity design capacity of a persons
and you bring a few people together and
you get increased productive capacity
and for a little while you'll actually
get an exponential up curve where more
people give you a lot more ability
because they're sharing new capacities
and this is the startup phase or
something but pretty soon you get an
inflection point where adding more
people starts having diminishing returns
per capita and then you get to this
table incurring more people is not
increasing it up to capacity really at
all and so if I have a curve where more
people don't keep adding adaptive
capacity well then those people will
always have an incentive to defect
against that system because they'll
actually have more adaptive capacity per
capita if they defect against it and so
as long as I have a system of collective
intelligence that can not scale with the
number of people it can't include
everybody right and and it will always
force its own collapse its own defection
so far we found that all the things that
we
all like intentionally made human
systems countries and companies have
this type of curve and so again this
shows why none of those can make it this
is a design criteria saying of if I'm
making were creating a social system if
it doesn't have sense making in choice
making able to increase at least
linearly with number of people through
some process then the people will defect
against that system as soon as you pass
the inflection point and now they'll
either defect against it make their own
thing completely unless the big system
even though it's less efficient per
capita than them is still a lot bigger
than them and it would take them out in
which case it's not safe to overtly
defect then they covertly defect they
defect with while staying within the
system which starts to look like
everything you see in the world today
where someone looks at okay what is my
particular bonus structure and how can i
optimize getting the most bonuses here
even though it's not what fits to the
company they have now defected against
the well-being of the whole because
their own incentive and the well-being
of the whole are actually ante coupled
or at least missed and we can see that
almost everywhere people within systems
have actually defected against being
optimally aligned with the integrity of
the system
they're basically preying on the system
in some way and while continuing to look
like they're serving it because that's
where the incentive is and that's going
to of course make the system radically
unadapted and speed up the rate of its
inevitable decline and so if I could get
a system it could scale its actual
adaptive capacity with a number of
people that were in the people being in
the system would always be better for
them and participating with it than
defecting against it in covertly or
overtly one way of looking at it is of
what we have to solve is that sense
making in choice making processes fit
scale add activity right were the
adaptiveness scales number people will
come back to this in a minute as this
into being a very central way of
thinking about it when we talk about
rivalries dynamics creating problems
antirattle risk dynamics coherence
dynamics of agents with other agents are
core to the solutions that we're looking
at it also ends up being the coherence
what solves a lot of the problems of the
open-loop syntax because just how when
we were talking about in democracy the
process of making a proposition
somebody's sensing something they care
about they make a proposition the
benefits it but it harms other things
that they might not have even been
sensing how do we bring all the sensors
together to say what is everything
important connected to this hold those
as design constraints and then go into
an integrated design process that is
trying to meet all of those design
constraints that sounds like the future
of governance but it also sounds like
the future of technology design right to
make technology that's not externalizing
harm and that also means infrastructure
design and so coherence between all the
agents that are sensing a part of the
system means that all the information
from all the parts of the system get to
be internalized to the decision-making
processes right to the choice making
processes which means that externalities
get internalized and so interpersonal
coherence at scale ends up being a
central way of thinking about this now
another way of thinking about it is the
generator function of all the extras so
one thing we just said is the generator
function is social in coherence right
how it was actually what we just said as
a generator function spoke through the
language of collective intelligence this
ability to scale another way of looking
at it is that the source of all of the
risks and also the things that have
always sucked the risks are just the
things that have always sucked bigger is
the relationship between choice and
causation an inappropriate relationship
between choice and causation as two
types of change and this is going to get
into a very tricky philosophic area
which is partly why I said the thing
that we call science and tech is
necessary but not sufficient so science
is a theory of causation right when we
study law what we're studying the laws
of physics or the laws of any domain are
the rules that create change causal
chain train and we study and even more
curly in computer science computation
means rule-based transform and so
something is changing it's transforming
from one state to another state in a
perfectly predictable way governed by a
rule set all set
so causation not true
we don't have a Serie of choice which is
why every philosophic conversation gets
into free will and determinism and get
stuck there and Sam Harrison Dennett
debate it out and get nowhere and at the
end of the day say we just have
different intuitions on this and that's
happened since forever in philosophy and
we could actually get into that topic at
depth at some point does require some
nuance to do well but we are making
choices we are at minimum operating as
if we were making choices and we are
making choices that are extended by text
knowledge of causation so before I got
the tech and I was just predator I could
hit somebody with my fist but then I
could understand causation and say the
heavier the thing is and the faster it
goes and the harder it is very causal
principle some more damage it causes and
so I can extend my fist through a stone
hammer then I can extend it through a
sword right then I can extend it to a
gun then I can extend through a and so
I'm taking my knowledge of causation
science and creating technology applied
science that allows my choice still to
be extended through levers very powerful
levers science is giving me a a theory
of causation that can create applied
causation without giving me a theory of
choice that tells me how to use that
increased causal power and this has been
a classic thing in the philosophy of
science from the time of Descartes that
science says what is not what ought that
it is the realm of objectives this is
but we can't say anything about what
ought because we don't deal in
objectives and you know through most
interpretations of physicalism the
entire thing is meaningless and
deterministic anyways and so it just
means something that we can't even make
sense of well now there's a real bitch
in here this is a real problem which his
science gives us the ability to
understand the physical world very
deeply and to create technology that can
change the physical world very deeply
and so it is the most powerful Avenue
for affecting the physical world
technology right which is applied
science but it has absolutely no compass
for how it should do that and not only
does it have
no compass it says that all compasses
are gibberish right because it's gonna
be some religious ideas and moral some
whatever but they're not science
they're not objective and we've equated
objective with real and subjective with
gibberish and the relationship between
subjective and object if we don't even
really take seriously because we don't
know how we don't have good tools for
that intellectual tools then we say ok
well if technology is the power to
change like to create nuclear bombs that
can blow up the entire world to
create all kinds of dystopias or all
kinds of proto Pia's right if it's all
this power to do anything what
determines how we use that power and
it's not natural framework it's not a
theory of choice what it ends up being
is well who paid for the science who can
pay for the tech how did they get the
money to pay for the tech remember money
as a concentrated choice making system
so what we end up getting is well
capitalism well what that ends up
meaning is social Darwinism that means
game theory and so when who's game
theory still ultimately guides the
development of all the tech and so if
we're now get growing exponential tech
with no basis for how to use that other
than to keep winning at win-lose games
where every time we increase our
technological capacity so do all sides
and a multipolar wave so we're just
upping the ante it's a playing field
this is a very important principle it is
impossible to have a kind of
technological asymmetric advantage and
maintain it indefinitely once you employ
it you can maintain it
well you don't employ it in which case
it's not really a bandage just on the
potential advantage at the moment that
you deploy it then everybody else sees
it and it's much easier to copy then it
was to do the initial innovation it's
easy to iterate and find some other
examples of and so all you did was up
the playing field which is where he went
from one country with notice to lots of
countries with nukes and somebody with
AI to lots of places where they I and
etc etc right and so the idea well we're
gonna develop this technology for our
good purpose
let's just silly because it's going to
be used by all players for all purposes
so this is why I call naive techno
optimism naive is because could
technology solve some problems sure
and we addressed loop closure and
complicated systems where it's not
externalizing harm somewhere else no and
have we recognized that that same
technological capacity will be used by
everybody for all purposes all purposes
that are incented in a system that has a
big greatest perversion center all right
well that's a problem
so the answer is not just that we
technology ourselves out of it all right
we actually have to change that
underlying basis what that means is ok
if we got all this power what should we
do with it well how the do we
answer that ultimately that's an ethical
question it's an existential question
and this comes to the forefront we don't
like to ask this because we only know
physicalism which says this is not even
a question right basically physicalism
we have a couple different versions and
they all suck
right they're all nihilists unless you
do some mental gymnastics to try and
pretend that they aren't which I would
say is not intellectually honest because
either I get consciousness is an
epiphenomena of brain but that makes it
a causal right so that brain is a
causally closed physical system where
voltage differentials and the brain move
ions across membranes and
neurotransmitter goes in one way versus
the other so you think you love her or
not or had this idea or believed this
thing or not and it's all basically
controlled by particle physics and your
consciousness is epiphenomena for some
reason but could not be causal because
what is consciousness that is not
physics that could causally affect
physics right if physics is causally
closed ok so you don't really have
choice for your experience of yourself
as a choosing agent is ultimately an
adaptive illusion which is also a
problematic argument because why would
it be adaptive to have that thing if
that thing doesn't effect causality at
all and what is the weird metaphysics of
how first-person pops out of
third-person David Chalmers speaks about
in a very interesting good way when he
says ok so you've got a bunch of atoms
they're non experiencial and you arrange
them in a particular way and experience
pops out of it right they've got
position and momentum and mass and
like that and now we've got like feeling
and emotion and it's like a different
type of stuff but if I have tools to
study third person I'm gonna find third
person because that's my tools right so
if my epistemology is measure and
then do math across the
stuff that I measured I'm gonna come to
a belief in the reality is measurable
 if I went the Buddhism direction
and my epistemology was inquire into the
nature of my own experience I can do the
exact opposite I can say I actually
don't know that there are any particles
here I might be dreaming I might be a
brain-in-a-vat
being stimulated by electrodes I might
be a crazy person I might be who the
 knows I can't know any of that all
I can know so the Buddhists send a card
to the same thing
what can I know for sure prima facie I'm
experiencing something but the thing
that I think is I and the thing that I
think something might not be what they
are but I know for sure is experience so
let me explore the nature of my
experience and so then of course the the
Buddhists typically do the opposite
reductive move what's real is
consciousness in the physical universe
is either not real or an epiphenomena
and because if my epistemology is to
inquire into the nature of experience
but I'm going to come up as realist
experience and so what you end up having
is epistemology x' that bias ontology x'
in our self referential but on the
physics side and the physicalism
interpretation of physics you get
dreadful nihilism or incongruencies and
other than that you get weird religious
 and we're just not happy with any
of this so we just like try not to think
about this too much and we actually
can't because we have to actually
address what do we want why do we want
it what is worth wanting I the Attic one
stuff that makes their life suck and the
little kid who grows up in front of the
screen with a bunch of flashing lights
wants it again because they were
programmed wanted their sovereignty is
hijacked what is worth wanting what
actually creates a good life what is
good mean right and the fact that we
didn't like the bad religious answers
for these doesn't mean that we get to
throw these questions out completely
because you end up getting the
existential risk of where we're at right
now which is we don't ask those we just
build the tech based on who pays us
great so we all get to go extinct in a
world where we have no theory of choice
but we are choosing based on shitty
theory of choice prima facie
game-theoretic theory of choice and we
have a theory of causation so we're
extending our shitty choices through
exponential tech and so
another way of saying what we have to
actually get right is individual and
collective choice making that doesn't
suck and another way of thing doesn't
suck is individual and collective choice
making vit is Omni positive or at least
vectoring towards Omni positive it is
Omni considerate in terms of considering
all that will affect realizing that it's
interconnected with all these things and
that if I act in a way to beat the other
guy I'm engendering his enmity and my
own insecurity in the future if I'm
harming I'm polluting the air I breathe
the air and this is where we have to
shift all the way down to an identity
level which is the idea that I'm a
separate thing you're a separate thing
over there
I can advantage myself independent of
you or even at your expense is just
actually ontological II not a well
formed idea ontologically when I say I I
might think I and I've got some idea of
what that means a set of atoms contained
in a particular boundary that looks like
this guy called me he's on my facebook
picture and a set of memories whatever
but when I think of I usually don't
think of all the planets on the
biosphere without which I would not
exist because there would be no
atmosphere and I would be dead and I
usually don't think about all of the
soil bacteria without which the plants
wouldn't exist and all of the
pollinators and so but I don't exist
without all those so if I think about
without those it's a ill-formed concept
but when I think of that ill-formed
concept and I think that it's a good
concept to real thing I can think about
advantaging that are a at the expense of
the things that I depend on and that is
a kind of insanity but it is a kind of
Ubiquiti sin sanity currently and so for
me to make a choice for me I have to
know what the I am and I am NOT a
separate thing in games here at a
competition with everything else I am
ultimately interdependent with and
dependent on so much other than me so
then I say all right to not debase the
world upon which I exist the foundation
upon which I exist I start to get I am
an emergent property of this whole thing
if there weren't the bacteria and the
plants and the pollinators there weren't
the people that
before that made up the ideas that I
believe in the words that I think in and
the aesthetics that I perceived through
if there wasn't gravity and
electromagnetism making the whole
 thing possible if it wasn't for
so much just that I consider other than
me I don't exist and so then I get I am
an emergent property of the whole and I
am both interconnected with everything
and totally unique within it and for you
and as soon as I get that I get a couple
things because we're totally
interconnected
I cannot advantage myself at your
expense in a real way I only can if I
haven't factored loop closure everywhere
but the way that I harm you is gonna end
up being an open loop that is going to
harm the substrate of what they care
about and when I factor all the closed
loops we get to david bombs the
evolution of wholeness this whole thing
the evolution of wholeness the the the
Schrodinger equation of the whole thing
right am i evolving in its complexity so
I can't advantage myself at your expense
in a meaningful way and now so I can't
understand myself without understanding
myself through the my interactions with
you and your feedback and reflection so
choice we have to have a theory of
choice it comes from a philosophy that
can actually relate choice and causation
and can have a theory of causation and a
theory of choice that are inter
commensurable with each other right it's
not a made-up kind of theory of choice
and it can serve as a basis for how to
make good choices in the presence of all
of the technology we have and that
there's something we said last time
we're together is the technology is
because it's a causal extension of our
choice has us extending our power to be
like the power of gods the ability to
create new life forms of genetic
engineering to destroy whole life forms
and species to blow things up at like
nuclear bombs are bigger than juices
lightning bolts was depicted or I'd like
the power of gods if you do not get the
love and wisdom and consideration of
gods as a choice making basis for that
power you'll use that power in just a
good ways that will end up causing
self-destruct on a very tiny plane
and if I want to make choices that are
good for me and I'm interconnected with
the whole I have to make choices that
are good for the whole and that means I
have to understand that I'm not a
separate thing and I have to be able to
progressively consider my relationship
with everything the impact of my choices
and be on everything and be able to
internalize the things that would have
been externalities into my choice making
process and not just at an individual
level but at a group level we're doing
group process and this becomes the
future of design as opposed to the
open-loop harm externalizing method that
we've had is how do we have
progressively more Omni considerate
design that is more Omni positive that
is a safe vessel for the level of effect
that is the idea of us being separate
from the world in many ways it's modern
because if you look at how some of the
what we call primitive tribes looked at
themselves and considered themselves it
was not the same they considered
themselves a lot more connected with
everything or just a small part of the
whole but like you said those tribes a
lot of them got killed by the other
tribes who considered themselves as more
separate and so how we place our sense
of agency and where we place our sense
of what is us and what is not us
actually has a very significant effect
on the outcomes and I think that in the
modern world a lot of people don't even
realize that this sense of separation
between self and world is a construct
that because we have certain definitions
you know scientific definitions or
whatever of where body ends and the
environment begins but if you start
deconstructing that and you can do it
through any number of things like just
intellectually deconstructing it or in
deep meditation looking at where like
your sense of self ends and sense of the
world begins it just breaks down that
sense of self is very strong and maybe
it is because capacity to affect
the environment is so much higher now
with technologies and all these tools
that kind of have become the extension
of ourselves maybe that's part of the
reason why people are so attached to
their sense of self because they
actually see the effect so strongly
whereas in the past people would see the
effects of nature a lot more strongly
than the effects of themselves
I think it's strong because of the
dynamic of experience in time you know
you don't see the direct results of your
actions coming back to you after a long
time until they become external and
separate and then when they come back at
someone else or something else affecting
you in a way you don't want to be
affected but you don't loop it back to
your original actions this is something
I've been thinking about quite a lot as
you've been talking Daniel is this sort
of natural experience that people have
and how these theories might contradict
those natural experiences even though
the natural experience is incorrect how
do we communicate these concepts in a
way that even though it can conflict
with someone's day to day
minute-by-minute experience but I could
cause them to think differently and
expand their identity but people's
experience is also dictated by their
concepts you know like those two things
affect each other because when people
have an idea about how a certain thing
is they tend to experience it in a way
that is consistent with that idea mmm
true so if we look at the tribes that
had more of a there's a web of life and
we're a strand in it few that we were
mentioning long ago they had a informal
theory of choice they might have had
some moral or ethical principles this
was not like a formal systems of
formalized ethics but they had some
theory and they had a very weak theory
of causation they saw diseases happened
by like ghosts and obviously didn't know
how to work with tech all that well and
etc so they didn't make it through with
other people that understood causation
better and so the causation leads to
physical adaptive advantage and there's
a theory of choice it's just a theory of
choice called win out win those games
right game
there's only theory of choice it's just
that that theory is tapping out right
that theory itself leads to its own
self-determination ones because as the
power keeps getting larger it becomes
more than you can keep winning at all we
said this before the win-lose eventually
becomes lose-lose Omni lose lose when
you have levels of war that nobody can
win when you have tragedy of the Commons
that are completely ruined Commons you
know when you those types of dynamics
when you have an information ecology
that's so broken from the incentive to
dissing form that nobody has any idea
what the is true so you either
figure out how to create Omni win-win as
a new solution against win-lose other
than members or you get Omni lose-lose
as the inevitable byproduct of trying to
keep winders and it's funny because
there's this very mythopoetic
way of thinking about what we're talking
about that is otherwise a very kind of
just technically clear thing you know we
said scaling to get the power of gods we
have to have love wisdom of God's a guy
that similarly we say we either create
Omni win-win or we get Omni lose-lose it
sounds a lot like heaven or hell on the
other side of purgatory and we get some
hard choices to make and we might even
ask if maybe those stories had were
metaphors for seeing hey we're making
choices that we kept getting more
powerful that this would be problematic
and you know not just the heaven and
hell and purgatory story but we're in a
Kali Yuga and you know Satya is the next
phase there's there's a lot of these
stories that in a Joseph Campbell like
way we can say like oh that's actually a
very interesting way to think about
where we're at right now but we can't
depend on Jesus to come back and solve
it or aliens to come fix it for us or a
fifth dimensional library from the
galactic center or whatever it is we
have to actually become that Jesus for
those aliens we have to actually become
a being that has the right capacity to
make the right choices and you know do
the right sense making the right choice
making so it is true that it being this
a shit-ton more effective at good choice
making needs to comes all these things
then the types of beings we've been it's
just we have to become them and with
regard to Mike your question on what
experiences are
natural obviously it's natural for me to
think in English not Mandarin but if I
grew up in China I would think in
Mandarin and that would be natural and
because I think in English I have
certain constructs of thought
linguistically that are related to the
syntax of English that if I thought in
Mandarin would be different my aesthetic
would be different and if I grew up in
the plane to the Sioux Indians what
would be natural to me would be
different and my identity ethics
aesthetics etc so this is very
conditioned now in the modern world
where we experience Rubik wit ously
feeling separate we also experienced a
bit courtesy feeling alone and lonely
not just alone be lonely and we can see
that loneliness as a major source of
depression anxiety and ultimately even
suicidal impulse is pretty much
ubiquitous in the developed world we say
is that a natural experience well it's
certainly a new bit courtesy conditioned
one was there ever a person in an
indigenous tribe throughout the history
two and a half million years of hominid
history or turn fifty thousand years of
Homo Sapien history that felt lonely not
that much you live in a tribe with 150
people that know every thing
about you that you've known forever and
that you can fully depend on you know
everything about them and you got no you
know secrets and lonely it's not really
a thing right and separate from them is
not really a thing and so we say natural
I think what you mean is conditioned
ubiquitously then you have to say
alright so humans are more susceptible
to being conditioned by their
environment than most creatures
obviously a dog that grows up in the
wild or captivity is going to be
different but we're even more
susceptible because and this is a really
important thing to understand about
sapiens the gorilla or the chimp that's
close to us can grab onto its mom's fur
in the first five minutes while she
moves around and we can't even move our
head for three months and a horse is
going to get up and walk in 20 minutes
and it takes us a year and just to have
a real sense like to do the calculation
how many 20 minutes fit into a year to
get how many multiples it takes us to be
adaptive in the most simple way and
we're like well we are embryos for an
extraordinarily long
of time we're helpless for an
extraordinarily long period of time why
is that well because the horse comes
kind of pre-programmed how to be a horse
it's gonna be a horse pretty much the
same from generation to generation in a
while and so it coming pre-programmed
works because it adapted to fit its
environment and so then it can hold the
code of how to be adaptive in
relationship to its environment but it
used to be really adaptive to throw
Spears and probably none of us are all
that good at throwing spears and we're
pretty adaptive because we like text and
podcasts and that they didn't do
because what's adaptive for us changes
pretty rapidly because unlike the other
creatures that are the product of their
environment we are as tool evolvers
creatures that not only go and exploit
every Miche gorillas didn't leave and go
find islands and be in the water and go
to the Arctic and right like they
adapted to a niche we went and found
every niche and then we made new niches
right we made cities and treehouses and
all kinds of as a result we had to
learn how to adapt to the new world that
we were in because we were gonna keep
creating new worlds finding and creating
new worlds so as babies were born pretty
much open to just start imprinting what
world of my end and how do I not have a
genetic program to do this but how do I
connect Tomic lis program to be able to
do this but it's not just in childhood
cuz we can change stuff so fast as the
whole tribe might get up and leave and
go somewhere else we went from gathering
to farming or to hunting right like
something super different this is why we
need adult neuroplasticity to be able to
change our kind of basal orientation
even later in life and so we are
radically affected by our environments
and it's part of our adaptive advantage
and we are mostly affected by our social
environments by what the other people
around us are paying attention to in
doing and what the nature of the
relationships are like you'll notice
that mostly now people live in nuclear
family homes on their own don't interact
with other people all that much and then
they spend all their time addictively
looking at other people on screens they
watch TV and their watch people and then
they go to Facebook and they look at
people and they read news articles about
people they're fascinated by
people but then we're conditioned
currently to both suck at interacting
with people too capitalism has largely
been a way
not needing each other directly and
being able to indirectly inter mediate
needing each other through money right
so the money can just buy whatever I
need so I don't actually have to have
friends or neighbors or you know give a
 about anybody or have anyone give a
 about me and that seems really
convenient and everybody is in a crisis
of loneliness at home looking at people
hoping that they're getting likes which
are not real relationships this is
basically sugar rather than nutrients
this is porn rather than a real
relationship this is a hyper normal
stimuli having co-opted real stimuli but
also having desensitized us to real
stimuli well being comprehensively bad
for us so in he'll asked how could
people have a different experience
realizing that we are conditioned by our
environment to think in words of a
certain language to experience in a
certain way I could say lots of things
that won't matter I could say go spend
more time in nature but nobody will do
it
we both know other people listen to
podcast nobody will do it maybe one time
and then their life is busy and they
will be the product of their amount
again very largely and because the
relationship with us here was a tiny
part of all of the relationships that
were influencing and so I could say go
spend time in nature and I could say you
have some good psychedelic journeys and
you know do this kind of breath work and
contemplate that the atoms that make up
your body where plants not that long ago
I but there would just be nice words to
say that wouldn't perfecting people that
much if you want to ask how could people
really change their experience only
thing I can say that is statistically
really going to work is immerse yourself
in an environment that makes that likely
around people that are doing them so if
you went and lived as a tribe for a
while in the Amazon you go live with the
Ottawa or something you will experience
the world differently before a couple
weeks passes you will start hearing
things in a different way experiencing
yourself in a different way feeling a
connection to people in a different way
and if you even change the group of
people you're hanging out around at what
they're motivated by and what they think
about and you change the quality of your
relationships with them you will end up
changing the basis of what seems like
natural experience to you
alright that was part two of our
interview with Daniel's Martin Berger on
the generator function of existential
risks to listen to part one and part
three and get all the links and show
notes go to future thinkers org slash 57
and to check out our sponsor qualia go
to future thinkers org slash brain hat
if you new to the show and you like a
list of our top episodes and resources
go to future thinkers org slash
start if you want to sponsor our show go
to feature thinkers that org slash
sponsor if you like our podcasts leave
us a rating and a review on iTunes and
elsewhere it helps others find the show
and we really appreciate it thanks for
listening and we'll see you in the next
episode
[Applause]
[Music]