[Music]
so this is the second part of our
hopefully ongoing series with John Bob a
key and Jordan Greenhalgh which was
really fascinating we caught up for
about an hour a couple of weeks ago and
where we got to at that point was John I
think you were just asking Jordan about
his concept of simulated thinking and
simulated thinking versus genuine
thinking and how that maps onto your
concept of do I use your
concept of John and then maybe
Jordan pick up and say if there are any
parallels between the two yeah so the
Kant thinks David and it's good to see
you again Jordan there the context was
Jordan had given a very clear exposition
of you know his take I'd spoken about
the meeting crisis in a mental fog and
then he had talked about how that crisis
can be exemplified in a personal way and
then that brought up this this idea of
people people getting into a mental fog
and what how that plays out and then he
introduced the distinction well
discussed thing that state between
simulated thinking and I believe he said
real thinking and that that really
struck a chord with me because that
seems to connect to some really
important ideas you know Heidegger's
idea about you know real thinking as
opposed to just getting caught up in the
cultural code and then and that that has
had an influence on my thinking about
this idea of self deception and
bullshitting oneself and that the idea
is taken from Harry Frankfurt's work his
seminal essay on in which
Frankfurt made an important distinction
between lying and bullshitting this is
relevant in two ways because as he
pointed out in the essays what I think
20 years old now you know everybody
senses that is rising and I
think that's one of the symptoms of the
meaning crisis so
cultural level it's important but I
think it's also important for
self-deception and when I let me explain
why
so the liar is committed to manipulating
you by your commitment through the truth
of your beliefs so if I get you to
believe that Susan loves you when she
doesn't I can manipulate your behavior
accordingly because you're committed to
acting on the basis of the truth okay
now Franklin pointed out that unlike the
liar the artist doesn't work
that way the artist manipulates
you by getting you indifferent to
whether or not something is true and
then I sort of develop that a little bit
by something that I think is strongly
implied in Frankfurt's work which is the
 artist manipulates you like oh
not only getting you indifferent to the
truth but by getting you caught up in
the salience of what's being said how
catchy it is and so a prototypical
example of this is political discourse
or advertising in which the advertiser
presents something that you know is not
true you see somebody drinking alcohol
in a bar right and they're immediately
surrounded by happy attractive people
and with that I've never seen that in
the bar in my life and everybody knows
it's not true and that's important
because right away right you think oh
well I know that's not true
but you're actually losing in that game
because now you're indifferent to
whether or not it's true and the thing
that matters is right the alcohol has
been made salient to you by its
association with sexuality success and
you go out and buy the alcohol that's
precisely why the advertisers for all
the money in now that's a prototypical
instance of because you're made
indifferent to the truth and then you're
caught up in sailing now why does that
relevant to self-deception and this is
where I think it might tie in with
Jordans distinction I take it that you
can't and there's a lot of philosophers
who argue about this and I think many of
them come to the similar conclusion you
can't really lie to yourself you can't
say well I know Susan doesn't love me
but I'll say it and you know because
saying something to yourself is it the
same thing as believing it believing is
not something you can
as an active will you can desire you can
hope you can will but you can't just
sort of make yourself believe and then
that's important because then the common
metaphor we have would sort of situate
us at the propositional level I think
incorrectly for self deception is we lie
to ourselves whereas I think what we do
is ourselves because well we
can't directly manipulate belief what we
can directly manipulate with our
attention is salience I can make
something salient to you just by getting
you to attend to it like you know how's
your right hand doing right now
now what's salient to you it stands out
for you it gets your attention but the
trick the interesting thing about
attention is it's not only something we
direct it's something that grabs us so
also salient for you it grabs your
attention and so attention as this
self-organizing capacity which makes it
tremendously adaptive but it also makes
it liable in this following fashion
you know the advertiser directs your
attention towards the alcohol in these
other stimuli that makes the alcohol
more salient to you that's gonna catch
your attention more often which makes it
more salient to and then you get
deceived and you can do the same thing
with yourself you can deceive yourself
by getting a walk by not paying
attention to how you're paying attention
you can get caught up in this Dilla
Terius
self-organization of your attention that
gets you caught in this sort of salient
spiral and that leads you to have your
behavior directed in a way in which the
salience of the information is being
disconnected from your evaluation of its
truth its realness its moral goodness
etc and I find that this is a pervasive
pattern in a lot of people's cognition I
think when you're looking into a lot of
what therapists are working with they're
often trying to break out of salience
misdirection oh just teach talk to him
one more minute I think that'll give
Jordan a lot to work with so one of the
things I talk about when people are
doing therapeutic work is aspect
disguise so here's a prototypical
example somebody comes in to therapy and
they know oh you know
have a problem I'm too stubborn
everybody says I'm too stubborn I got to
change my stubbornness and the therapist
is okay and then you talk off you go
away and and you come around and you say
tell me something you really like about
yourself like you really identify with
it oh I'm really persistent I stick with
things and I keep going no matter what
and it's like mmm so what's happening is
they're there they're actually talking
about the same thing without realizing
it because they're changing the salience
of this particular mental feature right
and when they when they're seeking help
they're picking up on the naked are
making salient the negative features but
when they're identifying right they're
picking up on the positive features and
so they themselves in that way
and so I'm trying to give a couple of
very concrete examples for you to work
with Jordan that's what I mean by
bullshitting yourself and how it's
working at this attentional level and
the level at which were sort of creating
our identities in our interactions
wow that's great that was I have felt as
we went through that actually for there
was a journey and just that little tiny
bit
setting up the larger story my sense is
that there's actually something very
interesting to be found here the
physical shape of it it almost feels
like a like a particular geometry
I noticed I'm actually a little bit a
little bit of bashed it feels like it's
maybe more than I feel that at least I
person can Congrats but I'm also excited
to see if by venturing in that direction
something actually emerges between us
which would be wonderful good and I
expect that if it does it'll be largely
because you were here because this is
definitely a place where well you know
what you're talking about I'm sort of
punching vigorously in the direction so
the distinction that I tried to make in
this concept simulated thinking and just
real thinking action was based in the in
the in the in the conversation or the
way that I expressed it on a more
foundational distinction between habit
mode and explore mode
and so the notion is that there's an in
normal thinking there's a fluid
relationship between habit mode and
explore mode where those those aspects
of life that are most they can be I
didn't recognize as being more or less
identical to circumstances that we've
dealt with in the past and therefore can
be addressed effectively using well-worn
habits are the appropriate domain of
habit mode I've actually learned that
apparently Brits notice that Americans
because we've been driving more and
longer drive and haven't moved in with
it's actually a little bit frightening
right okay talk and think while driving
in a way that isn't ordinary for them
right right and then of course we have
Explorer mode where we're were quite
specific
not allowing what's happening to be run
into habits of thinking in habits of
acting but rather are moving more slowly
through experience and paying attention
in a more open-ended way seeking
potential patterns that may or may not
be arising for which to respond this is
ordinary thinking and the notion that I
propose that there's this kind of an
Eddy that can enter into when there's a
particular form of habit mode that
presents itself as being seeking mode
and then begins the process of eating
the normal fluid relationships that we
find ourselves in habit mode and
thinking that we're thinking normally
and now we're najran simulated thinking
oh let me let me see if I can point it
to some specific cognitive mechanisms
that I wear of it I think they fit into
the model you just put so let's say a
good example of simulated thinking in
which habit thinking I'm trying to use
your terms carefully here is being
extended into what looks like
exploration but isn't would be something
like the confirmation bias the
confirmation bias is you look like
you're exploring but you're not really
exploring because you're only looking
for information that will already
confirm your beliefs
don't look for any information that will
actually challenge it so while it looks
like you're doing research or exploring
you're actually not doing that you're
actually just reinforcing the beliefs
you have because you're falling prey to
the confirmation bias and then of course
this is one of the things that drives
echo-chamber II in social media it just
reinforces it very very quickly and that
strikes me as a good instance of what
you're talking about because of course
you should look for confirmation when
you're doing exploration but right but
it's a bias precisely because it only
makes the confirming evidence salient
and you don't direct attention towards
something that might dis confirm your
belief and so that's a prototypical
incidence of bullshitting yourself
and so the confirmation bias would be a
lynchpin between sort of habit thinking
pretending to be exploratory thinking
that is also quintessentially an
instance of are you familiar
with the work at anchor just if tantor's
work and the Tainter curve you know all
right this is this I think this is going
to be badass all right check this out so
painters work is anthropological so he
takes a look at the book the big book
the main book is the the collapse of
complex societies oh I have used book
I'm gonna read it I know nothing about
it I'm a draw I'm interested in it
I I got the book and I want to read it
okay go ahead on the top 5 top 5 list so
spoiler alert but the the proposition is
here is that in the context of a society
so a group of people who are working
together and communicating with each
other and building an increasingly
sophisticated capacity to engage in a
certain exploration of Technology and
relationship to a given resource so
learning how to extract petroleum better
or bronze in the bronze age or something
like that bronze in the bronze age food
corn in there and the Mayan Empire right
right and what and what you see is
there's there's actually it's it's it's
really an amazing thing that he was able
to suss out because it's there's two
distinct drivers
happen had simultaneous and his curves
are superimposed on each other so one
has to do with a series of what are now
pretty well understood s curves that are
associated with what happens when you're
engaging in innovation
so innovation has a characteristic of
exploring for a while with little upside
until it hits some set of structures
that seem to work and then it exploits
those structures and you get an
acceleration and then you could have
tapped out everything that you can and
kind of come to the top of the S curve
you get the exact same curve in
psychology when you're studying insight
problem-solving mmm well and I'm
guessing for the same reason actually I
guess it is actually something
fundamental about the nature of a
particular mode of being in relationship
with reality sure yeah you were you're
proposing an isomorphism that's what
we're exploring yeah yeah exactly and so
awesome okay so so in the tape thing
what you have is on the one hand you've
got that dynamic so in the beginning you
have I start and then on the other hand
you have the dynamic of the some
relatively increasing difficulty of
getting access to the resource under the
low-hanging fruit in the beginning while
you're technology for extracting
petroleum really sucks petroleum is
relatively easy to get right so you've
got like X capacity and then you you
increase your technology and and
petroleum is still relatively easy to
get she actually get a significant
increase on X but then you've harvested
all the low-hanging fruit and so you're
noticing is that it's harder to get
because you're actually getting all the
low-hanging fruits your technology has
to get better to keep on but you've
still got a lot of room in improvement
of technology so your technology does
keep in it right it gets a lot better so
you don't just keep up you actually
accelerate so you see this acceleration
curve right but what that happening is
as you begin to move up the s-curve in
technology you're also beginning to
cross
what is a obviously it very much depends
on the particular it is the resource but
a different kind of curve that tends to
have a depletion characteristic on the
resource right and
and you're also taking the resource and
making it more and more fundamental to
the society itself this is the that
third piece is crucial so you you get to
a point where you actually find yourself
not just kind of liking or enjoying or
be rewarded by investments in technology
you're certainly in the red Queens race
we actually have your must continue to
actually increase your investment in
technology just to keep pace but you're
still actually getting a positive return
on investment in in in Rd because
there's still plenty of resource to find
there's still plenty of room in the
technology curve but you hit a certain
inflection point where you've moved from
a highly very fluid seeking optionality
to a oh wait now the society if we if we
start to slow down what we're doing
we're gonna feel the pinch at the social
level we're gonna feel an unpleasantness
as the from the neurological level the
serotonin does not continue to flow
right but then you start getting
yourself into a real problem because as
the technology begins to move through
the curve you're actually now having to
increase the the amount of investment
just to continue to stay at pay so now
you've moved from an acceleration mode
in in the fundamental curve to a
velocity mode so acceleration is
actually decreasing velocities continue
to increase so it still feels like
you're getting a positive ROI in fact
you are but the acceleration is slowing
down and this is where you actually
teachers model where you hit the key
pivot point like right here is the point
where society could shift like here's
like you know 1975-1977 in oil and
America were like okay now we've made a
concerted effort to move consciously to
a different infrastructure we still have
enough resource and enough runway in
technology in innovation space and we're
still not so fully addicted to the
resource that pivoting from an oil based
economy to an electronic tricity based
economy while painful is quite doable
but generally speaking and this is where
the the similarity really rain from
you're generally speaking you don't
generally speaking the cost of changing
your mind
and the ability to yourself
into continuing down this road causes
you not to almost ever as a society make
the choice to switch at that point then
you get yourself into the top of the
curve where now the technology is
beginning to show less and less return
so now we're past oil derricks in the in
the oceans in the 60s and 70s now we're
starting to get into the deepwater
horizon where you're actually having a
real crazy deep to get returning or
fracking to be able to and the resource
is now getting to the point where you're
on the other side of the Hubble curve in
oil and you're actually getting
depleting the resources are now getting
past there the peak um so you're having
to really scramble the technology is
incredible just to keep pace and now
you're really locked into something
because the society has now made not
just an investment in oil it's made a
massive investment in the capacity like
think about how how deeply into
intertwine and while you're doing this
think about this from a psychological
and neurological level right how deeply
intertwined things are like how the
finance industry is connected to the
petroleum industry and the distribution
industry and the universities that are
producing technical degrees that are
plugging into this infrastructure and of
course the automotive industry and
gasoline I mean this hugely complicated
fabric of a massive commitment to
something that is now in the tantrum
story reaching a point where it's no
longer sustainable and you hear a crisis
through one of multiple different
pathways so then just take that same
exact story and we map it to the story
of and simulated thinking so I
have a in simulated thinking what I have
is I have an a reasonably optimized
habit structure able to respond to life
in some rapid and at least initially
perhaps very effective way like at the
store that I like to use is just math
right if the way we teach kids math
particularly arithmetic is through habit
mode right
it wasn't intelligent my early 30s
before I actually grasp even
multiplication but I can multiply when I
can be a calculator yeah but I could not
I didn't understand what was going on
right
so I've been given this tool that is
very effective by the way I can build
more on I can actually do physics on the
basis of my capacity to be a calculator
even though I still don't understand
what's actually happening sure I can
build more and more on this
infrastructure and it's based on a
certain ability of every individual
human having a certain capacity to do
certain things with a certain degree of
precision and a certain degree of
reliability of repeatability and I can
build more and more social fabric on top
of that sure okay sorry that's I am
there there's more but that's right I'm
just ready to tail off okay so the idea
is then that let me see I'm gonna
explain back what I what I heard you say
right so the idea is that's sort of
something that is initially very
adaptive and it's being used and it gets
sort of automatic that's you know
automatic thinking right because it's
precisely because of its activity and
then you know you you build more and
more on top of that foundation the way
more and more of American culture and
industry was built on top of the
petroleum right but as you get more and
more committed to it its ability to
extract reward from the environment
starts to decrease because the world
right has limited resources it's
dynamically changing and so you have to
invest more and more in getting what you
used to get from it and then the idea is
at some point right something like
diminishing returns sets in and now
you're into a situation where you're
sort of catastrophic lis committed to
something that is ultimately doomed to
fail is that the is that the model that
right do I have it right yeah the thing
I would want to make sure it's all in
there is when you said
automated I would also put in optimize
sure there's something fundamental out
the notion of optimization that I think
is key to the key to the story give you
the model so well let me make sure I use
this word the same way you do I mean so
there's two senses of optimize there's
there's local optimization right which
is I'm optimized in this context and
there's law there's longitudinal
optimization in which what I want to do
is I want to play the meta game of
keeping open my ability to optimize
across new context right this this is
like the difference between that I being
merely logical and then trying to be
comprehensively rational in one's life
yeah great and without that would say is
it's it's the former yeah yeah it's the
the line it's an effort to simulate the
latter by virtue of a limit as X limit
as the former approaches the latter and
that I think is where things get really
interesting
so is that so when you equivocate then
I'd like like you have you ever calculus
analogy as a form of equivocation but
when you equivocate between actually
pursuing their meta optimality and just
folding something into whatever
automated system you're using that's the
moment of is that what you're
see now right you're identifying two
things that are exactly not identical in
the important way in that one has the
option of renewing your capacity for
exploration and innovation right and the
other has precisely that the the effect
of keeping you inside your confirmation
bias keeping you inside the the habitual
mode of thinking is that is that correct
yeah yeah that's it well that's very
interesting that so that that seems like
we can make a bridge here because I
don't know if you are where you are in
the series but I talked in the series
about mark Lewis's model of addiction
and he talks about it as a process of
reciprocal narrowing and let me see if
this works it's not it's it's not
isomorphic but I think there's something
here we can we can make a bridge so he
talked about wanting to undercut the
normal model of addiction which is the
the model of the disease model I have
this foreign substance in me and it's
just compelling me to behave and the
problem with the disease model is it
doesn't it doesn't situate well with the
actual empirical data if a lot of people
will spontaneously stop their addiction
just because the age for example
we have people like you know the Vietnam
soldiers that seem to be addicted to
heroin when they're in Nam but when they
return they just spontaneously give up
right and so the disease model doesn't
work very well and he's not the model
that looks like this the model is right
well what happens is I I take the drug
and that sort of hampers a little bit of
my cognitive flexibility in ways and
what that does is that alters well I'll
use a little bit of my language just to
speed things up it alters what I can
notice and pay attention to so my world
the options in my world shut down a bit
and then as the options in my world shut
down instead of breaking I sort of uh
Baldauf I commit to this world to some
degree and what that does is that
commitment actually then reduces my
cognitive flexibility right and now you
got a feedback loop as my cognitive
flexibility goes down my flex is what my
world gets less and less so you get what
he calls reciprocal narrowing until
eventually I can't be any different than
I am and I see no other options in the
world and then that's what addiction is
when I'd lost any ability to change my
identity and I see no other alternatives
in the world and that seems to me like
what you're describing like with the
American and culture with like with
petroleum there's just our identities as
petroleum consumers there's no other way
we can be right and there's no other
option for us we like and it's the same
thing with people in the Bronze Age or
the Mayans with the maize right is like
well this is who we are and and this is
the only way for us is that what you're
talking about because that's very how
much sort of like I mean in March I mean
I I know mark personally his colleague
and friend I think he's I think I mean I
think he's brilliant I think the work
he's doing on addiction is really
pivotal but I think I think that
connection is right then because that's
exactly a kind of right that's
where what you're finding Syria is right
affecting how you're coupled to the
world and then right then that that
impacts on what identities you can take
what force of development you can go
through and then it just narrows all the
way down so are you are you proposing
it sounds to me like what you're
proposing is that something like that is
happening in the individual that's
getting caught up in simulated thinking
they're basically right there they they
they look like they're exploring but
actually what they're doing is this
process of intensifying the reciprocal
narrowing between who they are and what
their world can be mm-hmm yeah is that
does that feels very nice okay good that
feels that feels very right that's a
there's a something very large like a
large synthesis that is kind of waiting
at the wings I can kind of seal it
around the periphery me too maybe too
large again but yeah this is good what
the reason that's in for somebody
because you know please no I was just
gonna say that that that brings an
opportunity to make a potential
connection that I think it's very
relevant to your notion of you know you
were talking about this this open
exploratory thing and sort of how much
we can hold I mean I proposed this to
mark directly because I proposed to him
well the possibility the actuality
because we have if this is a good
account of addiction the actuality of
reciprocal narrowing also needs there's
a real potential for the opposite which
is reciprocal opening reciprocal
realization right we're you know and I I
see this in plato's model of an agog a
right i I get more flexible than the
identities i can assume and that allows
me to explore the world more deeply as I
explore the world more deeply that adds
a flexibility to my cognitive grammar I
then write so you can see the opposite
you could reciprocally old then as
opposed to reciprocally narrowing and
the reason why I bring that up is I
think what you are trying to do in the
kinds of discourse I see you practicing
is exactly that I think you're trying to
I'm proposing to you the following I
propose to you that in order to deal
with this the reciprocal narrowing of
simulated thinking you're trying to
enact the opposite you're trying to
enact the reciprocal opening what do you
think of that yeah definitely yeah are
you
unfortunately I can't remember the
citation of the the woman whose theory
this this is but there was a philosopher
who was building from theory around
explaining complex systems she was
discussing the new no keep going yeah
exactly
exactly yeah pereira yeah the the notion
of enabling constraints in how wholes
have yeah yep and and it feel that
there's a relationship between enabling
constraints or contextual constraints
and these reciprocal narrowing where
there's some some structure whereby
there's some relationship there yes the
the place you're pointing is very much
in the right direction and I would say
that there's a no as its it the other
point the key point that you made
earlier about the distinction between a
local optimization and a more open-ended
organization of fundamentally
ontologically open-ended optimization it
needs to be held very centrally as a
proposition in the way that we relate to
reality right I think you intuitively
all the frame you yeah I was gonna say I
think that's really really cool because
sorry it's just resonating with you
right now a lot around Plato because the
distinction between Plato and Aristotle
as many people have explained it is
their attitude towards wonder Plato is
trying to ultimately expand wonder into
awe
right and whereas Aristotle thinks of
wonder as something that you want to
remove he identifies it too much with
curiosity right he wants to remove it
through the acquisition of knowledge
mm-hmm there's a lot of Aristotle's
around for very good reason right he's
the foundational figure of science in a
lot of ways I empathize with that I
empathize that a lot like I'm familiar
with him the Gilchrist's work yes of
course I mean I've talked about it in in
the courses when I talk about brain
lateralization and I've read also the
follow-up essay on the sort of the
interaction between his idea of
hemispheric asymmetry and clearly
something he's articulating as the
meaning crisis and so he thought that
that mapped on very well to your your
definition of Aristotle and Plato is it
almost sounds like the sort of ya know
deeply deeply because the the left
hemisphere I mean so the left hemisphere
is basically how you deal with
well-defined problems which fits in very
well with a lot of what Jordans talking
about just so cleanly right and when I'm
in well-defined problems what I want is
you know I want attention to detail I'm
pursuing certainty and clarity at all
cost because right when we're both in
familiar context if I can get the
details all beat you because we're both
familiar with the context right and so
and I went step by step processing
because the more I have step by step
processing the more fine-grained I can
make my behavior right and that's that
that's the left hemisphere and it's
great the problem is you face a lot of
ill-defined problems in your life like
predation right right when you know you
don't know where it's coming from you
don't know what that which kind of
predator it's gonna be and so the right
hemisphere sort of evolves for you know
grabbing the default and it's it's much
more tolerant of ambiguity because you
care too deeply which kind of predator
it is you know it's bigger moving
towards you get away from it it's faster
yeah right and and so but
interesting right what's interesting is
when you're watching and this is the
work of Bowman and Beaman and others
right on in sight what you can see in a
lot of people when they have a moment of
insight it's right you'll see a second
shift in that debate so people are
getting a problem they think it's a
familiar problem and the left
hemispheres they're a dominant and then
when they have the flash of insight
you'll often see a sudden shift of
activity to the right hemisphere right
because what the right hemisphere is
doing it's doing the meta thing that
Jordan and I are talking about the left
hemisphere that takes a here's your
formulated problem right but your set of
constraints it's all stable and then
you're moving through the search spaces
to find the solution but the right
hemisphere is doing is it's not moving
through a problem formulation it's
searching through all possible problem
formulations to find a better problem
for my formulation and when it finds
that and then it ships it back and why
that's important is because I would
argue that that notion of you know
wonder is much more a right hemispheric
thing and and the point about wonder and
and fuller makes at this point very well
in his book is it's not supposed to
bring us to a conclusion it's supposed
to bring us to a connection which is
that what I was why I saw what Jordan
was doing right what you're doing here
is he's not trying to bring about you
know well I need to get more oil but
blah blah blah I think I gotta get
getting this goal is just completely in
who and what I am no it's like no the
meta thing is no no there's this meta
issue of how do I stay connected to
reality and and the thing about wonder
is it's not solving my particular
problems what it's doing is keeping me
open to that connectedness to reality
and so I think there's deep connection
sorry for that pointing on that I think
there's deep connection between what
we're talking about in the reference
work yeah for sure yeah yeah and the and
the thing that's intriguing to me right
now is thinking about the how do we say
it maybe the sense of holes is a good
place so this is this is an Albert
ruff-ruff language like this is please
saw this left or the left or right brain
our were able to talk about them as
distinct things and anatomically they're
in fact actually separated right
connected by the corpus callosum which
would mean a fact actually physically
separating they still go about doing
their thing yeah
and yet for sure there's a way for them
to come together and behave in a fashion
which has the characteristic of being a
certain hole that has a different
sensation a different very much capacity
a different caste yes now this being a
thing this being a phenomenon in world
it's very unlikely that this this
capacity to to do this lives only inside
our skulls very unlikely seams insert to
actually propose that rather it is more
like this is a kind of a general
phenomenon that is available more
broadly and therefore and more
specifically is available more broadly
among us say for example right now I I
agree I totally agree that's why I
translated the McGilchrist language into
the extinct you between well to find any
other find problems groups or people can
also face well-defined versus
ill-defined problems yeah totally so and
groups of people can behave in a left
brain dominant fashion obligate left
brain right so they can become addicted
to that left brain and they can form
approach the context they find
themselves in as if it is a well-defined
context yes this is a mature company
right the the story of the innovators
dilemma is that embodied in a group of
people or and also groups of people
therefore by hypothesis can form other
ways of being in relationship with each
other that respond to the contact as
being an ill-defined problem and that is
a question mark right yeah so just to
make it I sort of saw a connection here
so you're proposing right distributed
cognitive level a level of distributed
cognition you can get a form of
bullshitting in which people are
equivocating they're treating an
ill-defined thing
as if it's still a well-defined thing
and that's another instance of simulated
thinking for a group of people as
opposed to an individual yeah the very
concrete so let's take a look at it
exactly how this happens because the
equivocation is not you know the word
 needs to be taken
seriously like it's yes it works it's
effective it's in fact in many ways it's
actually adaptive for a short period of
time the whole point is that it's
adapted for a short period of time
that's how the advertiser gets you to
buy the alcohol yeah and by the way the
alcohol may in fact make things look
better for a few minutes yes yep yeah so
I'm in a corporation I'm in a company
and I have a product a technology that
works really well and it's making a lot
of money right and and now I'm by the
way inside my corporation I'm following
my own little mini cater curve if you
think about how these things work where
I have a well-defined problem which is
the problem domain for which my initial
product was initially was targeted right
in the context of the ill-defined
reality of the larger world that is
constantly moving and adding ebbing and
flowing and changing and but it's not
like I'm just using a concrete example
like Blackberry or something like that
exactly like blackberry perfect so okay
blackberry has a blackberry and it's
defective and it works and they're
making some money off of it but of
course the market is changing so context
the context has changed but the thing
they're doing is optimized for a
particular context that is no longer the
current reality yes so they have a
choice as a company right they continue
to double down on the structures process
these technologies distribution channels
organizational structures of models that
are optimized for a context that is no
longer real but is real enough to
actually be able to benefit from high
profitability they can extract value
from it because they're efficient in in
a context yes nor do they try to leap
back to an innovation there
right and of course what we see
interesting enough is that it is almost
never the king that a corporation
chooses to kill the cash cow and
reprioritize becoming responsive to the
ill-defined reality that they find
themselves in right right right yeah
well if efficiency is very seductive
that way right
I mean I've argued in some of my work
that you know you're always in this
trade-off relationship between
efficiency and resiliency and efficiency
which is often associated with
exploiting resources rather than
exploring it's precisely addictive
because it intersects with you know what
temporal discounting is right this is
our bias to find present stimuli way
more salient was my language way more
salient than future stimuli this is why
when you that's why it's so hard is why
dieting has such a massive recidivism
rate because the the goal of losing
weight is is in the future and the
chocolate cake is right here now on the
countertop and so right the problem with
local efficiencies it tends to plug in
to that temporal discounting machinery
in very powerful ways so is like well
you know let's just do it another month
because we'll still get more cash right
now right and and you can do this in
experiments people will take the ten
dollars now rather than the hundred
dollars you know three weeks from now
kind of deal and there's something again
at that diff about temporal discounting
but again you need you need to be aware
of you need to be able to challenge it
yeah it is it's particularly maladaptive
and Excel in the domain of accelerating
change yes yes exponential curve
temporal discounting is is extinction
err you just don't know until you're
done exactly exactly exactly so so go
ahead go ahead Jordan yes I'm now having
both my friend Brett Weinstein's phrase
evolution goddess here but evolution
will kill us if we try to use it to get
us through here mm-hmm and then I've got
your your language I think it's your
language of psycho technologies yes if
we continue to try to proceed forward
use
as our mode of relationship with reality
the structure evolution put in place to
get us here
yes we're because those aren't
responsive to the reality we find
ourselves in and the solution that we've
developed that the the solution that
we've developed as humans boost by the
way is in fact why we are where we are
right it got us the psycho technology
the invention of psycho technology is a
gift that keeps on giving and it moves
us further and further away from the
context that gave rise to it in the
first place
second technology puts us on a very
different fitness landscape very nice
instead of characteristic dynamics and
so we have to actually formulate the
psycho tech the meta psycho technology
of engaging in the design of psycho
technology that are in fact responsive
to the reality that we are finding
ourselves in and that is a very good oh
I really like that that was really that
really saying to me the ladies put that
I really liked that a lot
I really resonated with me that was very
clear that was that was very insightful
that drew it all together very nicely so
it is is that oh yeah that that's very
interesting a very cool how would you
summarize that John was that that we
need to we need to mindfully or create
our own psycho technologies to get
through that's the key well the key
piece I got out of that is we need to
step back and create a meta psycho
technology for evaluating how we're
designing our our our psycho
technologies and this is analogous to in
problem-solving how you have to you have
to step back and have meta heuristics
that look at how you are creating and
selecting the heuristics you're going to
use there's a very strong parallel there
and what is it like and think about this
here's an example of exactly exactly
that you can't you can't logic your way
from a weaker logic to a stronger logic
okay look what I mean by that is let's
if I'm if I'm in predicate logic which
at which you know has you know all or
some or something like that
as modifiers I using the machinery of
that logic I can't work my way up to a
stronger logic there's no logical way to
do that I can't go from predicate logic
to modal logic because what I have to do
is I have to step out of the logic and
to step out of the logic and look at how
I'm designing my logic and I have to
introduce new axioms that are not found
within that logic now the interesting
thing about you is you do that
individual you as a child you keep going
through those changes where you step
outside because you go through
qualitative improvement in not only what
you think but how you can think the kind
of information processing you can do and
what I saw Jordan doing was proposing
exactly that kind of move will you step
out and you say no no we need a meta
psychic technology whose job it is right
and and the thing about that is it's got
to be sort of dynamically
self-correcting - right because it's got
a key it's got to keep open-ended in how
its monitoring the our our how we're
designing and coordinating our psycho
technologies and I find this really
relevant because I I keep talking about
we have to think about ecologies of
practices and ecologies of psychic
technologies we have to we have to think
about the relative strengths and
weaknesses all right and we have to we
have to use our technologies in a more
ecological way where they compensate and
balance and check each other and what
Jordan is proposing is right no but what
you need is the meta psychic technology
that sort of like I say open-ended
that's actually helping to realize that
that's what I saw is really crucial did
that help or did that just make it more
convoluted I'm not in my head so
everything you're saying is yes yes yes
so David did it help
yeah I'm do you have a sense of what
that looks like a matter sico technology
can you can you make the matter more
real yeah so one thing one thing I would
argue is is that I think that has a lot
to do with what I'm talking about when
I'm talking about wisdom as opposed to
intelligence or even rightly so let let
me let me let me try and do this
concretely okay so let's say I
a particular sacred technology right
mindfulness that helps me do with
certain kinds of biases in my
attentional processes right and what it
does is it try to keep at bay all of
that influential machinery so I can
concentrate on my attentional processes
right and that's what mindfulness does
right but you don't want it you don't
want to permanently shut off your
inferential machinery you need it so you
have another psycho technology over here
called active open mindedness and what
it does is it prevents the inferential
machinery from all this salience
machinery because what the salience
machinery is doing is it's helping you
make insight the problem is if I if I
let that inappropriately bias my
inference
I'll keep jumping to conclusions right
and that's where you get a lot of bias
in your hand so what I want well I want
active open mindedness and I want
that's a cyclo technology and I want
mindfulness and then I want them in a
point of processing not adversarial I
want them an opponent process and kind
of like your parents sympathetic and
sympathetic nervous system and so what
you do is you have a higher order right
you have a higher order psycho
technology that's designed to try and
coordinate them together and make sure
that that check and balance relationship
between active open mindedness and
mindfulness is ongoing and adaptive if
if you're having a hard time imagining
it it's not surprising because we don't
know how to do it yet you look at the
thing that I'm talking about if you can
imagine it well then just please just
write it down and start doing it because
it's very much the thing and something
that John mentioned earlier in terms of
thinking about it in the context of say
childhood development or
human development particular child
development there's a a relationship
between the we might call the physical
layer the anatomical structure
particularly the neuroanatomical
structure but the whole body paint
specifically leveled about you're
talking about and this capacity to step
back from of course yes and so we might
imagine we might hypothesize that there
is something similar to that that is
necessary
in the context of distributed cognition
for us to be able to have a container a
capacity to be able to hold a meta
psycho technology of this sort I've got
a very simple okay I've got a computer
right you've got a computer we can
compute we can do computation we both do
spreadsheets like nobody's business
right until we have a network there's a
whole bunch of stuff that cannot happen
right and tell those commuters computer
computers can communicate with each
other so a network is a different kind
of thing and there's an entire category
of computational phenomena that they're
only just in the context of network
right that's that's an example so what
I'm proposing is that that's actually
not just that's that's actually but
pretty good metaphor it's a great
analogy because coach I've networked
brains together long before the internet
networked computers together exactly
when you go on an emergent property who
are you asking both either yeah I I mean
it depends what you mean I mean that's
for I mean that's a very philosophically
loaded term but it emerges in the sense
that it's not found amongst the
constituent components yeah yeah there's
novelty there in the competence of the
cell there's not ya know the system the
network can do things that the
individual computers can't do and that's
the same thing for cultures as cultures
can do things right so see what happens
there David is there's a hypothesis
there's a necessity to find a particular
location in culture space a particular
configuration or style or approach to
how we go about being human beings
together using grammar using structures
and capacities of being in relationship
to there's a particular the hope where
this is a finger the fingers crossed is
that there is one in culture space that
doesn't require some really deep actual
evolutionary and leap in the biological
sense
but that there's a spacing code there's
a location of culture space that gives
rise to a possibility of a space in
psychic technology space there is this
meta psycho technology which then gives
us the capacity to engage in meta design
again psycho technologies which then
feeds back on culture space and creates
a an escape velocity movement in the
overall fitness landscape and the
directionality of Perpetual openness so
is that is that what I'm referring to
the the collective intelligence concept
they're they're sort of feedback loops
of collecting collective intelligence
are you asking not something different I
was identifying it with work that I do
in cognitive science on what's called
distributed cognition the fact that a
lot of our problem-solving is done by
basically networking brains together via
cultural systems like you know it takes
it takes a network of people a cultural
system to run an airline it takes a
network of people to do irrigation for
example on the kind of scale that makes
a civilization possible individuals
can't they can't do that for themselves
that's how I was understanding it that
kind of thing I suppose that's a kind of
collective intelligence the thing in the
sense that systems of distributed
cognition can solve problems that
individuals do not have the processing
power to solve and I think with Jordan
is proposing is that at that level of
processing if you'll allow me that Park
silent lingo we have to find the Metis
like the technology that will help us
right at the cultural level design
psycho technologies is that is that what
I'm hearing exactly yep that's exactly
it that's cool yeah and we can and we
can point to the various approaches that
we can actually do a assessment of all
the various approaches to distributed
cognition then thus far have been found
and we can actually determine that none
of them can actually get to this
location like none of them have the
capacity they have a variety of
different limiting limiting factors on
either
scalability or on the boundary
conditions of the amount of cognition
that's actually available because of
diminishing returns for exam sir
yeah and so we can take a look at this
at the scope of the problem the the the
thing we're trying to accomplish we can
notice notice that the various tools for
achieving distribute cognition that have
dusts far been developed that have done
good work can't get us there and then
the crude can say okay great now we know
what we need to do at least vaguely is
new and then begin the process then well
how do you design things that are new
and of course the approach that you you
go after is you take a look at what are
constraints we're examples of what a
good design would consist of and and
then you do the sort of thing we're
doing right right now which is you you
notice where there are all these
characteristics like that that you can
say oh that's an example of the
right kind of thing right so this is
analogous or maybe stronger than analogy
to what I'm trying to do in the video
series right because I'm doing this
whole historical analysis because you're
proposing that we have to take a deep
look at our history right now see right
and then what I'm part of what I'm doing
is is is trying to also build towards
something that I think you're talking
about so here's a again we have to use
analogies I guess one of the things that
makes people good at insight
problem-solving this came out of Kaplan
and Simon's work is what's called the
notice invariance heuristic and what you
do is you look across all these
instances where you have failed to solve
the problem and you try and this is hard
to do and people vary in their capacity
to you try to notice what you're not
changing across all the failures because
because that that's often the thing that
you're most blind to right and that it's
misdirecting what you're finding salient
and if you can notice what's invariant
that can often help you to say well it's
it's not an algorithm it doesn't
guarantee anything but what it does is
it gives you a good place to look to
intervene for real change and that can
also often provoke the needed insight
yeah so David here
the concept of sovereignty becomes an
interesting thing to spend some time on
because if you take a look at the the
question of what why why why isn't it
easy for this to happen why is it
sometimes quite challenging to take a
look at what is not changing
I've lost these different experiments
and you can take a look at just a given
given individual human and say okay well
here's some pasta here's here's some
examples
there's many right there's a lot one
example might be I have a deeply deeply
tied like limbic system level connection
to some aspect of that thing and so my
pre cognitive processing is actually
already rejecting the analysis of that
on the basis of an actual fear of
version response to the possibility that
investigating in this area might in fact
be a threat to my personal physical
well-being right that's a very very
common and the kind of thing that if you
haven't built the psycho technology the
training to be able to have enough
embodied awareness of those kinds of
responses that you can actually notice
when that kind of thing is happening it
will come through a blind spot it'll be
an unconscious reaction that will make
you just go in circles and never know
why you're not actually digging deep
because you're simply avoiding it
altogether for very deep fundamental and
these days reasonably well understood
psychological reasons and of course we
can go through a long list of those so
it's a very long list of them there's
and then of course you do it this is
just us Jordan what do you would you
describe sovereignty as a psycho
technology yes
right or some cluster of psychic
technologies that describe a particular
capacity to be in response sure sure
really and by the way in is an
individual and then as an individual as
part of a group so you can talk about
the individual having sovereignty and
the relationship with what's happening
and they can talk about the individual
having sovereignty and relationship with
other individuals and they can talk
about that relationship having
sovereignty in the context that it finds
itself in right so it's a it continues
to go up and that's where it becomes
very challenging so John and I right now
are engaging in a conversation we're
both ready willing and able as
individuals to take risks with each
other and by the way take risks in pub
yeah which takes time like that's not a
that's not a trivial amount of work to
get to the point of being able to do
that and not to do it recklessly right
there's obviously certain typology that
will simply take risks for bad reasons
mm-hmm
so the the the psycho technologies of
sovereignty bring people into a place
where they have was by say by hypothesis
the highest capacity to be able to then
do the next level of work to be able to
enter into the kind of relationships
that give rise to and can begin to
discover the the structures the psycho
technologies that then support the
creation of a culture a distributed
cognition mode itself then is able to
finally give rise to the the meta psycho
technology which now are certain biggie
somewhere on Jewish then AutoCAD Otto
poetically put to them in form at a
lower level of detail in their nuance
the psychic technology structures that
give rise to sovereignty and the psycho
technology structures that give rise to
a stable form of this of this
distributed cognition now we've got a
thing now that's that is where we're
we're really getting into a good place
right I see that so two things came out
for me for that the first is of one way
we can ourselves is to keep
trying to keep equivocating between what
you're describing we need to do which is
we need to do this together in a very
deep sense of together and equivocating
and thinking oh no this is an individual
sort of theoretical innovation I have to
come up with right and it sounds to me
like no no what this is something that
has to take place within districts we
have to be participating in distributed
cognition not just talking about it in
order to analyze it but that sounded
like one of the things you that was an
important point and then the other one
was it sounded to me like because of the
way you you the way you were
exemplifying it that one of the
invariants that we're not noticing very
well is the fact
get to 10 we tend to be locked at the
propositional individual level as we
approach all our problems and it's sort
of inconceivable to us that there's a
way of solving these important problems
that's gonna make use of you know
participatory and prospective of knowing
within distributed cognition
is that also a fair point the second
point oh absolutely
this is a ubiquitous in fact I I I found
myself experiencing this very concretely
more than a decade ago when trying to
discuss this kind of thing well I could
actually be in conversation with an
individual I did it happen so many times
that I became I noticed the physicality
I think may have described this already
the physicality of it where a point was
reached where I could actually see the
pupil get wider and then get smaller as
the I think it's the paracin
parasympathetic nervous system is doing
that right yeah is essentially there's
something happening where there's a the
building up of an insight and the
feeling the recognition if that insight
leads to consequences that are well
scary and the individual actually
literally goes to a and almost
instantaneous shift and the
propositional logic like a again it's
the you can't build a stronger logic
from a weaker logic yeah the weaker
logic is actually able to hold it should
it's able to hold a relationship between
the the body in this case the limbic
system it triggers a limbic response to
be able to short-circuit the insight
that is ready to happen and it reboots
itself what was the second thing is that
it was almost aphasic where I would
actually find myself repeating the same
conversation because there was the
reboot was was not just a metaphor as a
hard shift in even memory was not what
was not held so yes there's a the
capacity to be able to be aware of the
degree to which our world has put us in
a place where we've been so radically
separated from many different modes of
knowing or understanding
I would call snowing transitional and
because Batory knowing oh yeah know it
and this there's a so much so much tide
at you know please please
I just wanted to comment on the reason I
call it knowing is because I want I want
to say that all of them are ways in
which we connect to reality it's not
just propositional not knowledge which
it's claims on truth you know procedural
has claims of power perspectival has
claims the presence and participatory
has claims of attunement right and and
these are all these all contribute to
our sense of being connected to reality
so I that's why I want to use the word
knowing so that I'm not giving one a
particular privilege yeah yeah men and
the path as I'm sure you're now like I
don't know how what happens in the in
the series but the the path of taking an
individual who has been developed in the
world we live in particularly in the
West and by the way in in the develop D
and how separated our our environment
hat has made us from these different
modes and they're now yeah how
separatist made it made it's not just
sort of temporally but separated in a
very deep way like I do believe it we
are identity connection or a sense of
survival capacity by virtue of being one
way and not being in the room getting to
the but actually just beginning to be
able yeah that's I mean that's what I
mean about the you know yeah you know
that the cognitive grammar and the sort
of reciprocal narrowing until we've
gotten to this point yes
culturally right so what you know the
second half of this this series is going
to try to you know unpack this dynamical
coupling and and this trade-off between
efficiency and resiliency in the notion
of relevance realization and how that is
essentially open-ended and as always you
know we should our attempts to try and
get I'm sorry I use this term because of
its horrible associations so it's used
deliberately whenever we try to get out
a final solution to what is relevant
or important to us we're actually doing
at the deepest kind of because
we are thinking that anything can be
intrinsically relevant or important
we're the only thing that's intrinsic is
the ongoing process of finding things
relevant and important and so that's
that's sort of the main gist of the
argument and trying to show how you know
we can if we can look at what fourth
generation cogs is telling us we can see
about how it's pointing at twenty us
back towards embodiment embeddedness
extended mind distributed cognition a
lot of the machinery the reason why I
can talk to you Jordan about a lot of
this machine is precisely because of
what's going on in fourth you know third
generation or what's called for economy
of science that's exactly what's going
on there as a crucial thing and then
what I try to do with my work is say ok
this machinery can radically change the
grammar by which we understand meaning
making and a connectedness to reality so
that's that's what the second half of
the series is going to be doing buy your
tickets everybody well I mean yeah we'll
see we'll see does this feel like a good
place to wrap up for for today yeah
that's fine with me yeah that's fine wow
this is great thank you this is so this
is really welcome I really enjoyed this
too that I mean that yeah really
wonderful I I I really enjoyed this a
lot it I hope you can do it again thank
you guys have some real gems in there
yes they do that also it felt like
you're sort of mining mining a rich seam
in real time so thank you very much for
allowing us to see that
rebel wisdom is a new sense making
platform bringing together the most
rebellious and inspiring thinkers from
around the world if you're enjoying our
content then you can help us make more
by becoming a subscriber which will give
you access to a load of exclusive films
also you can then join our group zoom
calls to discuss the ideas in the films
and you can send us ideas for questions
for upcoming interviews we're also
looking for talented people to help us
out with editing graphics music that
kind of thing and if you're a regular
viewer you'll know we talk a lot about
the value of embodying or actually
living out the ideas that we talk about
so that's why we run regular events in
London check out the links on the
website for more and hope to see you
soon
you