howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to jim
rut show com that's Jim ruts show com
today's guest is Jake Bornstein a senior
executive coach and the head of global
expansion that talent ISM an executive
coaching firm great to be here Jim
thinks are out for me yeah great to have
you you know I saw your presence on the
internet and I said hmm it's the kind of
guy I'd like to talk to and Jake has had
a rather interesting career trajectory
his first job at least the first I could
find was at Bridgewater associates
perhaps the world's leading
hedge fund right Ray Dalio you know who
got to be goddamn near the root of all
evil in fact a very good friend of mine
worked there for a while and went out
fleeing into the night fairly heavily
traumatized by the whole experience then
he went on to slow money the other
extreme one of the best and most well
thought out do-gooder organizations that
helps match investors and local
agriculture people to help up regulate
the local agriculture scene I actually
have a little nexus with them my wife
and I helped start a clone of slow money
here in Virginia it's all the clone with
changes we the group of us took the
ideas kept some of them change the other
ones back we had the head slow money guy
what the hell's his name I forget woody
- yeah woody task came out to one of our
organizing meetings and we got to meet
him and chat with him he was an
interesting fella
so yeah going from Bridgewater
associates to slow money he got to have
been the biggest career jump of
something I've ever seen then after that
he got into personal and business
coaching and has been doing that at his
own company with talent ISM since as far
as I can tell those of you who listen to
my show know I have a fairly extensive
business background and my passion in
business was the people side of
business recruiting development and
retention and culture and the fact one
of our earlier episodes episode 22
featured sarakin spotter Yerkes and
organizational design consultant and
someone who's worked for me in the past
in the recruiting and development side
of people so people know this is an area
of passion for me so this should be a
fun conversation so Jake your take on
your little epic journey here of career
arc from Bridgewater to talent ISM yeah
absolutely Jim and you know in many ways
my career arc reflects a principle I'll
be talking about more in terms of living
your life as an experiment continually
refining your clarity for what is
ultimately going to be meaningful to you
and where you can best deploy your
talents so going back to Bridgewater the
one thing that you said that I don't
know that I'm on the same page with is
Ray Dalio as the root of all evil I
think he has his flaws as do as do all
of us but I actually got a ton of value
out of my time there and the challenge
that ended up having me decide to leave
was actually something that they
encouraged which is thinking about
economic fundamentals and being
relentlessly curious about how does all
of this actually work when you drop the
academic jargon when you drop the theory
how does any of this actually work and
there was a white paper that was put out
a couple of years into my tenure there
where it was talking about how the
economic machine works and there was
this underlying assumption that it all
started off with that productivity can
be expected to grow sort of ad infinitum
for you know around 0.5 to 1.5% globally
and I read it and it just sort of blew
my mind because on one hand if you're
trying to you know trade on a three to
six month time horizon mostly on debt
and business cycles then fine it works
as a simplifying assumption but it
begged the question why would you think
that it's it's a it's a pretty strong
claim to make divorced from sort of the
underlying drivers of what actually
creates productivity what actually
creates value and that question led me
down this whole rabbit hole of heterodox
economic thinkers an environment
thinkers EF Schumacher was huge in my
perspective at that time and I decided
one day to basically just up and leave
which is sort of unusual Ford water
usually ends up kicking people out and
in that case I decided that my path
needed to go after this question of what
actually creates value that I was no
longer satisfied to sort of solve the
puzzles around these little Wiggles on
in the market but what actually drives
value in the world and how can I be a
part of creating that what is my highest
use towards that end and so I ended up
going on a journey around the world with
my extremely patient wife to check out
all of the people who claimed that they
were doing this that they were taking
another shot at the fundamentals of how
to organize economic activity so ended
up in a variety of different eco
villages I volunteered on a on a farm
for a bit studied permaculture study
different forestry management techniques
got involved with transition towns which
is based at totnes England with Rob
Hopkins did all of these different
things some degrowth activism and all of
it was based around this idea of you
know if some of the things I think
you've talked about on your show before
right that when you have essentially
Neil if the cognition dealing with
exponential growth and exponential
technology that you're inevitably headed
for a wall so that idea led me to the
concept that okay given my background
given that particular view of the system
what can I do and the answer to me that
seemed clearest was okay I need to help
formulate a new narrative around money
because that's how we allocate resources
in our society and in particular
shifting capital from the current game
which is which is optimizing for sort of
a false efficiency that that mostly
revolves around making public
externalities and shift it into an
alternative economic system that takes
those into account that sees benefit to
community benefit to environment benefit
to all the stakeholders as
of the ultimate return on capital so got
in touch with woody Tosh because he
seemed to be one of the leading lights
talking about that and that was what led
me to slow money great that's quite an
interesting idea and has had a lot of
effect both directly and they've guys
did a lot of projects there but also you
know various emulations like ours it
really has been I think a Fountainhead
of rethinking about how you relate
capital to building real value and what
real value means beyond just short-term
money on money return ya know I think
that's I think that's absolutely right
and the place and the place where that
breaks down to be honest is that you
have to actually be able to out-compete
the existing system and none none of the
responses that I saw from you know the
hippie ecovillages to you know to impact
investing trying to kind of sidecar the
system none of them actually
demonstrated the ability to out-compete
that the that the underlying system that
that we have the existing game was still
allocating resources and still
commanding power in such a way that that
they win and that ultimately prevented
scaling on all these sort of underlying
alternative attempts yeah I've
identified the same thing as I think as
you know I'm involved with an
organization or not it actually there's
no organization that's the beauty of it
a movement called game B and you know we
call the status quo the system as it is
game a you know and one of our deep
tenants which actually does tend to
drive away the hippie-dippie z' is that
we talk about the fact that game B must
become good enough at things like
coherence and sovereignty and working in
a high impactful way to actually be able
to out-compete
game a at least in some niches and to
therefore parasitize game a and pull
resources out of game a that we can
reinvest in building game B I'm with you
100% that you know what comes next will
not come from wishful thinking it has to
come from good thinking combined with
excellent execution
yeah and that and that question of
how do you actually how do you actually
design for for the things you're naming
autonomy sovereignty ability to
collectively deploy resources
effectively that's the question that's
the thing that I'm now obsessed with
that has led me serve on this on the on
the rest of my career journey is what is
the what is actually the key leverage
point or key leverage points that will
enable that to happen you know I think
at this point the notion that the
existing game a is in some sense self
terminating that it's no longer meeting
the needs of the majority of people who
play it etc etc that's becoming sort of
shockingly widespread since the when I
was working with some you know dealing
with the D growth folks back in you know
the what I guess was like 2012 2013 it
was absolutely fringe and now you're
seeing that as sort of part of
increasingly sort of the mainstream left
dialog which is which has been sort of
wild to see yet it's quite interesting
how you know we started the game B
movement in January 2013 and we were
just a bunch of Fringe Kooks at that
point and now we're growing
exponentially the time is right and my
prediction is that one of the
non-equilibrium effects of this koban 19
epidemic is going to be the ears to hear
are gonna increase by at least a factor
of 10 for the next nine to twelve months
this is the kind of wake up call where
people for once are heaved out of the
glassy hammock of Western high gloss
civilization and thrown on their ass and
have to think for themselves a little
bit and I suspect one of the side
effects is gonna be opening their minds
to realize this isn't the only game in
town I certainly hope so
and that to me is often the blind spot
in this kind of thinking right like it's
then it's sort of the the way that most
revolutions fail is a lot of focus on
okay if the existing system breaks or if
we can speed along that break then
people will realize that we've got the
answers and the way that it tends to
play out is oftentimes it's actually not
that hard to tear down a system and it
is remarkably hard to organize people
towards building something better the
the things that tend to fill those
sense-making gaps
you know you've I've listened to you
before talking about the different
attractors right you end up with
particularly and these days likely you
know technologically enabled fascism
things like that so to me the question
is okay if this is one of those moments
and there's likely to be more we're you
know we're pretty we're pressing in the
clutch and we're out of gear and we have
an opportunity to choose a new gear that
we're going to go into what is the
underlying frame what is the underlying
algorithm that actually tilts a
meaningful portion of the population
into productive means of collaborating
with each other going forward and moves
us towards sort of the more beautiful
attractor yep and my own view I'd love
to hear your view on this is I think
most people are not too interested in
abstract talk and theory and that the
way to really get people to move is to
actually show and so what I've been
pushing in the game be world through the
concept of game be ventures and proto
B's which would be smallish initially
communities that organize independently
using their own charters which may
differ between them if we can actually
show people a better way of life and
show that we actually can out-compete
game a at least in certain sectors then
the number of people who are amenable to
moving their flag goes up exponentially
the number of people who could make a
life-changing decision based on pure
intellect are relatively small so I'm
constantly trying to nudge our community
which frankly is overpopulated with
thinkers and talkers towards action and
that strikes me as indispensable also
this comes from my complex systems
thinking is it frankly the more you know
about complex systems the more you know
that you can't predict the unfolding of
a complex system very far and so one's
got to actually go out there and do
experiments be empirical learn do probes
on the environment and then react but
while being cognizant of the fact that
you're embedded in a very high
dimensional complex system and that
almost all your responses are gonna have
yes an anticipated effect but also some
unanticipated effects so it's this kind
of mix of epistemic modesty but also a
bias toward action
and thinking in high dimensional spaces
that strikes me is how we move from
theory to practice we are a hundred
percent aligned on that at least at the
theory level right which is always in
trouble I like that that combination
that you're saying epistemic humility
and a bias towards action that's that's
the heart of my focus and part of why
I'm excited about coaching and why I'm
excited about bringing these ideas into
into business is because I genuinely
believe that there are some psycho
technologies and some underlying frame
shifts particularly for people operating
at the leadership level that will
demonstrate this and they don't even
have to be bought into any notion of
game B they don't have to be bought into
any theoretical framework they don't
need to be bought in dead-even any
particular set of ideals there's an
underlying shift in the same way that it
became advantageous you know as you've
gotten to capitalism the simple shift of
oh the future might be the future is
likely to be better than the past
therefore you should use your
accumulated capital to invest in things
that will return on that improving
future that mindset shifted the world
without even needing all of that much
ideological buy-in and so there's a
fundamental idea that I'd love to get to
with you the notion of potential and
confusion and clarity that I believe can
be sort of the germ of that particularly
when handed over to leaders who at this
point given the way power laws work
actually control the vast majority of
how resources are allocated now let's
love to talk about that but before we
get to that let's dive in a little bit
into what it is you actually do it
talent ISM I pulled down off the website
something that I suppose you guys would
call your mission statement though when
I hear the word mission statement I want
to go back which is we constantly
explore and challenge the thinking that
stands in the way of unleashing human
potential including our own we consume
scientific economic and behavioral data
to test our approach and solutions we
take our latest thinking and offer it
for free to anyone who is interested
while embedding our proprietary insights
into solutions that help our clients
gain competitive advantage and achieve
their hardest goals that's pretty cool
so let's start out with that as a
framing and you know you can go from
that and then put it in the context of
why do game a people seek out your
services what is it that they need what
is it that you're delivering in the game
a context yeah absolutely Jim I love the
question and and by the way I do share
these sort of inherent vomit reflex when
I when I hear mission statements most of
the time and in some ways that's
actually a reasonable place to start
that there's this sort of inherent
incoherence in the way that most of us
organize towards shared goals right and
that's why mission statements by and
large are sets nonsense because they in
no way actually reflect with clarity the
reality of the eve of the leader who
formulated them or the people that
they're trying to work with so why the
game a players use us why is this
something what do we actually do it's
because it wins its but that's pretty
simple that's really what this boils
down to and the reason why I think our
approach wins relative to what you're
seeing mostly being done in the market
is it's a fundamental shift from
accomplishing goals through the work of
others by commanding and controlling
what they're doing to unleashing their
potential which ultimately is about the
collective speed of learning and the
sort of Taylorism scientific approach to
management that was used in the past
made sense in a relatively low change
environment right when you mostly just
needed people to interface with an
assembly line and do repeated things all
day it made sense to say you go sit over
here and you you know connect this piece
to this other piece and that was a
reasonable way to win in business and
that's still the fundamental
architecture behind the way most people
think about management in the current
environment with the amount of
connectivity the amount of sort of frame
relativism exponential tech
environmental limits power laws all of
those things creating this extraordinary
speed
change you can't win by doing the same
thing over and over and over again and
in fact if you are doing the same thing
over and over again you're probably
gonna get eaten by software so the way
that you're going to win as a human
trying to organize with other humans is
increasing the overall speed of learning
of everyone involved towards a shared
set of goals it makes perfect sense you
know in the core academic discipline I
come from which is evolutionary
computation where we let software write
itself by competing in Darwinian
fashions really amazing stuff we have
the concept of exploration and
exploitation and that neither is the
meta strategy you got to have the
appropriate mix of both your
organization needs to be exploring
whatever the appropriate amount is for
its Co evolutionary context but then
once it finds a vein of gold it's got to
mine that pretty efficiently right so
you you have kind of two different
tensions going on in developing the
culture around the company particularly
in a world like ours where the
co-evolutionary context is quite extreme
at least in many industries you got to
be light on your feet and be constantly
looking for what's next
but at the same time you can't give away
the ability to be the low-cost producer
or the more efficient player or whatever
the dimension a competition happens to
be in that niche once you find it that's
that's exactly right I mean I think you
you nailed it Jim and the one the one
variable that I would add particularly
in the context that we're talking about
because we're talking about humans
rather than software is human cognition
right that's the that's sort of the
linchpin of all of this right like why
is this so hard like at some level what
you're saying is you know cutting
through all the complexity is relatively
simple like use your excess resources to
explore check your assumptions and when
you find something that works double
down on it hard right that shouldn't be
that hard to play to run and yet nearly
every organization and every leader on
the planet is failing at it with very
few exceptions yeah absolutely I
remember I did part of my career and you
know one of the 250th biggest company
on earth that had a bunch of operating
divisions a very successful company
great culture in certain ways but way I
described it when I was in finally up
reached the c-level ranks and could
actually say such things in public was
hey you guys are on the top of Hills
you've entrenched yourself there and
guess what many of your hills are
shrinking you know we were essentially a
print and cd-rom publisher in 1992 right
hmm
literally 90 percent of our revenue came
from print and CD ROMs in 1992 and we
were the fourth biggest in our industry
but fortunately we were able to get the
attention of the powers that be and
convince him of this co-evolutionary
Fitness landscape idea and we started
doing things differently and we actually
started out competing our peers and by
2000 we were number one in our category
not bad right we did some smart things
along the way like sold our newspapers
at the top right moved our biggest most
lucrative business from being mostly
print bound to mostly online etc but the
natural inclination of successful
business people is to entrench where
they are right let's squeeze 1% out of
our cost this year and if we do we'll
get a gigantic bonus and it really takes
a whole bunch of leadership incentives
compensation plans and above all else
culture to overcome that natural
tendency or at least you know the common
tendency for people to entrench in place
and defend their position so what you
just laid out is the kernel of what we
do at talent ISM what you just described
is what I would call the path of clarity
and that's what it's going to take for
businesses to actually win in such a
fast changing environment and that
question that you're asking of why is it
give him that that's a winning strategy
do most people not follow it that is
that is the driving question that we are
after and that we work with people
through in our different service
offerings and you know there's a there's
another story I love along the lines of
what you're talking about where
blockbuster actually had a streaming
service in the works before Netflix and
it got shit-canned by a group of VPS who
were scared that it was going to
cannibalize in-store sales that's the
classic in a
phaidor's dilemma right one of the most
business books suck and are not worth
the dead trees that were sacrificed for
him but the innovators dilemma what
something Christensen that talks about
exactly that and in a kind of a complex
systems fashion that people to control
the revenue also unfortunately control
the investment which is an error and so
it's exceedingly hard to compete with a
successful franchise from inside yes so
what actually drives that and and ten
that and can be behavior that drives
that and the way to switch out of it
actually be reduced to an to a
simplistic enough sort of psycho
technology or mental algorithm that busy
executives can deploy it that's that's
the real question for me that would be
gold if you have that so why don't you
tell us about we give a little bit of of
the cognitive science of what's going on
then pivot from there into your practice
and your deliverables yes so at a at a
high level the core idea here is
confusion that most of us most of the
time are confused without realizing it
and because confusion shows up as a as a
neurological response when reality what
we're experiencing doesn't match our
existing mental models there's a gap
between what we were expecting and what
we are experiencing and this is deeply
hardwired into our biology right like we
we evolved as this sort of middle of the
food chain animal on this on the
savannahs of Africa where we needed to
be watching out for predators and at the
same time looking to exploit food
sources and the reality is that our
ancestors all survived because they
recognized that seeing a log and miss
identifying it as a crocodile was going
to lead to you surviving more than
seeing crocodiles and thinking that
their logs we're going to who are going
to see things that don't match that
don't match our mental model that get
our attention out of the reality and
most of the time what we are wired to do
is to go into threat to to identify the
new thing that doesn't match as some
sort of threat to us
there's a hole trigger of biological
responses that this creates
you know kicks off of obviously our
limbic system the amygdala triggers a
whole sort of cascade of hormonal
responses for nerding out on that stuff
I highly recommend looking at some of
Sapolsky x' work specifically behave and
why zebras don't get ulcers but the net
result is that our cognitive
architecture is designed to respond to
the unexpected by solving simple
problems right run away kill it
run from it or freeze and hope it goes
away fight flight freeze that is the
basic toolkit that we have been given to
deal with things that we did not expect
and that works in a world where most of
your threats are simple when your
threats are a tiger that you need to run
away from shutting down the part of you
that's going to go well is it actually a
tiger and does this tiger want to eat me
and maybe this is a different kind of
tiger that doesn't want to eat me
you're dead automatically you're dead
just run just run away from the tiger
and so we have a whole set of cognitive
architecture devoted to taking offline
our ability to step back and do complex
thinking what Daniel Kahneman calls our
type two thinking right that ability to
step back and break down a problem and
go through first principles and put hard
thinking into it that turns off most of
the time when facing something new and
the problem with that right is that in
our current environment our problems
most of the time aren't simple they are
actually complex right and complex
problems don't respond well to taking
our higher-level cognition offline so
the net result of that right is people
get faced with things that don't match
their mental model they get confused
that confusion rapidly converts into a
biological threat response and then the
way that you've resolved that
particularly in a complex system where
you don't kind of get the catharsis of
having actually run away from the tiger
is you retreat into certainty you
basically double down on your existing
mental model and so you know when you're
talking about say board dynamics or
company dynamics something happens it
doesn't make sense
sales don't go the way
want going to the blockbuster example
you see sort of this streaming thing on
the horizon whatever it is and you go to
protective narratives you go to
certainty you go to yeah I know how all
this works and I just need to defend
myself you know screw those screw those
guys who are trying to take away my
in-store sales screw that guy who wants
my job screw that guy who wants the
credit whatever it is we retreat to
these narratives that help us make sense
of our ongoing threat by retreating to
things that we already know that can
that we believe will protect us and that
path from confusion to threat to
certainty is the reason why most leaders
and most businesses fail to learn and
fail to unleash potential mmm I like it
I like it a lot in fact it ties into one
of my own theories of leadership I'd
love to get your thoughts on this
distinction one of my key superpowers I
think and I think my success at least is
anecdotal evidence that it was true I
was pretty successful in my business
career is that I concluded that
leadership was a mix of underlying
innate almost probably genetic stuff
some talent in certain domains
you know like communications and
interpersonal skills and some skills
that could be you know honed and
developed over time but let's get back
to the innate part it's interesting I
eventually developed a system where I
said we have sort of innate leadership
at the l1 l2 and l3 level L ones can
lead a squad l2 s can lead a company
accompany in the military sense a
hundred people and l3 can lead anything
essentially and that the emotional
underlying context of the sort you were
talking about that by the way I know
Sapolsky a little bit very interesting
character and certainly somebody who's
thinking about response in extreme
situations is very very valuable but
anyway you know for instance I know
about myself I have a somewhat unusual
wiring and then I'm a fight not flight
guy right as I tell people if I get into
a business war with them I say you know
you can kill me but you can't stop me
 I will not run and that's
relatively unusual in business most
business beef
or pussies right and you put up
a little fight and they fold and you
know I also never fall into the fear
reaction it's just like why would I be
fearful about something as trivial as
business you know at the end of the day
it's just a game as my wife and I used
to always say particularly in our
startup days when I did a number of
startups hey if we end up in a basement
apartment back in Somerville
Massachusetts who the cares right
you know we're young we're talented we
can you know do it again and again and
again and we don't really give a
about status through things or any that
kind of bad distractors however once I
got into big corporation world it was
very very different one of my favorite
stories I won't name names but one guy
that was in the c-level suite with me
making a low seven-figure income I mean
Jesus Christ low seven-figure w-2 and
spending ten percent more than that how
the hell could you even do it right but
he managed and so what does that mean
he's holding on to his desk in desperate
desperation there's nobody on earth that
would pay him what we were paying him at
most 30 percent or 40 percent of what
he's making and yet he somehow ratcheted
up this insane lifestyle and so that
means that he is utterly in fear of
losing this ridiculously idiotic
consumptive lifestyle should any
perturbation happen that causes him to
lose this tit job and of course
ironically that led him to make some bad
decisions which caused him to be fired
but to your point the short-term
reaction was fear so at least in part
when I'm looking for high-level ELLs L 2
s and L 3 s I'm looking at least in part
for people who have the genetic right
stuff you can teach the other stuff or
they could have achieved it on other
jobs but I'm not convinced that high
level leadership can be built that at
least it requires a substrate of right
cognitive type yeah I think that's I
mean listen I think the the
nature-nurture debate to me by and large
deserve a distraction like at the end of
the day we we have certain we have we
have certain potentialities built into
our genetics and those in turn will be
influenced by how they're deployed and
then that in turn will be deployed well
be matched against the context that were
in so one distinction that I would add
I think that its inherent in your story
right is that that inherent response
that you have of going to fight it
sounds like didn't work that well in the
big structured corporate environment
we're going to war wasn't an effective
response in that culture is that right
actually I was such a goddamn good war
fighter it worked great for me
I'll give you a hilarious bill and the
biggest parts because I did not give a
 right I would raise the ante as
high as I could because I didn't care
right I was also being paid a ridiculous
amount of money and I was living on 15%
of it right hence if I take account was
getting really fat really quickly they
gave a I'm not interested that
anyway I ran the tech division and in
particular I had a high tech division
that reported directly to me it was
about 800 people thousand people
something like that one day the new HR
 asshole who we stupidly hired
from some other big company put out this
dick taught that drug testing would
become mandatory right and my high tech
division was located in the DC area and
one of our big competitive advantages
was we were trying to out-compete the
big Beltway bandits you know the big
defense IT contractors Intelligence
Agency IT contractors etc and for
statutory reasons they were required to
have drug tests they were also required
due to administrative law to pay talent
based on resume rather than quality
which we arbitrage the out of that
right we're able to sell the labor of a
you know C++ programmer was seven years
experience for this price right and so
they just hired people based on their
resumes and paid them all the same
irrespective of their quality and we
highly arbitrage we'd pay the good ones
twenty five thirty percent more guess
what we got all the good ones they got
all the steps but anyway we also armed
on the drug testing well we didn't quite
make it explicit in our ads it came
pretty close but we also definitely got
the word out on the grapevine
we don't do drug testing in fact
everything else being equal if I found
out you did acid once or twice a year
that would be a plus right you'd have a
heightened consciousness about the world
he wants to mope a little reef where you
get home I don't give two right
but anyway this new HR exact
you know sends his dick tot that thou
shalt and I first called him up and said
hey X this doesn't work for me here's
why here's my recruiting strategy you
can look at our results we're kicking
everybody's ass without doubt we have
the most forward-leaning
effective organization and the whole
fifty thousand person corporation don't
want to do it and then of course he goes
you know I am the head of HR you will do
it and I go Norwell and then I sat down
with my ghostwriter
who was also my chief strategist nothing
better to have a chief strategist he's
also an impeccable wordsmith and we
wrote a two-page letter to the CEO
laying out our argument very forcefully
and very not quite confrontational eek I
had a great relationship with the CEO
but I didn't say it but it was more or
less him or me right and
again do I really give a if they
fire me no so I'm willing to go all-in
here they are sent the letter to the CEO
and just sort of biding my time you know
have no idea what will happen don't
really care it's the right thing to do
the next day I get a call from the CEO
and he goes Jim you're right
this was ridiculous no you should not
have to adhere to this policy it also
violates although by the way our
corporate doctrine of radical
decentralization and so the next day he
said to Heather Stern email to the head
of HR saying independent business units
may opt out of your policy end of story
yeah and the headline might my main
takeaway from this story is that your
business was operating with cultural
clarity and that's the and that's the
antidote to confusion like you were
clear that you were that you were
running an arbitrage in this particular
way that you were going to index to
talent no matter what that part of your
culture was one where you weren't going
to overly index to policy stability or
to the personal lives that your
employees we're leading whatever it is
and that you are going to be
compensating primarily on output and
that you didn't really care about much
else right and so that cultural clarity
allowed you to attract people like that
and for your CEO to quickly help make
sense of situations or someone like this
HR director
something contrary to that right which
is not what you end up seeing at most
companies yeah and we were I will say
that this is what other thing I find so
important in companies that I build and
we happen to have a very powerful
culture of radical decentralization at
this big multinational where the default
was if you run an independent business
unit you have remarkable leverage do
what you want like some of our
independent business units actually
opted out of our corporate health care
plan and what put out the bit and
independently got their own health care
plan I mean that's pretty damn radical
for a major corporation so to some sense
I knew my battlefield bottom line was
everything in this almost medieval
decentralized Kingdom and I had to
bottom line goddamn it and plus I had
gigantic five stars for strategic change
both within my unit and across the
company and I could appeal to the
cultural norm of radical
decentralization and so you know being a
warfighter you don't fight stupid Wars
but you fight wars you have a reasonable
chance to win and if that cultural basis
hadn't been there radical
decentralization even me mr. warfighter
would have opted out of the fight has
struck me that that cultural norm gave
me a reasonable chance of victory yeah
and that piece of the cultural norm
gives you a reasonable chance of victory
is is I think pretty key I'm curious and
feel free to skip the question or add it
out if it's overly personal but I does
that warfighter impulse has it ever
gotten you into trouble oh yeah I will
say that I got my ass kicked a couple
times when I was a teenager but in
business no I would say that that I win
every battle no but being a smart
warfighter I generally had a fallback
position did I ever get fired know that
I have bosses that probably thought
about it yes but I would say net-net
know my warfighter strategies are hugely
net positive on a portfolio basis nice
well I'm glad to hear it my my guess or
at least my sense making around that
would be that part of that success is
that you've been good about choosing
your battlefields because what I have
seen cases where people who have that
fight reflex
and and aren't end up going to places
where that fight reflex is outside of
the existing culture and then they
confuse the out of everyone
everyone gets confused by them they get
confused and that usually goes badly so
partially what I the way that I read
your story is that your ability to
choose places where that worked and
effectively choose your battlefield that
you'd be operating on and have clarity
about the goals that you were actually
fighting for I would imagine that those
were the ingredients of your success
without knowing more about your story
yeah I would say that's mostly the case
and then the other is that when the
battles were outside I wouldn't where it
was actually a lot more fun is that most
people are just afraid of a
fight you know particularly a fight that
they know will be a fight to the death
right and they flinch and so I think
that was the other part I guess you
could call that macro battlefield
analysis you assess the other side and
you realize that their leadership will
definitely blink if you raise the lids
on the ICBM they will definitely sue for
peace so when the time comes and you
have them at their weakest you raise the
lids on the ICBM and threaten nuclear
annihilation
most people don't then raise their lids
I guess oh that's probably good for the
world but I think that's another reason
particularly externally why bi
warfighter strategy work pretty well but
again you have to do it where you have
the strategic position and my biggest
strategic battle I literally had a war
room where we created eight scenarios on
the white board from roll over and
submit to thermonuclear war and six
different options in between we
eventually chose option 6 which was to
make them think we were going to a
nuclear war but actually be ready to
settle and we call that strategy huff
and puff and then settle it which worked
perfectly I'm glad I'm glad to hear it
but anyway enough about my tails let's
get back to your confusion and clarity
and and all that how do you help people
get through that and increase their
capability to do the right thing in a
rapidly changing world yes so if one
branch and the branch that most people
go down instinctively is confusion the
threat to certainty
the the alternative that you have is
going to first to awareness so rather
than being just aware that oh okay right
I'm probably confused right now
right and that's actually an enormous
step for most people because once you're
in that threat once you're in that space
of going into that fight flight freeze
reaction it's difficult to pull back
right and that's where especially having
external sense makers rather whether as
other executives or a manager or a coach
or whoever it is to help you recognize
that you're confused at the moment is
sort of the first step once you
recognize you're confused then you can
actually get curious about it you can go
okay what is my underlying mental model
what isn't matching here what is that
gap to expectation that's driving this
reactivity innate and from there you can
reorient to your intentional goal
because what gets lost right on the way
to that path to certainty is the
aperture focuses down to how to protect
oneself rather than how do you actually
win how do you win against your bigger
goals right and this is where you see
executive team sort of endlessly
bickering or retreading the same fights
or backstabbing each other or whatever
it is even if it's value destructive for
everyone in the firm and the way out of
that is you recognize that confusion
understand it drop the assumptions
reorient to the intentional goal and
then you can start moving towards
clarity then you can start moving
towards the clarity of okay I know what
actually matters here I've now
simplified down to something that I can
do action taking on not because I've
retrenched to my existing mental model
but because I've expanded it to take in
this new information and I've adjusted
appropriately to make sense of it and
then it's just about experimental action
taking right because clarity I think as
you said at the beginning it's not a
fixed place right it's a it's a constant
dynamic loop between okay confusion
awareness I'm doing my sense making now
I'm taking action from a place of
clarity okay what did I learn from that
update my hypothesis and now have
expanded by mental Maude
again and I'm back to the next step of
the strategy right so being able to
rapidly run that loop where you're
catching your own confusion in the
confusion of others reorienting them to
what actually matters and expanding the
mental model through experimental action
that's more or less how you win in the
game be world we have adopted a model
from a fighter pilot named John Boyd
called the OODA loop observe orient
decide act and then repeat it sounds
very very similar yeah and the and the
challenge right with the with the OODA
loop from what I've seen with people
trying to deploy it is they gets is they
can get lost in the orient stage in
particular exactly that's the hard one
people don't understand it
right and it's hard enough to do as and
when you're doing it as a collective the
complexity of that scales exponentially
right and that's where you have to start
thinking about okay this isn't just
about me how am I going to actually
orient large groups of people the
majority of whom are going to be
confused post to the time towards
working productively towards a singular
goal okay so what's your trick how do
you do that so one way that and there's
listen I think I think it's an ongoing
learning process and you know I want to
start with at least some amount of
skepticism about what I'm doing because
I think there's always room to be
learning and expanding the model but
there's there's a couple of key areas
where especially in an organizational
context you have to create clarity for
your people and so those are goals like
what are we actually going for
leadership which is hey what's the point
on the horizon we're heading towards and
why in the world should you trust me to
get us there management like how does
this work who's responsible for what
what are the processes etc etc and then
finally culture which pretty much just
boils down to what are the behaviors
that people expect to be rewarded and
punished around here if you give people
clarity across those areas then it
becomes very easy to run that
orientation process right because you're
someone gets confused you get confused
whatever it is the outcome you don't get
the outcome you want right someone
misses miss
is a key result missus they're okay are
whatever it is and rather than it
turning into this sort of blame festival
or you know we have to throw up our
hands or we do it or fire someone
whatever it is you actually have a
framework for saying okay let's step
back how is this supposed to work what
are we trying to achieve does this get
us towards that point on the horizon and
is there something that needs to change
given given how this went down the
challenge right with most orientation is
that there's very poor diagnosis we tend
to be very bad at actually pinpointing
where the problem was
and the inability to pinpoint the
problem usually boils down to a lack of
clarity on one of those four elements if
not more so let's go back to your
example of the director right so your HR
director comes through with this drug
test policy for whatever reason thought
it was a good idea etcetera etcetera
missed all of these key elements of the
enterprise clarity for the company that
you are working for right that your goal
is bottom line that's all that really
matters the management structure is
decentralized so doing broad-based
edicts is not going to work the culture
is one in which you're going to be
indexing to results rather than people's
personal lives so doing behavior that's
controlling towards other people is not
going to work and then so you look at
all of that that person was confused
about all of these key elements around
how the your company was actually
working and the net result right was
that they created something that a
pissed you off and B ended up getting
the CEO having to step in and luckily in
that particular case your CEO actually
had the clarity about those areas
sufficient to say hey that's not how
things work around here
which prevented that from cascading
throughout the org right because yeah
what you see more often than not is that
the CEO doesn't have clarity they'll
just come in and say something like I
just let Jim have his way this time or
something like that or you to play nice
or whatever it is and then you and now
you've sown the seeds of future
confusion in the org
because now the HR director goes to
their people and says oh we got to work
around this Jim and like well
we'll do drug testing for everyone else
but not Jim's little boring but we'll be
trying to work to undermine the
future because they don't they don't
respect us and whatever whatever
whatever and that hardens over time
until you end up with these companies
that are basically divided into warring
fiefdom z' where there really doesn't
need to be a war very good point that
because that's exactly right
you know our CEO because we're in a
radically be centralized organization
didn't have too many actual duties other
than you know to cut off heads when
people failed to perform and to make
sure that the culture you know was
relatively clearly communicated to
people and you know when I think back on
it interestingly this HR guy was brand
new he'd come in from a much more
traditionally organized big company when
I heard through the grapevine he was
utterly scandalized by the fact that we
didn't already have a corporate drug
testing policy and just thought how
could anybody not right and somehow had
not been properly acculturated in these
almost religious tenants of the company
there you go existing mental model for
how companies work for what matters
comes in sees it's not there and is like
these people must be nuts so I'm going
to take it upon myself to fix this right
to create something that is in line with
my existing mental model rather than
trying to actually understand how this
place works so how do you get up senior
management team to get that if they
aren't already there again in this
company we had the fact that the company
had a 20-year tradition of radical
decentralization which was almost
religious in its intensity most
companies aren't that way yeah I mean I
think the answer is painstakingly for
the most part it's a it's a it's a grind
you got to run that loop consistently
right where you're helping people make
sense of how often things aren't
matching their expectations which if
you're talking about a management team
that doesn't have that clarity around
those four elements doesn't have
enterprise clarity it's going to be all
over the place
right and if you've sat through you know
I'm sure you've sat through many of
these executive meetings that are just
sort of interminable right you have one
person say well you know I think it
should be this way and then someone else
says well no I think it should be this
other way and then it just goes around
the table and suddenly it's six hours
and a million dollars later and like
what do you just do nothing
right because no one actually was able
to get to the heart of the confucian at
hand so the first thing that I'm always
trying to look for whether I'm in a
coaching role or trying to concurred my
clients to do is dial in what is the
root of the confusion you have to
actually you have to get out of the
process of trying to be an advocate or
trying to argue for some position
because that's sort of that certainty
path and instead start thinking like an
investigator right okay why does this
suck why are we all confused why does
this feel so bad why are we missing our
goals okay it's because X Y Z it's
because okay it sounds like tech thinks
you know the RCR CTO is indexed to
creating beautiful products no matter
what and our sales team just wants him
to respond to their feature requests
because they need to sell and they don't
care about the beauty of the product
right okay so there's a fundamental
mismatch there around what you're trying
to create and how you win in the
marketplace if you have a good CEO
they'll crystallize that as the
confusion point and then from there be
able to clarify okay the way we win in
the market is whatever it is X Y Z and
then see is there a way that they're
going to be able to hit that it might be
such that okay CTO guy I hear you care
about the beauty but we're gonna have to
iterate fast to get there we're gonna be
learning from the market to inform that
because our strategy is to whatever move
fast and deliver to customers no matter
what so we're gonna go with the sales
guys approach but it's going to be
feeding back into your product or maybe
it's going to the sales guy and saying
hey listen we have long lead times and I
want my Tech's and we're gonna win
because we're gonna be creating
something new in this market and I want
my CTO focused on these long term high
standard build projects so go figure out
how to sell what you have and stop
arguing about it right you have to be
able to step back and rather than diving
into the content of the conversation
frame the existing confusion point and
then be able to go to clarity about how
you're operating and what your actual
northstar is then you can start moving
forward
yeah the North Star is really critical
you know again in my own units I had
similar thing I called it Pikes Peak I'd
say let's imagine we're 200 miles out on
the plains of eastern Colorado and
there's Pikes Peak just see the little
tip of it way out there on the horizon
we have no idea what River Valley's what
hostile Indian tribes with deserts we
have to cross to get there but we're
heading for Pikes Peak goddammit let's
go
yeah and that's exactly right and that
the thing that's a challenge in practice
right is what I just described to you it
requires a fairly high level of mastery
to actually be able to do that on the
fly when you have lots of stuff flying
at you and you're often confused
yourself right so I usually try to break
this down to some real basic first
principles which is one just just assume
that the people around you including
yourself are confused like just hold
that as an assumption they're probably
not trying to you they're probably
not evil people they're not bad stupid
or lazy which is typically the
narratives we go to they are confused
they don't know how to make sense of
what is happening around them and you're
seeing reactions because of that that
don't make sense then just start with
you right go from okay I need to make my
own narrative to what am I missing here
that basic shift from I need to push my
perspective to what am I missing here
save so much heartache it's unbelievable
like I've I've seen I've seen literally
billions of dollars of company value
saved because you know two co-founders
who were at each other's necks stepped
back for a second to ask what am I
missing here and saw that they were
basically on the same page it's really
common and then finally just getting
into a spirit of investigation like
let's go actually figure out what's
going on here if I'm assuming that
things aren't working not because you're
a bad person or because you're a stupid
person or because you're lazy but
because there's some confusion here
either and it probably starts with me
then let's go figure out where that is
and see if we can get to clarity
together
yep that makes sense maybe talk a little
bit about let's say there's an executive
senior executive team of what five
people or usually it's five people that
really you know hold the culture
together or not how do you actually
engage them in this process yeah and
that's a great question I think it's a I
think it's a I think it's a bigger
question about how do you institute any
kind of cultural change right because
well we're fundamentally talking about
at that level is culture change it's
saying you will be rewarded for
admitting that you are confused and
exploring it right because that's that's
the underlying fear that most people
have right they get into these
situations and there's often an implicit
cultural assumption that this is a
zero-sum game right if you win the
argument in the in the room then you're
gonna get more resources more status
whatever it is and the loser will have
to go away so you never want to share
that you're uncertain you never want to
take responsibility you never want to
look for the limits of your own mental
model because that's the first step on
the pathway to defeat right that's the
sort of underlying cultural assumption
that you see a lot of companies so if
you're a CEO and most often I think this
change has to come from the CEO you have
to be crystal clear both in what you're
communicating and more difficult how
you're behaving to reinforce this new
culture so hey guys we need to learn
fast learning fast is how we're going to
win and we can't learn fast unless we
actually are clear on where things are
breaking so from now on the behaviors
that are going to get rewarded
escalating problems calling for sync
when you're confused rather than
continuing the battle taking
responsibility for your own confusion
and the outcomes that are being missed
those behaviors are going to get
rewarded and the behaviors that aren't
going to get rewarded is diving into
content without actually setting up a
frame deviating from the big picture and
going for personal goals at the expense
of company goals whatever it is you can
go through that list and then you have
to actually stick to it right and it
takes time like this is the grindy part
of it right and I think we started
talking about how difficult it is
actually do change just through theory
you have to actually be they're calling
balls and strikes
in the meeting and say hey that thing
that was awesome I'm so glad you brought
up that confusion point okay great and
versus hey are you actually tracking the
goal here let's step back remember rules
of the game is this we take
responsibility we escalate problems we
start with our own confusion and get
investigative about what's going on
you're not doing that right now and if
you keep not doing that you're probably
not going to be an executive here for
very long yep that would certainly help
that would certainly help you know it's
interesting in my own companies I had
something that was kind of a conflation
of your three points now I think about
which I always called our basic cultural
premise is intellectual honesty in all
things right you know you always
escalate bad news you never shoot the
messenger
you'll give credit to whoever it is I
would always say if the receptionist
comes up with the 100 million dollar
product she gets the credit for it
etc in some sense intellectual honesty
above all else is kind of infused in all
three of your components yeah and and I
want to just to at risk of complicating
the picture well I think that that's
critical for actually moving towards a
learning organization you can actually
run a successful organization that
doesn't have those qualities as long as
you're actually providing clarity for
people about how things work and being
clear about when it deviates from that
so one example that I love is Spirit
Airlines right you know everyone makes
jokes about how they suck so much and
how the experience is terrible and how
you'd never fly them again and they're
one of the most successful airlines ever
and the CEO Bal Danzo was just
relentlessly clear with people that he
didn't give a about anyone he
didn't give a about employees he
didn't give a about customers all
you had to do all the time was make
cheaper and figure out how to how to
squeeze money out of people that was it
that's all he cared about who delivered
that one and who didn't lost and under
that leadership spirit actually became
remarkably successful and actually
pushed the needle on a number of things
that you're seeing today driving down
air fares across the board etc
now I like using that example because
it's not the warm fuzzy one the warm
fuzzy one is you know Herb Kelleher at
Southwest who had clarity on the other
side right like we do everything with
love it's all about the customer
experience we treat each other well
these are the rules of the game two very
different companies operating under very
different cultural rule sets both
successful because they led with that
clarity people were basically able to
make sense of what was going on around
them we're a social species we always
want to know how we're supposed to work
with the group and that clarity enabled
two diametrically opposed businesses in
the same industry to succeed right and
the the interesting sort of code on the
Spirit Airlines example is that ball
Danza actually ended up handing off the
reins to this other guy for Niro in 2016
because they were so successful that
they were like actually we need to stop
treating the customers like on
things like on time and things that
actually people care about and ball
dance was like you know what I'm the
wrong guy for this because I truly don't
give a so I'm gonna hand the reins
over to someone who I love that I love
that story and that and to me that is an
example of leadership clarity right you
set clear guidelines you set clear
cultural rules you set a clear North
Star and how you're gonna win such that
people understand it you're ruthless in
how you're driving it through the org
but then you actually have the humility
or the self skepticism to recognize when
you've lost the thread when the macro
game demands something else and in that
case sometimes the best thing to do is
step down and find someone who's
actually better suited to that role that
I love that I love that story I don't
know I never even heard of Spirit
Airlines tell you the truth I do know
Southwest very well actually was friends
with Roland Kings son who Roland King
was one of the two co-founders and you
know it's a company I have admired
greatly but I didn't realize there was
essentially an anti Southwest out there
in the same marketplace off the have to
look into that a little bit because it
sounds like an interesting story and it
certainly does highlight the quality of
clarity above all else whether it's dark
clarity or light clarity both can be
effective I suppose totally I mean look
at you know you can look in and I've
there's
more examples of that right you have you
have Nike like backstabbing competitive
culture starting from what Phil Knight
is like and it worked because people
understood that's the game we're playing
here yeah child's a child slave labor
what the whatever it takes right
now and and so and I use these examples
right because the clarity enables the
winning now if you want to actually win
with a higher that with the different
values that go into you know game B
values or something because you know
these aren't the kinds of companies I
would want to work for the what gets
lost right when people try to put these
things into practice is that clarity
about who we are what we stand for and
how it works and a willingness to
actually drive that down through the org
and everything that gets done ok Jake
this has been very interesting and I
think speaks very clearly to how to do a
better job as an executive team in the
game a world but what can you repurpose
or extend from your experiences and your
insights which are impressively deep
into the game be world or into other
shall we call it better future what
comes next world sudden just have to be
game be there's lots of other people
doing good work in this area but let's
use game B as an example our four
pillars of game B are that the things
that emerge in game B will be
self-organizing network centric
decentralized and metastable the first
three are probably sort of obvious
metastable means that they can last a
long time but probably without by not
staying the same they have to constantly
flex and change and adapt to their
co-evolutionary landscape to last for a
long time but they should be built with
that in mind to be able to do just that
rather different context then let's say
the company I talked about where we
happen to have you know a CEO who when
he needed to could throw lightning bolts
and wood to defend the culture as
opposed to true self-organizing
bottoms-up
ways of organizing what if your tool kit
do you think applies to game B and where
might it need to be extended feel free
to go long on this answer by the way
yeah absolutely so I think it's a it's a
great question and part of the reason
right why orient to the desert of the
hierarchy structure is just that's
what's most common out in the world
right now but the reality is that that
that hierarchical structure is just a
one particular clustering of
responsibilities right where I think a
lot of people get lost when playing the
decentralization game is that they say
oh well okay if these responsibilities
lived in the CEO or lived in a manager
or whatever it is we'll just get rid of
all of that right and we'll just all go
do a thing together and in most cases
that just devolves pretty quickly
particularly if there's any shock to the
system so the first thing I would say is
recognizing that the responsibilities
related to creating clarity those exist
no matter what structure you're in you
still need clarity across those four
areas you still need goal clarity you
still need management clarity you still
need vision clarity you still need
culture clarity the responsibilities
involved in management meaning helping
people productively make sense of when
things aren't working so that they can
keep growing and learn how to best
deploy their talents that is a
responsibility that still needs to exist
it might just not be bundled with say
you know hire fire authority or
particular particular reporting lines or
whatever it is right so what you need to
make sure that you have is if you're
trying to create a decentralized
organization that you're not falling
into the naive trap of because I don't
like these roles I'm going to just get
rid of them and the functions that were
embedded with it you actually have to
still solve for those underlying
functions and there's lots of different
ways you could do it right now I will
say that from and you know you please
feel free to weigh in on your own
research here from the cooperative's and
decentralized entities and things that
I've seen be successful a lot of them
did start with a founder who kind of set
that meta container for people to play
in right so I think about the
Morningstar company you know the famous
or tomato company out California that's
highly decentralized I think about
Mondragon
a lot of these sort of cooperative
entities started with a founder who laid
a lot of this stuff out clearly things
will work in this decentralized way and
that means that you will have this
autonomy in this way and you can go do
this and you can't do this and if you
want to try to create a hierarchical
fiefdom that's not gonna fly here they
were still providing clarity around the
basic rules of the game that others
could play with and then they stepped
out of the way right they didn't
maintain sort of the operational veto
power that's embedded in the CEO role of
traditional companies so that's sort of
my first one right is like one you got
to recognize that these responsibilities
for creating clarity still exist when
you're trying to coordinate large groups
of people whether you want to do it in a
way that's unbundling those
responsibilities or not does that make
sense absolutely and and again
especially with our game be perspective
that we have to be disciplined about how
we do this because our goal our North
Star is particularly safe for a game be
venture we have to be able to
out-compete game a alternatives so that
means we can't be lacks and sloppy and
hippies in a mud hut right though we
have to figure out how to do this
without a command and control hierarchy
so we have a very difficult problem to
solve and I would say having looked at
some of the alternatives like holacracy
etc I'm not convinced anybody actually
has a template yet that I would feel
comfortable rolling out at scale and in
fact templates interesting is another
one of our key game B concepts we call X
in a box where X can be anything and the
idea is and you know maybe instead of
the founder being the one who lays out
the deep doctrine the Moses who brings
down the Ten Commandments some previous
ventures that more or less found the
right way to do it documented how they
did it and created a template we call X
in a box then any group can take that X
and think of it as like Kraft macaroni
and cheese right pretty crappy by itself
but if you doctor it up and change it to
your local conditions oh I like green
chili in my mac and cheese and let's
pour some heavy cream in there goddamn
it
you can make it pretty good so that's
the concept of an X in the box it's not
to be thought of as a rigid template but
as a starting place for each team to
then take and you know add their own
local ingredients and things
themselves then go with it and then oh
by the way it's their duty if successful
to report back to the X in the box that
this fork or we added heavy cream in
green chile worked really well for us so
here's our version of X in a box which
we hope somebody else will take and
further develop so that's at least our
theoretical not yet tried way to attempt
to address at least in part you know
your assertion that one somebody's got
to do this and two maybe it has to be a
traditional strong founder even if maybe
that strong founder steps away I'd argue
maybe there had to be such a strong
founder somewhere up the evolutionary
chain but through the use of X in the
Box soft templates that can be modified
and grow and learn these values can be
propagated out wider and wider without
necessarily ever having to have a strong
founder you know after the first one
yeah listen I I love the X in a box
concept that was was one of the big
projects I was working on actually my
slow money days was sort of check the
the chapter in a box how you're gonna
create something that's gonna be work
for your local conditions so you know
that notion of template izing I think
but providing autonomy with with some
amount of local modification that makes
sense to me as a model the thing you
said about you know do we still need
founders to set the container I would
sort of love to believe that that's
possible I'm not convinced that it is
that's that's mostly where I come out on
it just because of how hard it is to
actually get groups of people to agree
on anything particularly people who are
interested in decentralization right one
of the one of the big common failure
points I saw in sort of a lot of these
eco village models and things like that
is that when you when you get a group of
people together who are basically united
by a distaste for authority and an
inability to get along with with with
like the the main social vectors so you
put them all together in a place far
away from everyone else and surprise
half the time they tear it themselves
apart right or more than half because
you're not actually no one's actually
holding the container of the higher
values and you end up just getting
people of reverting to the underlying
mental model that had them want to
divorce from the game a in the first
place so
that would be my big watch out for
something like that that you know if
that's going to work hey I do think at
minimum you're going to need some group
of people you know if it's a committee
or whatever it is who are highly aligned
who have done the work to get that
alignment with one another you know and
then you can play with different
mechanisms I mean this is I'm in no way
an expert on this but you know some of
the things that I have my eye on are you
know automatically executable contracts
in the crypto space you know the whole
sort of Dow stack approach where you're
embedding a lot of these protocols into
code you know and taking the person out
of it I like I kind of hope some of
those things work I haven't yet like you
I haven't yet seen anything that I
believe is like ready for primetime but
I'd love to be proven wrong yeah I had
rich Bartlett on recently and he has a
whole bunch of interesting ideas you can
check him out on medium though his tool
kit basically takes you up to 10 or 20
people and it's quite compelling as a
way for a group to self-organize and
start building its values and building
its processes but he's the first to
admit he has no clue if it's scales
beyond that and to do a lot of the kind
of things that I'm interested in and I
presume you are as well we have to
figure out you know how to scale that to
hundreds thousands tens of thousands of
people working in some form of a cloud
of decentralized activity that is
nonetheless coherent and can out-compete
game a on its home turf
yeah and no I totally agree and to me
and obviously I'm biased given given my
day-to-day work but I do believe that a
key missing ingredient is this notion of
confusion and using leveraging confusion
to create ongoing clarity of learning
for people that's that's the thing that
I most often see missing is there's sort
of this notion right that like well if
you get a bunch of people together
basically agree on stuff and hold the
same values etc that it's all gonna work
out and the reality is that it can work
out for a bit but inevitably there will
be confusion people will not be able to
make sense of what is happening with one
another and in that case they will
to their worst selves or at least to a
non-optimal version of themselves so you
know you see a lot of these kinds of
enterprises a lot of these projects
starting with the underlying assumption
that hey you know we've got this
sovereignty we've got these psycho
technologies we're all going to be able
to just be self-regulating and great
together
and it doesn't account for the fact that
that's just not what our cognition is
wired for we need ongoing sense-making
from those around us to get our heads
out of our own asses that's just the
underlying reality of how our brains are
structured so when I think about what is
it gonna take you know the seed
algorithm to me is okay what is the
underlying mechanism and if it's not a
manager who is it going to be that is
going to be helping others make sense of
their confusion on an ongoing basis so
that those micro learning loops are
happening really really fast
those Gouda loops you talked about
people are orienting well consistently
they're not getting sucked into that
knee-jerk response
loop the certainty loop that ultimately
hardens into something that kills the
org let me throw an idea at you I just
had it being a software and product guys
tend to sometimes immediately leap to a
solution almost always wrong but at
least it's a basis for a conversation
suppose a group of people who are trying
to self-organize into a venture as part
of their network centric platform had a
button that they could push called I am
confused and at any time there would be
high social reward for pressing and
explaining why they are confused
they could then specify who they wanted
to have as their Deacon fusers and that
would then become a working group to
work on this confusion and to help the
member of the team who is confused reach
clarity or for the wider group to
realize that this is a high level
confusion that's beyond their abilities
saw and then they would collectively
escalate it to a wider group to solve
until some level reduce the confusion to
clarity
that process would be reduced to a
one-page description of what was the
initial confusion what is the new
clarity and then that would be published
to everybody and go into a knowledge
repository for future confusions to use
the starting raw material I love it yeah
absolutely I think I mean what you what
you just described is kind of the social
software that ends up getting that I end
up helping install for a lot of my
clients right it's getting people
getting people to raise their hand say
I'm confused
reward it make sure that they get the
appropriate sense making from someone
who can actually help them and then make
sure that those learnings are reiterated
back into the wider org that's it do you
have soft worth not yet so I think what
your what you're describing turning that
turning that algorithmic process from
human software into actual software I
think there's a lot of promise there so
definitely definitely a project worth
pursuing and you know in the meantime to
not let the perfect be the enemy of the
good recognizing that that's a at least
a sort of a psycho technology that you
can install right now so you could
essentially do it on paper you know
sensei I'm confused I'm going to send an
email out to a group of people to help
me become unconfused something like that
totally yeah
sounds great yeah yeah that's
interesting interesting now I'm going to
also go back to something I mentioned
earlier I suspect this will be
controversial with some of the game be
folks but I raised this from time to
time this idea that there are sort of
natural leaders which I call l1 l2 l3
obviously it's a gross reification it's
clearly a continuum of whatever it is
that constitutes this underlying ability
to be a leader one of the areas that
particularly Jordan Hall and I have been
talking about a lot in the background is
how does a natural l1 through elder
develop into a true game be leader right
and what is Game be leadership we're not
even sure you know I confess I confess
several times on this podcast and as
guest on other podcasts but I doubt I'll
ever be a true game B leader I'm too
much of a game a right yeah
there's a groove too heavily
my brain I can move towards game B ship
I can coach people in you know how to
build game B entities that aren't insane
when it comes to out competing game a
but I doubt I'll ever be a true game B
leader and I we wonder if you could
speculate a little bit about what game B
leadership might even be mmm yeah it's a
it's a wonderful question I've got I've
got kind of a double-barreled answer for
you so I'm gonna give you two parts here
the first is that I would be very
cautious about sort of single-factor
one-size-fits-all leadership structures
what I have seen time and time again is
that there are different leaders that
you need for different contexts that
there are contexts where you want a very
strong leader who's gonna go around and
you know yell and push and push people
to do stuff they're leading their
organizations that need a much more
sensitive touch someone who's going to
be more of a facilitator and bring
people together and bring the best out
of them consistently this idea that
there's only one way to be an effective
leader irrespective of context I've seen
sinkhole autoships so I would just throw
that out there as a caveat now too to
simultaneously undermine what I was
saying a little bit I do think there are
some sort of meta qualities particularly
when thinking about game B leadership
that are going to be critical and to me
it comes down to are you capable of
holding enough perspectives and updating
your own perspective with enough
epistemic humility that you can then
help others make sense and mass towards
it towards a shared goal so there's a
there's a lot wrapped up in that right
because we're talking about some
difficult polarities to navigate you
need to be able to on one hand be highly
self skeptical of what you're doing and
at the same time be willing to not to
cut off the analysis and go to action
you need to be able to hold a lot of
perspectives and at the same time be
able to identify that a lot of those
perspectives are basically
and being able to hold those polarities
effectively I think is going to be
required for anyone who wants to
organize large groups of people towards
complex goals in a minimally controlled
structure hmm I like that so the
openness but not to open attention
between openness and the need to get to
a decision yeah I see it as managing a
polarity rather than a happy medium a
lot of people fall down into the happy
medium trap it's more like you're
willing to be radically open and
radically skeptical of the assumptions
that you've made and simultaneously
willing to act very fast towards an end
right being able to hold both of those
as necessary and not water down either
one that's that I think is pre is is
hard and possible like I've seen people
who can do it and you know whether
whether as you said that's a genetic
thing or or whether it's something that
can be taught I don't know I do know
that I've seen people be able to get
more and more clarity about what kind of
a leader they are and if they are
capable of doing that and if they even
want to do that and at least that
clarity has them not lie to themselves
and that's a big step in the right
direction yeah I would say interesting
your description of that is not too far
from my game a leader style
I think I was both radically open and
radically decisive you know certainly
much more so than your average game a
 so maybe I'm not that far
from a game Bay leader though I do think
I still have too much game a
 to be a good model for it I
mean that's the confusion point right
would be that assumption that the
trappings of game a II
automatically would disqualify a model
of game B leadership right that's their
sort of reactive move to certainty that
whatever type of leadership comes next
can't look like the leadership we've had
before versus hey there might be some
qualities that are just good for
organizing groups of people that have
been applied out in different structures
and so let's take the best of those and
add to them the higher reaches of human
development and cognition and the
structures around them that will enable
that
see what that looks like yep I think
that's always good advice don't be
afraid of the past right the past had
some errors in it but it also had some
brilliant something we have to remember
game a took us from a world where 95%
were starving peasants 50% of kids died
by the time they were 5 and led us to a
world where life expectancy including
the whole world's now over 70 and the
number of kids that died before their 5
is 1 or 2% so game a is not all wrong by
any means and that we should not be
afraid to look back and find what
actually works yeah it's the most
extraordinary cooperation system ever
invented thus far yep and you know if it
weren't for the fact that it's on itself
terminating can't put on the brakes
because of its underlying relentless
short-term money on money return there's
a lot to be said for it well there's
also some others not so nice things to
be said for it like the amount of
alienation that it creates in people the
number of manufactured psychologically
astute needs that it manufactures in
people to keep them on the hedonic
treadmill but there are a lot of good
things to be said for it and we
shouldn't be reactive against every
possible lesson that we may have learned
in gaming total sync that was really
good Jake let's go to our final topic
which is one of the things we talked
about in game B a lot is that none of us
are really prepared for this game a
world and we're carrying a fair amount
of what we call game a malware you know
the trainings from the time we were
young sitting in the sausage factory
public school systems you know abusive
bosses we've had along the way and the
idea is that there are a series of
psycho technologies things that could go
at the lighter end from you know
mindfulness meditation to nootropic
drugs to psychedelics to mind machine
implants to a whole series of other
possible practices breath work whatever
 that is but something people talk
about do you have any insight into
psycho technologies and ones that might
be relevant or that you've seen used
successfully in helping upgrade the
capability of people to manage
particularly self-manage in groups yeah
so this is
so a yes absolutely I'm a bit of a
psycho technology I don't know what you
would call it a pet aficionado whatever
it is I like to try stuff and see how it
goes that's just kind of built into into
my own mental model but I would start
rather than just sort of listing things
that I've seen work or not work
I would rather start with an orientation
which is what's going back to the body
of our conversation is what are you
trying to do what is the actual goal
right there's a lot of times I see
people go to psycho technologies mostly
because they just don't feel good right
they just have that impulse if I don't
like the way I feel therefore I will try
something right which is not all that
different than the impulse that gets
people to go binge watch TV or do heavy
drugs or whatever it is all these
different addictive patterns so like any
technology I would I would want to start
with with going back to that that bigger
clarity of what actually matters what
are my intensional goals here what am I
going for and if we're talking about
game B I believe the goal is how how do
I expand my frame of reference enough
that I can catch my patterns early that
I can do that switch from confusion into
awareness rather than confusion into
threat because it's really hard to catch
in the moment and to me that ability to
catch it and to be able to be expansive
enough that you can hold that polarity
of perspective checking and action
taking that is the goal that I think is
worthy of using psycho technologies
because a lot of this stuff is powerful
and I think can kind of lead people off
track if they're not using it towards a
meaningful end so with that said right I
do think meditation is fantastic think
guy named Geoffrey Martin has done some
really interesting research on people
who have transitioned into what he calls
fundamental well-being which maps onto a
lot of descriptions of enlightenment and
sort of demystifying that and looking at
the different ways that you can actually
create that relatively easily but I
think I think meditation is a great one
there's
lots of different meditations out there
anything that's going to create a bit of
a buffer zone between stimulus and
response is really powerful so you know
if you're if meditation does that great
you know some people use nootropics for
that though I think again if you're just
speeding up your underlying processing
power without actually distancing
stimulus and response then you probably
aren't doing yourself much much good
relational practices I think are great I
spent a while out and Boulder learning
circling and something that could you
have something they call circling which
is basically can interpersonal
meditation where you're tracking
yourself in relationship to another
again being able to practice that sort
of gap between stimulus and response in
a relational context which you know is
where a lot of meditators with solo
practices fall down I think that can be
really potent polarity mapping there's a
woman named bina Sharma who does amazing
work with polarity mapping so getting
starting to get used to that idea of
okay I can actually hold and pursue two
seemingly diametrically opposed things
in an integrated way being able to
develop that skill I believe is enormous
ly important to jjigae be leadership so
so yeah so those are those are something
that come to top of mind you know the
the big one for me more than anything is
just learning to treat life as a
practice like if there is any single
psycho technology that I have gotten
more out of than any other it is a
fundamental shift in orientation from
life as a series of tasks to life as a
series of experiments so if I'm going
out to the grocery store what am i
noticing how am i behaving how am i
treating the people around me how much
am i aware of if I'm getting into
conflict with my wife or my family or a
co-worker how am i showing up in that
it's there's a there's a way in which
many people who use these psycho
technologies I think tend to think of
them as these discrete things that live
in a particular practice space rather
than recognizing that all that really
matters is how your
and whether you're able to consistently
create that stimulus-response distance
in a way that enables you to get from
confusion to clarity
hmm I like that well said I think it was
a good review and I also very much liked
that you called out the fact that a lot
of people unfortunately use these things
as analgesics essentially right when
they're in pain they go for a hit of it
which is understandable if it works
great but rather than using it more
constructively to build their capability
I think you did a nice job of reviewing
the landscape and particularly I liked
the perspective of really these things
are a means to an end which is allowing
us to process the world and turn
confusion to clarity
whereas I sometimes would say the you
know the main skill of a businessperson
is just to reduce ambiguity right is
what we run into ambiguity all the time
and if you're afraid of it and you lock
up you're not gonna make any progress
you just have to live in the ambiguity
for a while and then gradually chip away
at it until clarity emerges absolutely
Jim that's I'm we're on the same page
and it's it's been a wonderful
conversation so thank you so much for
having me on yeah it really has been you
know I look forward to continue to our
remaining in touch in the future and I
thought very good conversation I'm so
glad yeah I've been been a fan of yours
for a while so it's really a delight to
get to talk
[Music]
production services and audio editing by
jerod Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space music com