okay so says we're going live and looks
like we're live now how's it going
Jordan it's going well it's a bit of a
very nice day good
so just I'll say up up top here that
there's a bit of delay between the zoom
call and then the YouTube chat so I'm
not gonna be able to engage with people
if people have questions let's just save
them for a little bit of time at the end
and I'll check those when we get to that
place yeah I mean periodically take a
few like a pause and see yeah yeah yeah
for sure okay I like that idea okay cool
so maybe I can just say a little bit
about the impetus for this idea sorry
the YouTube screen just popped up and I
was hearing two voices okay so the
reason for this this conversation was I
was interested in double-clicking on one
of the really important pieces of the
idea of cultivating sovereignty and
that's a relationship to money and
wealth and I've been learning more about
wealth creation I haven't been
interested in it before I come from a
performing arts background and it's just
like never I've never felt like it was
my ballgame so I never really paid much
attention to it until very recently and
one of my ways in was hearing people in
this particular space game be sort of
system thinking space a lot of what the
thinkers had in common was some success
in in some entrepreneurial activity or
venture that led to wealth and from an
outsider's perspective seeing what your
experience has been Jordan is
somebody who invested a lot of front-end
energy into creating freedom for
yourself the only reason you've been
able to do like the deep thinking and
sort of deep-sea diving into this game
be spaces because you had the freedom to
do it you didn't have to work you didn't
have a clock in at an eye job so so as
we're talking about game B and in
transition be like what like what do
business ventures look like in this new
space that where people are thinking
about what what's coming next and yeah
and a crucial piece just feels like
being right relationship with with money
and we had a pre call yesterday and one
of the one of the things that which i
think is a good place to start is you
made a distinction between wealth and
prosperity mm-hmm do you remember that
at the top of the conversation yeah does
that feel like a good place to dive in
yeah I think so I think um I think it's
I was also thinking about our call
yesterday and some notions in that area
cannot summate Samir you can we can
weave it together and another concept
that came up for me that felt very close
to connect it was just a more basic
notion called choice making and you know
one of the ways that we can look at the
notion of money is that money at the end
of the day is a proxy for choice making
and so if I am paying you if you're my
employee one of the things that is part
of that relationship is that I'm giving
you money and you're giving me your
choices meaning I get to tell you what
to do to some extent right hmm and to a
greater or lesser extent depending on
the the nature of the relationship and I
think that's a really nice way to to
begin to walk into at least one aspect
to the question so this question is
distinct between wealth and prosperity
came up when you were talking about your
own experience having a story yeah of
the the inevitable corrupting
characteristics of well yeah
to make to have money and to have made
money differently both involve different
levels of unreasonable and inappropriate
corruption and and I talked about is
this destitution wealth and prosperity
which you know I mentioned by the way
you could just use this as two terms
like I'm don't want anchor on either one
of those neither of those terms has a
long eddy of a long etymologically
lineage that I'd like to sort of point
out as being more right than the other
than just saying because two ways of
looking at it and saying that there's
something about one direction or one
origin or one disposition or basis of
approach that we can call wealth or on
the left hand side that tends to be more
closely associated with with both
personal corruption things that are
reducing your sovereignty and external
corruption things that are actually
reducing other people's sovereignty
making actions in the world and reduce
other people's sovereignty and we might
say that at the center of that is his
choices on the basis of beer and then we
talked about the notion of prosperity
which has the characteristic of
increasing your sovereignty and also
synergistically as you make choices out
in the world tends to increase other
people's sovereignty and we might say
that on the basis of love and if those
of you who are familiar with Forrest
Landers work I'm clearly referencing
that in some way although my level of
mastery of his workers to wear near high
enough to say that I am sourcing from it
but the distinctions that I'm making are
clearly echoed in Morocco in what he's
written about in his book the effective
choice and the ethics so so I'll give
you some examples that I thought over
the past few days and this is one landed
this morning that I thought was quite
interesting and it's turn this is in
terms of just having well so there's no
right now just talking about how you how
you how you get well just active having
it so just a pile of money lands on your
lap magic and then I think this is
actually quite interesting so what that
is to say is that a pile of choice
making a pile of the capacity to have
your your will your what you want to be
the case has just shifted in the world
like you now have much more ability to
influence the nature of choice the
than you did before and one of the
questions is how much and I've actually
had this conversation the number of
people and there actually seems to be a
converging notion that one there needs
to be a symmetry between your
sovereignty and your choice linking
capacity so as you have more let's say
wisdom as an aspect of sovereignty as
you have more capacity to make choice as
you people more and more people are
looking to you to be making choices
either on their behalf or with their
consent or assent you need to have more
wisdom to be able to carry that in
amount of choice so that's one piece
like this that notion of symmetry and
being very mindful of it but then we had
this interesting artifact that because
of the nature of money money in many
ways is certainly decouples those two
you can have money without having wisdom
and in many ways in fact goes the
opposite the less wisdom you have making
the more possibility of money might have
but then there's another really
interesting thing which is it is fair to
say and which is to say I've had a
number of conversations with quite
thoughtful people that no human can have
enough wisdom to be able to make
effective choices beyond about a hundred
million dollars so if you have more than
a hundred million dollars and you're not
making effective choices it's just
impossible like if you have a billion
dollars you're actually making
ineffective choices no matter how wise
and sovereign you are there's just way
too much asymmetry like if you think
about how much choice making embodied in
money so how much wealth the average
person has you know the average American
has you know whatever $50,000 worth of
networks maybe less I don't know there's
a lot of debt going around may average
human probably has you know close close
to a buck all right so or maybe less
again so let's just say it's a dollar
per person on the planet and you happen
to have a billion dollars well in some
sense what that says is that you have to
have at least a billion times as much
wisdom to be able to have the enough
wisdom to carry that amount of
choice-making capacity and that ain't
gonna happen and presumably a hundred
million is also pretty high standard
like that seems also pretty darn
impossible but it's an interesting kind
of heuristic
it seems that it's plausible like it
really does seem like a reasonable
proposition to say in terms of creating
wealth in terms of having wealth and
then you cream wealth and having wealth
once you've made about ten million
dollars you're beginning to get into a
zone where you're increasingly likely to
be having more choice making capacity
than you can actually deploy with wisdom
with effect to make effective choices
with that and if you blown past a
hundred million you have almost
certainly put yourself in a place where
you're just going to be making more
trouble more and more bad than good
kind of an odd heuristic like it's a
funny thing to say and I remember when I
first got into the Entrepreneurship
gamma class first getting involvement
very first startup I remember thinking
to myself that ten million dollars was
an insane amount of money like I didn't
grow up with any meaningful amount of
money
I'm intact we were reasonably poor for
sensible fractional they're not all of
it and I remember being like if somebody
came to me and said you know the way
this is gonna work out is you're gonna
do acts and at the end it actually gonna
have ten million dollars I would have
gone like yes done signed I think we're
going to cap and if they'd come and said
look here's the deal you're gonna get to
work and it's gonna be hard like a low
likelihood of success hard work and
we're gonna cap you can make no more
than a hundred million dollars I
would've just sort of laughed at like
what you basically just do a magic
number I mean these aren't real numbers
it's not a real set and I'm saying that
maybe that's actually a really good idea
like as an individual if you're going
into entrepreneurship you're going into
the startup gig for example if you're
really trying to go hard in the
direction of moving a whole bunch of gay
made ships from other people to yourself
which so what's happening right you're
taking choice-making away from some
people and giving it to yourself you
know if you if you've done something
where ten million dollars has it has
accrued to your side of the balance
sheet that that's the point at which
taking your foot off the accelerator is
an increasingly wise choice and you
probably shouldn't be making a whole lot
more than like 30 40 unless it's just
luck like you just did something where
it's just gonna kind of have some number
and if you've made more than a hundred
you've probably actually been doing
something that has been call it to my
in the direction of
making too much money and not in the
direction of actually making effective
choices as a heuristic as a heuristic
now notably oddly enough and some of
these conversations we actually were
able to identify certain locations where
some of the some of the objectives the
things that were being endeavored we're
almost certainly important they needed
to happen and it seemed to be very much
part of the vocation like the colony of
the individual would say L on Musk and
searching the world from oil to
electricity thank you it's probably a
really good idea like that seems like
that's that's what's in the path viable
futures is that shift and it seems like
it's like he's uniquely called to do
that there's something about his very
being that seems to be uniquely called
to do that and to the degree to which he
is truly fully in service to his calling
and also money is flowing through that
that seems plausible but then you look
at something like neural lace and you're
like hmm mmm neural lace feels like it
may be something where his choice making
is now too high and that's not his
calling I don't think it feels very much
like he's doing something where he has
the ability to make it happen in the
world but it's not really his to do and
there's an error that's beginning to
emerge on that side so wait a second hi
I'm just curious how you pick up on that
likes it like the making that
distinction between oh this might not be
as calling us because these it is
because he's clearly put so much energy
into other things already if I listen to
the thought process that goes into
neural lace it's it's he's basically
reverse engineering he's working
backwards from a story that he doesn't
really have a solid grounding in like
he's he's he's kind of downward
interpolating saying well it looks like
the AI story and the singularity story
is really big and real and dangerous and
my sure istic SAR telling me that the
only viable path is one more man and
machine merge and so we're gonna make
that happen but it doesn't feel like
it's something that he's embodying all
the way down to the bottom like if you
were to really go in and start beginning
to ask deep questions about the the
nature of synapses and the nature
of consciousness like these kinds of
hard questions that honestly if you're
gonna be promoting human brain
augmentation and into machines you
should have that you should be a master
of this field like this should be your
 life like you shouldn't be even
the least bit of a tourist you shouldn't
about cars at that point you should give
zero shits about cars yeah exactly
that's what you're doing it should be a
hundred percent of your focus so much so
that you don't even know you came in
distinguish between yourself in it and
that's my point and that's what I mean
by calling so
that kind of branches so this is what
thousand they stop there so that was the
point of saying okay let's talk about
choice making in this notion of the
symmetry between your sovereignty and
the amount of choice making that you are
literally able to carry like how much
responsibility can you actually take in
the world and be likely quite likely to
make effective choices with that
responsibility and the notion that
there's almost certainly just an upper
limit that no human being could ever
carry more than a certain amount of
responsibility which then shows up as an
upper limit of the amount of wealth that
you should ever accrue to yourself hmm
do you think do you think if someone's
really tuned in to their calling they'll
have an idea of how much responsibility
they should be taking on yeah yeah I
think this actually has a bunch of
different characteristics to it and you
said really so me just focus on that
word because it has a lot of nuance to
it hmm so one piece is something like
some people many people I think who are
attracted to the story of game B put
themselves too much into it they're
trying to carry more than is theirs to
care in fact sometimes I try to carry
the whole thing oftentimes they're like
I'm the only one like they don't they've
never met anybody else who's really
really earnestly like sees it and feels
it just is committed to it and so like
oh I guess I guess I'm just gonna
have to do the whole thing yeah and this
is of course too heavy it's way too much
no human could possibly carry the whole
thing even vaguely yeah can I can I say
something about that sure I like I think
a lot of a lot of the engagements happy
happening on social media and Twitter
for example is like where a lot of these
sorts of conversations happen and
Twitter definitely selects for a kind of
Pythias like a like really sort of like
if you were good at writing philosophy
papers in college and like you have a
decent sense of humor when you write
like Twitter's gonna select for those
sort of ideas or memes that pop up you
know and I think I think what you're
saying about people feeling like they
need to take on more than it's theirs
there might be just like a lack of
imagination of the lab
that these sorts of ideas could be could
be played in does that make sense no I'm
sure it does but I didn't follow so it
felt like a shift that happened there
there's something in that shift that I
didn't receive okay okay I think this is
it like because because Twitter or
social media is like the public square
where these ideas are talked about it
seems kind of like a one it's only one
facet of engaging with these ideas like
there are other places for example
experiments with collectives in-person
collectives and that may not be open
sourcing their experiments on the
Internet
or maybe and we just haven't found them
because the Internet's are gigantic
you know that's yeah yeah so I guess the
the whole point of what I was saying is
people taking on too much part of it
just feels like for what's selected for
in the public square right now so some
that maybe maybe let me just say some
things back so let's imagine that
there's a really big story oh how fun -
with the concept of transmedia
transmedia I can put the two words
together but what's funny cuz if if you
if you use like the transcendent sense
like Conte and transcendence or
transcendence and you and then you
combine that with media and you look at
it like that's an interesting comment
combination you're definitely the right
zone but for the moment I'll just make
it a little bit more prosaic and maybe
pop it back up but one of the things
that we learn in transmedia is that each
medium is kind of has its thing so if
I'm trying to tell a story and the story
should be told in a comic book because
of the nature of the story and the
nature of the medium and I tried it -
that story in a movie I'm doing
something wrong it won't land right like
the medium just can't carry the
characteristics of whatever it is it's
the nature of the particular story
rightly to make it more obvious like if
I'm trying to tell the story that it
should be told in a painting and I'm
trying to tell it in a radio play
that's gonna be hard random like and you
see green and the brushstrokes are thick
you know that just as an obvious you
know each medium can carry different
aspects what transmedia says is hey man
there is no story that any one medium
can hold and in fact all media and by
all media I mean literally all phenomena
in physical reality that can carry
signal must be considered as part of the
way that you're expressing the whole
story like the whole story is a whole
story it's the whole thing and so
Twitter can't carry the whole story
Facebook came carried the whole story
money can't carry the whole story
grass can't carry the whole story human
beings can't carry the whole story like
it's the whole field the whole field of
possibility the whole field of reality
then that can carry a story is what we
need to be contemplating and then then
we need to have a high degree of
aesthetic discernment which is and I'm
using that word now in slightly new way
which is to actually have a high degree
of sensitivity towards what is exactly
the right media or media medium or media
like combinations to carry this
particular aspect so that the aspect is
most fully expressed with the least
amount of noise coming from the media
that were selected and in by the
direction ie the media are not adding
and are not subtracting from what is
trying to be expressed through those
media so that's something that came to
me if the result of what we were talking
about weights a more got aesthetic
discernment like I say we're about the
qualities of a person who has that
capacity hmm this is a this is a super
powerful thing we're by the way way off
topic but maybe we'll come back no no
it's on topic okay I trust you I try to
completely so to me at least is this
something about a bridge two things
we've got what's it called participatory
knowing Oh fun yeah this is a
conversation I was having on facebook
action with a woman who's an artist so
participatory knowing in in the verve a
key sense what he calls relevance
realization which we might think of as
being a sanctified
broad subtle and and multimodal meaning
all the different ways that your body
has of perceiving way of knowing and
your and your directly like hand-in-hand
in relationship with reality and the
difference in your part of it because
they had a whole point of that
participatory knowing is that you are
not in third person looking at something
and trying to be separate from it sort
of scientifically analyzing it but
you're just you're in it and there's
something about the way that you are of
it that gives you a way of sensing what
it is that you couldn't possibly sent
that we're just looking at it and then
what I want to do is I want to bring in
another set of languages which would be
in fact from forest work which he talks
about different also different modes and
here the mode of the quality of feeling
so the the difference say for example
between a semantics knowing purchase
propositional we've a Kiwi talking about
top down from his stack propositional to
participatory when we know in language
that we know in language and the way
that our mind is able to process signs
and symbol or signals in schema and in
paradigms that make sense through that
modality forest talks about this other
one the quality is it feeling that come
from the bottom up in that sense like
from the ground up through us and they
come they come in in the choke as being
very subtle so if you're if you're
sensitive to subtle qualities of feeling
this is how you for example I think I've
talked about this previously if you're
playing music and you're not playing
written music written music is when
you're playing from from sides like
you're reading some sign you're just
producing the mechanical thing the signs
are telling you to produce but you're
listening to what wants to be expressed
in the music and you're just making
yourself increasingly capable of sensing
what is the next note that needs to
happen and almost being of service to
that next note becoming more and more
transparent well this is what force
would call the quality of feeling these
and we could have an infinite number of
qualities of feeling we can name feel
but I could you know could give you some
one feeling might be sadness like that's
a pretty common feeling that we can
share very easily then we've got like
the quality a feeling of melancholy okay
that's a little bit more and we've all
kind of had now on calling if I can
describe it as we love hmmm interesting
some nuanced they're like yeah well
let's let's go is the kind of melancholy
of when your kid is going away to
college oh well that's a an even
different flavor right you can notice
like the the qualities of the flavor of
feeling are in fact actually infinite
because they're directly associated with
the infinity of where it is to be
experiencing reality the whole of
reality so when I said ascetic
discernment I was saying developing
skillfulness in the protype precisely
these modalities the participatory
knowing and qualities of feeling and
becoming capable of using those
modalities to sense the characteristics
of the expression what is it what is it
that wants to be expressed in this trend
sended both before it is expressed right
if I were to think it at all in any in
any way see it smell it taste it I'm
already embodying it in that medium so
the most subtle like the most subtle
characteristic of this thing that wants
to be expressed not yet expressed in any
way and then having sensitivity to the
characteristics of the ways the modes of
expression you know painting or radio
that are most harmonious with the
essence of what it is that wants to be
expressed and then to be able to
skillfully do so and so that would be
aesthetic discernment would be those
three characteristics simultaneously we
might call that an individual who's
who's has that a master artist or a
great artist you know someone like a
Picasso who could take the essence of
the feeling of Guernica and then could
actually modulate into that into into
physical expression but imagine if you
had somebody who was sort of like
Picasso and Aesop it was like hmm you
know Guernica really actually needs to
be more in the music domain and then in
the painting domain well the Ninth
Symphony needs to actually painted not
music but I'm no longer bound to any
given medium I can now express myself
through all possible media with that
level of master like that would be the
god mode and that particular skill
[Music]
yeah well okay when you were first
talking I immediately saw its connection
to relationship with money and then I
didn't for a while and then maybe it
kind of circled back so let me let me
kind of let me take a crack at where
where I think I want to go
the idea of propositional verses
participatory knowing yeah it feels like
stories are constructed based on either
or both sort of those two ways of
knowing interacting in some way and I
was reflecting on how stories around
money are created people's sort of
relationship to safety security like
whether or not they deserve abundance
like there are all these like codes that
can get put in place that might affect
one's relationship to money which is
just flow energy so let's talk a little
bit about where some of those stories
come from and as someone who talks a lot
about sovereignty what are ways of
engaging with those stories in a way
that feels helpful wow that's great so
obviously right now I would like to put
up there as a caveat a big caveat which
is just to say that we're having this
conversation and it's just us and the
people commenting on it in YouTube but I
have no no sense whatsoever but I can
vaguely answer the question you're
asking in a deeply rich or whole way all
I can do is maybe nudge a little bit in
the direction right so I would be
putting some things out there it'll come
that makes sense to me and feel
meaningful I am quite certain that if
this is even a small part it's only a
very small part of that news story cool
and it's coming each person will have
their own yeah so some things that
as we're talking about money my is that
there's struggle has our has is implicit
in money there has been money is is mm
Wow so should take this for as part of
the story and then I know if this is how
true this story is but it is something
to that's useful a long time ago like
100 years ago and a lot longer
humans routinely had to deal with the
problem of scarcity like it was just the
nature of life the nature of life was
that we're gonna go hungry and in fact
the nature of life was the quite often
would go a lot hungry and some of us
from die of starvation depending on
where we were and the the vicissitudes
of nature in fact if you think about the
origin story of humans like the way that
we currently tell the story in Western
science is that we almost didn't make it
as a species like we almost died out and
so this notion of how do we actually
deal with privation not just scarcity
for privation is deeply fundamental and
the notion that we we live in a world
where it's at least plausible that
people no longer need to go hungry it's
actually a relatively recent idea you
know up until the middle of the 19th
century it was obvious that some people
are going to go without and some people
gonna go and go without a lot and go
without lots of things like food and you
know warmth in the in the winter and
nice clothes and fill in the plain and
so the money exists in in at least in
some sense at the some aspects of
there's lots of things going on here but
least in some aspects in order to answer
the question who's gonna go without
those who have more money don't and
those who have less money do and then
you've got the question of how do you
get it how do we allocate the money but
that's actually really important to
recognize the embedded in the underlying
fundamental assumption of money is
scarcity and in embedded in in the
psychology of scarcity is its act
privation of truly being at the edge and
maybe on the other side of the edge and
this is this makes sense so when you're
touching money like when you're just
holding it you're holding that lineage
you're holding that history in it can I
help would be felt inside you and the
moment that I have money is also the
moment become aware the fact that I
might not have money and I think this is
even a point in childhood we become
aware of this we become aware the fact
that whatever is coming to you that has
so far been coming to you as a nature of
family and your family may or may not
have resources but you don't really know
what's the limit you just know that
there's a flow that come because of
relationship and there's a point in
which become conscious to the fact that
there's this other object out there
called money that is the thing that has
that implication so then we have all the
stories that are built around that all
kinds of stories right you've got like
class conflict stories there's a lot
right for the past several hundred years
we've had formal efforts to shift the
way that we resource and allocate
privation and whether we're a loss or
resource and allocate plenitude through
formal narrative through manifestos and
propaganda right telling stories that
weaponize or try to create conflict to
shift that and I'm not you know saying
that that's a bad thing I'm just saying
that's the thing that's been out there
and a lot of that stuff but those
stories in the the mimetic vector of
those stories the they were designed to
land right they were designed to
influence and change behavior and some
of them are told in a very pithy way and
they land aggressively and by the way
this is true on both sides right so one
side might tell a story of you know you
worked really hard you earned this money
and the money that you have is in fact a
sign of your virtue alright and that's a
that's a story and that story protects
your readiness and willingness to make
an earn money and then there's another
story that says that merely
participating in the system of money
makes you as complicit in the
exploitation of the billions of people
who are absolutely harmed in at least
some senses by the global capitalism
there's another story right and and that
story makes it very difficult to choose
to to make an older money and we should
recognize these are both weapons both of
these stories are weapons they are not
there for the purposes of upgrading your
sovereignty they're there for the
purposes of in
your choices for the benefit of somebody
other than you mm-hmm and that's that's
important all right because neither one
of those ultimately is gonna end in a
good place and this is by the way I
think I think it's very important to
hold this because if you're coming from
the lineage that believes the hard work
and thrift equals virtue therefore that
story is a story that teaches people how
to be good in the world what I just said
offends you makes you angry because I
just told you that story in fact a story
that ultimately is not in services you
as the individual who's hearing the
story and by the way not in service with
other people if you're coming from the
lineage of capitalism is an exploitative
system that you then treads on the souls
in the bodies of the poor I just told
you that that story is also not in the
service of you the poor or other people
that also is gonna make you very
offended right nonetheless I'm putting
it out there that is my proposition that
all ideologies are bad ideology is just
not the right tool but that's one piece
one piece of this is that we've been
fighting ideological Wars now for a
couple hundred years and here's the
thing we've also had embodied
experiences as individuals and all these
stories are based on real actual
experiences right I've had experiences
where I have you know aspired to or
desired something and I could not afford
it and the people who could afford it
seemed like dicks it did not seem to be
natural virtue flowing to the allocation
of what these things are going on
clearly this thing is something that
should have been neared to me or at
least to somebody who I felt was you
know deeply deeply virtuous and the
people who were getting it were clearly
assholes all right there's no question
about that
I've worked in businesses where the
person who was in charge who drove like
was it from the movie office space
where's a douchebag right and they had
all kinds of fancy stuff and so the
internal logic of well there's something
about what's going on in the system in
the way that money works and gives
people access to to making their choices
be more influential that's deeply
mismatched with the notion of virtue and
the notion of
sovereignty and maturity and and I you
know have worked in the circumstances
where myself and my miok circumstances
never as bad as many where I felt that
all of my time like all of my time and
energy and life incapacity and vitality
was being thrown into waste like
absolute waste and I had no influence
over it that's real there's no question
that's absolutely real for almost
everyone actually I would say in fact
for everyone but we'll skip that part
but certainly for almost everyone and in
many cases brutally so alright so it's
not just my my time but actually
literally my life like whether I'm a
coal miner or I'm you know working at
what's a good example of what just
flat-out kills you well let's just go
into the third world where I'm you know
working in a machine shop sweatshop my
life energy my literal vitality of being
alive the duration that I'll be on this
planet and my capacity to have
meaningfulness is being completely bled
into this machine over which I have no
control in fact is massively more
powerful than me and cares about me not
at all or even sociopathically cares
about me only to the degree which can do
precisely what it's doing that's true I
mean that's it that's it that's a true
thing and those experiences are then
looking for meaning they're looking for
sense and so if some stories show up and
the stories land they're like oh
like oh man I feel terrible about the
fact that my choice is these
shoes that I just bought are actually
being you know built at the at the life
energy and the and the joy and the
possibility of kids in Pakistan now I've
got a story what am I gonna do
I can tell once I can pick some stories
to talk about how I'm really justified
and by the way I can rationalize the
 out of it because they didn't have
that job I've made sure that if they
didn't have that what would they have to
be even more impoverished or I could
pick the other stories and try to tell
other stories that support that the
choices that I find myself having to
make and in my the thing that I'm trying
to convey is all of that all of that is
actually getting in between you and
truly being a sovereign being in the
world and your capacity to make
effective choices in the direction of
increasingly supporting the sovereignty
of other people ongoing
and that's a which loosing weights
ethics so that's the proposition that I
would put out there is almost first
order for any choice that you're making
and in the context of what we're talking
about here at least ostensively of you
know entrepreneurship or wealth creation
same thing if you are being guided by
memes if you're being guided by malware
by narratives that have been constructed
by other people for their own purposes
then you're being separated from your
capacity to make the most effective
choices that you could make hmm yeah
it's it's it seems like what's required
is a disciplined practice in perceiving
what is rather than overlaying it with
cuz cuz overlaying something with a
meaning or a story happens unconsciously
all the time
oh yeah you like think you're observing
reality as it is and what you're
actually doing is there's some story
that's in there that maybe you developed
as a kid to survive in the world
and it's still running your your
programming and you can just accept that
as you could accept that as as reality
so like is it Turtles all the way down
to really seeing reality truly as it is
you know it's the exact opposite
actually
so it's Turtles all the way down if
you're trying to run it from the top of
the stack you're trying to run it
through propositional knowing it's
Turtles all the way down which is to say
that it's kind of a paradox because
you'll never get there if you're doing
it to the bottom up or from the ground
up through participatory knowing they're
already there fact you're always already
there I think there's nothing nothing
separating you but yourself nice and
there was a point when you were a kid
before that story was in your head and
guess what before was in your head it
wasn't and you were directly in
relationship with what is you may not
have been in relationship with what is
with aesthetic discernment I you may
have had a lack of skillfulness and how
to be able to sense the possibility of
what is presented and have a
skillfulness in your own way to respond
to it to be able to further choices in
that context
that's a different thing but your
capacity to be in relationship with what
is unmediated by narrative with
immediate meeting by ideology is
fundamental it's prime is primordial
it's the base case and so you could
always go there well you can always kind
of reset to that it's not trivial but it
can be done mm-hmm this is making me
think of a something you brought up and
some thread on Twitter or people were
talking about game B principals and then
this sort of meme of transition B came
up as like transition B's where
exploratory actions can sort of take
place in a transitional period between
game a game B sort of makes sense
conceptually and one of the things that
you were talking about was I'm feeling
drawn to high leverage spaces and
collaborating with people on projects
that could be hugely influential in the
future and actually are currently and
feeling like I don't remember exactly
how you phrase it but immature boys was
like one of the one of them up I wish I
mean it wish I'm included so I'm not oh
I am an immature boy okay great okay
let's so day by day but nonetheless yeah
vastly too much yeah
can you talk about what what you meant
by that unpack that idea a little more
yeah but can I just hold me to that
and bring me back to it there's
something that in what you were saying
that I wanted to I wanted to pop out
because it felt like it was pretty
important yeah that's right cuz so the
branch that brought us here was the
notion of I conveyed that my own
personal orientation tended to be
towards these kinds of high leverage
projects right okay
yeah and what I wanted to highlight was
that my sense is that the the right
choice for a given individual say for
example yourself it has to be coming
from from your particularity from your
singularity as a as a being in the world
so what is the right choice for me isn't
necessarily or even in any meaningful
way connected to the right choice for
you it may be that you're your vocation
your way
simultaneously creating wealth and to
some extent you have to wear you have to
eat and also of being most fully of
service to gain be that thing which we
yearn to actually have come into the
world is local to you and so there's
very little bit that I can say about my
own personal experience that should be
considered as a guide of like best
practices that's not it
two degrees which were able to get a
sense of me and how - shows up and why I
end up going in this direction and then
you can say well okay well nothing
enquiries know who am i and how does my
- show up like if it turns out that your
particular vocation most closely aligns
to wealth creation and game a running a
B&B then do that like that is perfect if
it's your growing your own food do that
if it's running a hedge fund okay give
it a shot like I it's it's gonna have to
be again an aesthetic discernment like
get a sense get a sense and increasingly
become sophisticated and being able to
actually use that sense to guide your
choices about who you are and and what
it is about your thoroughness into the
world that seems to lead to where you
particularly should be play like what is
your piece of the puzzle to be holding
that you're uniquely qualified to hold
right so that's just do want to make
sure that was out there so then in my in
my experience and I think there's a
there's a convergent region for wide
sort of low EQ or hampered EQ males tend
to be the ones that I was running into
and that's because developmentally an
orientation towards very rapidly high IQ
rapid turning of gears in strategy space
meaning in the objective movement of
objective forces to achieve desired
goals chess one of the things that's
very noticeable about chess is that
having empathy with the chess pieces
does not help you in any way that make
sense
mmm-hmm like really really caring about
the interior perspective of the night is
actually going to make you a worse chess
player if you are extremely good at
being entirely focused on the objective
situation holding an enormous amount of
information in your head about what's
going on and being able to very rapidly
select the right choice
strategically you'll be a good chess
player well it turns out that in the
world that we live did a lot of stuff
it's like that there's a lot of stuff
we're not actually having any meaningful
amount of empathy for the pieces that
you're moving around which now it turns
out to be people sometimes known as
employees or members of the political
movement do you happen to be leading and
having a very surgical focus on
maximally maximally strategically
positioning you might collect the
energetic domain may be energetic domain
I mean like the like in military terms
finding the weak point on enemy lines
and then surging your forces through the
enemy lines and then getting behind like
that's a that's what I'm talking about I
think that's how you win so if you're
talking about military strategy you're
also talking about business strategy you
know the metaphor is flow back and forth
very easily and you're also talking
about like the disruptive venture
strategy if I want to disrupt the
educational system there's a whole set
of characteristics and trainings that
make me just better at it than other
people in the domain of strategy and
particularly the domain of strategy
around technology because I would do
strategy around technology I need to be
able to grasp technology very deeply
which means I need to be able to hold
like lots of stuff in my head so I need
to be really smart like really smart and
I need to have done something
developmentally that put a lot of this
information in my head and also not be a
scientist because that's the scientist
is like really smart may understand
Science and Technology have to have this
other characteristic which is that I
actually have strategy as part of my
modus operandi something that I'm
motivated to deploy in the world that
I've actually spent lifetime life energy
on developing capacity so that's me
like I just described myself like that's
and then by the way just to add one
third
piece to it because as I was growing up
things like role-playing games and
science fiction and comic books are a
big part of my developmental environment
the notion that the world is very much
made up and we can we can choose to just
make up a different story and if we can
make that story more real than it is was
again part of my developmental
environment
okay well only a certain set of
characteristics that are gonna select
for people who are going to be
successful in any niche that has those
as the constraints most doesn't look
like me
those them will look like you know al
Han musk I are our arcs have a lot of
similarity to including failed marriages
and
Silicon Valley is littered with these
kinds of kids because Silicon Valley
figured out that that particular
typology fits a particular niche back in
the early days of Silicon Valley they
were like there remember they were like
coming out of World War two and
recognizing that there was something
about technology that was important and
powerful and trying to figure out like
okay how do we do this better with like
IBM was the East Coast you know
archetype so they come over to the West
Coast and they start experimenting with
different approaches on how to actually
do this technology innovation thing and
here they start getting these archetypes
where I just have used Steve Jobs as an
example it's a little bit late in the
curve and then that's a really good
example of a particular kind of person
who had these skills these capacities in
the capacity to to have this vast
imaginal space of all the possibilities
of what technologies could be combined
into to create a particular effect in
his case he had kind of a design
marketing version of it so he was seeing
it from the point of view of something
to be sexy that other people do
interesting to get because it's a kid he
had a lot of conman experienced and
grifter experience so that was part of
his developmental skillset but you know
was the act was his key partner in crime
in the beginning there was niak was
coming at it from more the kind of a
systems design and seeing how these
things were possible and Silicon Valley
is like oh wow okay I get it
these kind of really weird low EQ like
when I'm talking to him I'm not even
getting the facial expressions that
indicate that they're human being
sometimes kids they're the ones who are
the peak predator in this niche okay
cool I need to optimize for that I need
to get more find a way to make them more
effective so how do I put them in
constructs that either incentivize them
to do things that they don't want like
to do naturally they have to like talk
to other people and work with people who
have collaborative skill sets and all
this stuff like it figured out how to
create a construct that super empower
these particular individuals so that's
what I was saying is that in the things
that I found myself attracted to and
frankly it's still attracted to because
if I can earn this weird capacity
through all kinds of tragedy and
sacrifice online in part and the people
who I care about and it'll be nice to
able to put to use so the capacity to
see vast complex systems and see all the
pieces fit together
- notice how subtle shifts in science
can be shifted in technologies that
could disrupt certain characteristics of
the system to shift things in a big way
is attractive to me because I can do it
and it would be nice to believe that
it's useful but in any event what I'd do
if I go into that space is that I find
myself a whole lot of other folks who
are somewhat similarly disabled and I
noticed that particularly over the past
decade and a half unless you're playing
the Silicon Valley game straight down
the middle so unless you like build an
uber or Facebook or snapchat that
particular typology is new is not
actually the right typology for building
this next kind of thing mmm it throws
too many errors they can't collaborate
anywhere near as well as is necessary to
build game B for example so that's what
I was trying to say in that Twitter that
you know 50 said it like nine Langara
tours all right right yeah mmm I could
respond to this or we could look we
could pop over to the YouTube page and
yeah like that there's something going
on there that feels good okay cool okay
I'm looking at the YouTube chat box now
let's see hmm this is the first live
stream ever done actually I've just
realized me too me too if I do this
there are people who are perceiving it
in real time that I happen I have no
idea who they are correct yeah and and
there's a 20 second delay - oh well the
proceeding in 15 seconds from now yeah
so
okay I'm just gonna read a read the
first comment that I see see what
happens here if you consider the
different functions of money unit of
exchange store value fungible etc does
not need all of these features anymore
we have computers for trust that's just
a little snippet I sort of chose at
random is anything interesting in there
that you want to okay yeah sure let's
pop that open so it took me a while to
actually process it because a lot of
that I've been thinking that for a long
time so I just need to think okay what's
hmm maybe obvious to me but is in fact
not common knowledge so the first piece
is to recognize that the thing that we
call money has a bundle of function that
it tends to bundle together mm-hmm so it
bundles things like unit of account and
it bundles things like medium of
exchange and store values of things that
in economics is the way they talk about
it
I should mention some other ones by the
way just as long as we're at it because
because the key the key thing what about
to say is we can we can decouple we can
we can unbundle these things and think
about them as not necessarily having to
be part of the same cost or I should
mention by the way that had a meta-level
in terms of ethics bundling and
unbundling is a massive consideration
and the notion for example that we
bundle what's one we were talking about
well this is maybe a little bit
challenging but the the way that
recently in California getting vaccines
and going to school have been bundled is
an ethical quandary because there's
naturally belong together like there's
no reason for them to be together other
than the fact that because people want
to go to school if we bundle vaccines
with school now vaccines is upregulated
but the same thing happens like with
cable companies they don't you know if
you want to get ESPN you also have to
get Disney or whatever if you want to
get Internet you have to pay for TV like
bundling things to its enormous amounts
of ethical quandary because it takes
people's choices away so maybe that's
even part of the implication here is
that because money has
bundles lots of things together they
don't necessarily need to be bundled it
creates an ethical quandary because it
takes people's choices away and maybe
we're now in a moment where we could
begin to unbundle them in more and more
act akahl which is to say more choice
enhancing ways so the other things that
I was going to mention that are bundled
are if you look at the way that we that
we use money in in the economy it does a
bunch of different things simultaneously
and this is a big reason why it would
kind of get selected for as a convergent
attractor so the the price gives me an
orientation towards where I might orient
my or spend my time so if I look at say
wages as a price signal the price signal
that job which will pay me the most
money and that I can get maybe is the
best the thing that I should be doing
right the most value that I can actually
contribute to the economy by hypothesis
is that job which will pay me the most
money and that I can also get that I can
qualify for so the the price signal
helps us orient our time and attention
towards those those activities of the
most valuable that's really really
important like super hard like at this
very moment what conversation I'd be
having I'm talking with you is this the
right one are you and I actually
spending our time optimally but
economics would say is that if we had a
price signal every single choice that we
made was guided by a price signal I
could just look out there have like a
bunch of bid-ask markets for my
particular podcast time whichever
bid-ask market had the highest price by
definition would be the place where I'm
giving the most vile is everybody's
paying to the minutes of podcasts and
you know that's the ones the most
important so that's one piece right
that's one piece and this it's super
powerful because it's simple yet
universal meaning whether it's talking
on a podcast we're making an asparagus
and whether it's me or it's somebody in
Zimbabwe the price signal can kind of
slow through all those things but it
also does things like
orient it's actually how we go about
allocating resources so not just how do
we personally like how do I get my
choice is activated out in the world
it's also through money and so I am
oriented towards how I choose to attend
my time and energy what work will I do
to give value to the whole but also I'm
telling the whole what value I want them
to give me and these two things match so
if I've got you know $10 I put those 10
dollars on a new iPhone then the entire
economy is like iPhones are better let's
be doing more of that good $10 on orange
that's the entire economy shifts to
oranges and more importantly terms of
ethics if I say I want to is it organic
orange as opposed to a pesticide Orange
then in principle that signal percolates
out and there's some shift in the whole
choice field towards slightly more
organic ish this is a lot of noise in
the total attenuated signal but then
it's also incentives it's not just
orientation it's incentive and
motivation like well you know okay the
entire value field is telling me that I
should be a doctor
cuz that's you know what we pay me the
most money and that I can get I can
qualify for but I don't want to be a
doctor being a doctor sucks right but
nope that's your motivation your
incentive and here's the trade-off do
something that you think sucks you know
are interested in make a lot of money
and then you get more choice making to
get the things that you want say that
little loop right there which of course
we're all familiar with that trade-off
I'll go be an investment banker do
really bad things make a lot of money
and then get whatever I want which tends
to also be interesting enough vapid and
not fulfilling but they've got another
one which is really interesting at a
higher level we had this hypothesis that
the collective allocation of resources
that are being created by this bimodal
relationship between where I'm orienting
my time and attention by the price
signal and how I'm getting what I want
creating price signals through demand
puts choice making coming back to the
beginning of the conversation
differentially in the hands of the
people who are the best at getting us
what we want entrepreneurs in the middle
and so he
I'm making oranges and you're making
oranges and I either am able to make
them cheaper or able to make them let's
say organic better and the market wants
oranges and I'm either making them
cheaper or better or some combination
thereof I'm making more money I mean
they're getting more demand or my cost
basis is lower so more money is accruing
to me on satisfying global need more
more values being produced and therefore
I get more choice making all right so I
remember I had there's two things that
are bundled here one is my incentive for
doing the thing that the market wants
that maybe I had more may or may not one
is that I have more choice making it to
further my own interests this is a
separate one this is because I'm not
proven to be effective I should
be given more choices because then I can
steer our collective resource allocation
more effectively Ekans okay
gasoline him in the collector cars I've
got a lot of money now so I can choose
to put 100 million dollars of my own
money into it
jumpstart this thing and to some extent
that's true to some extent the people
who are effective at X producing oranges
my house will be globally effective at
other things but of course in some sense
it's also not true just because you're a
really good investment banker doesn't
mean you know jack about education
and yet you have generic Universal
choice making capacity through this
token and called money and if you choose
to put your mind towards funding
research or funding nonprofits or
funding private schools or if they have
to do an education your choice is
beginning go in that direction you can
kind of like launder investment banking
expertise into education expertise
without having any of the thing on the
right it has a limited thing on the left
so that's a lot of words but it's
actually I think an important thing to
have in your mind which is money bundles
a lot of things together on the one hand
because it does that it's extremely
capable of producing certain kinds of
efficiencies in a sex it's highly
competitive against our there's
signaling mechanisms on the other hand
because it bundles all those things
together you get a lot of stuff that
don't necessarily they aren't
necessarily actually well handled stuck
together and it's really hard to pull
them apart because they're part of this
important powerful system as our
interlocked or TWRP
noted we now live in a world where
information is super easy you know when
signal is being sent through
face-to-face conversation the rare
teletype and maybe letters money is
insanely more powerful than any their
possible signaling mechanism for
propagating information through their
social feel when everybody is 24/7
unfortunately connected with mobile
giant computers we could produce as many
signals as we'd like up to you're
literally the limits of your attention
so we can imagine a system where we
begin to have a very large number of
other kinds of signals the folks at the
the meta currency project was I think
remarkably poor marketing acumen called
current sees seeing currents to replace
currency but different kinds of
currencies that signal different things
differently to more fully actually help
us make sense of those values as opposed
to all these things that are bundled
together so yes by the way challenge it
it's not obvious exactly how you do that
and most efforts in that direction have
largely well most efforts in the
direction of unseating money have
largely failed when they give you some
simple obvious examples of things of
this sort that are sort of obviously
successful Amazon and Yelp ratings so
I'm trying to find out how to most fully
satisfy my desire to have a really good
book or having a good meal a good cup of
coffee
well one mechanism might might use is
the price signal I might look for the
most expensive book most expensive book
but I can afford looking at say okay
this book's $30 I've only want to spend
20 20 go that's the price signal trying
to help me orient my time and attention
efficiently but of course that's kind of
a shitty signal it's obviously terrible
so Amazon signal of ratings and reviews
radically increases my capacity to
process that information space and you
might notice really shift the price
signal no so if I have a book is trying
to sell itself for 30 bucks and there's
another book that's sort of roughly in
the same domain so they're comparable
and ones that one star wants a five star
the one star's not going to sell it all
zero did everyone this five star is
gonna sell can't take all the man so the
price signal something it's shifted and
this one either just goes away or the
price has to go down more more clearly
the case in yellow I said I've got five
gunshots and one of the coffee shops has
five stars and each one has like going
down coffee shop with three stars if
it's for charity turning exactly the
same price it's gonna be getting much
less sales yeah so this is actually
completely different information
signaling mechanism the currency in this
case in the form of a review or a star
rating that is not money and
meaningfully changes our capacity to
make effective choices and getting our
are our needs fulfilled and by the way
also has direct real measurable
implications for the price signal
affecting money so we can be very very
clever about that we can begin to think
about modulating different forms of
currencies including little bit
different forms of money that have
different design characteristics and
then the the altcoin universe played
that's a bunch of difference different
ones and there's you know hundreds of
millions of other variations and see
what kinds of consequences does have so
what I have to say about that hmm
another question that I want to ask you
someone threw it on the group was um
like if the Silicon Valley personality
disposition you described earlier that
is the peak predator and in the tech
space what are some of the qualities
that you see essential and somebody who
has an entrepreneurial mindset who is
also interested in sense making and
transitioning into game B what are some
of those qualities that are actually
become the peak predator in this new
space wasn't that case the the metaphor
at peak predator feels a little off and
I think that's yep that's one
characteristic yeah my notion if
something feels off like a basic
orientation towards these qualities of
feeling there's aesthetic discernment an
orientation towards aesthetic
discernment meaning a basal capacity to
attend to building skillfulness and
using that modality to make choices that
would be a primary characteristic
because this particular modality is
increasingly meaningful increasingly
important for example in navigating
complexity do you want to navigate
complexity using analytical
you're going to have a very bad day if
you want to end up get complexity using
aesthetic discernment you'll have a much
better day by the way it still not gonna
be an awesome day because complexity is
complex but it could be a much better
here's another one I called this and I
don't think it really landed I called
infinitesimal courage so the story there
was something like an inquiry into the
nature of courage itself what is courage
and one of the things that I noticed was
that at least I proposed so who knows
that this is vaguely valid but I propose
that courage was an instant a simple
exaptation
of the fact that it was discovered in
the evolutionary arc that adults parents
who put themselves at physical
first-person risk oftentimes would have
their children would survive alright so
the sort of the the moment bear
protecting her cubs that instinct to be
willing to put yourself at first-person
risk leading to net net positive
consequences for your genome becomes an
underlying capacities that can be
adapted meaning taken away and put into
a different context where okay well now
I'm not protecting my genome I'm
protecting my tribe
okay well tribes that had courage more
people who had courage
radically out competed tribes that
didn't have courage so okay it becomes
even more further embedded both now by
the way genetic deep deep disposition
predisposition x cultural reinforcement
we're telling lots of stories about
heroes who sacrifice themselves to the
greater good but then it can be exactly
for my tribe to my nation
there's no French tribe but Napoleon did
a great job of creating this meta story
this narrative this ideology that there
is a French nation and once again
exacted courage so I'm willing to now
just charge at a whole bunch people
throw and let it be really fast in
defense of this thing again the genetic
predisposition of the mama we are
protecting her cubs x culture creates
this thing encourages very powerful and
those those groups that are more fully
capable of up and regulating courage
mostly in young males clearly have been
more successful over historical time but
what's interesting about it that I that
I was thinking about was it's almost a
school
very narrow band which is the your
willingness to subject yourself to
meaningful harm and damage from the
outside and you put yourself in front of
things that could create physical or
mental emotional harm to you when you're
protecting something with your well
that's your body but the interior side
tends to be completely not present in
Kurt right so for example the I think
relatively ubiquitous are not ubiquitous
but the roads of the complex story of
say I truly truly courageous soldier who
kills himself because he's he's gay gay
has not received well received in the
thirties and forties in the military and
he can't you know deal with that in his
interior and he never chooses to you
know find a way to process this is that
you in that story or fill in the blank
it doesn't matter there's many many many
things so what happens is that courage
is very outward facing but we find that
actually most of the things that we have
to overcome particularly now can trick
me in this new story our inward face and
the old school courage doesn't help us
at all
in fact it helps us zero maybe even - it
distracts us we can create an enemy out
there that we can you know gear up for
old-school courage to go out and combat
precisely to distract ourselves from
actually dealing with the enemy in here
so infinitesimal courage was this
particular changing of habits from a
version of curiosity so something comes
up so makes you have some experience you
are you experience a a what's it called
micro aggression yes you experience some
micro aggression and you are micro
trigger now you've got rough broadly
speaking two possible responses one
would be an aversion response that is a
bad thing I'm going to avoid it either
I'll avoid the person or I will create
some kind of protection mechanism or
possibly even just dilute it and repress
my own experience those are all of
version responses or I can have a
curiosity response I can be like okay
something just happened here some signal
is happening in my environment I'm gonna
be curious what the hell is going on and
almost be Orion
towards it not to go into it recklessly
because it might be too dangerous but to
pay attention but without a reaction
right not not to push back or protect or
don't whatever happens to me but
actually good I mean what's this all
about actually become more open more
perceptive slow down
fan open your perceivers and your sense
making no break break down your
ideological presuppositions of the
project what must be the case already oh
this is other this is just a bad guy bad
guy just happened I had a conversation
at a coffee shop recently and actually
don't know how old he was younger than
me but I don't know how old exactly and
he he gave me some really interesting
insight into the experience I guess
folks who are probably you know
Millennials and Gen Z I don't know
exactly but people who grew up very much
in this in the digital field digital
natives because he was noticing that
there was a an almost instantaneous out
grouping trigger that a huge amount of
social experience was very quickly
endeavoring to sense whether the
internet the person you're interacting
with is in-group out-group
and after he told me that I start paying
attention I noticed this actually does
seem to be the case like when you're
talking about the pity things that are
going on Twitter a lot of that it seems
to be well explained by people
protecting themselves and then sending
signals out into the world that are
designed to identify whether or not the
peoples are interacting with our
in-group out-group mmm-hmm and on the
one hand this is really quite
challenging that creates enormous
inability to communicate because that
notion of in-group and out-group is
already and that just forms micro
drivers you're not you very quickly we
devolve into a balkanization to micro
tribes and now I'm generative micro
drives if I identify everything that is
signaling negative as out-group then all
I have is a very homogeneous in-group
and evaporate pretty quickly but the
increase to why like how does you get
there is actually
interesting and it's and I think that it
speaks to this capacity or this
competence in infinitesimal courage or
speaks of the need for it which is to be
able to shift your habit from a habit of
reactive reinforcement of what may or
may not be a an interior that actually
serves you more fully and shift that
happen towards curiosity where you can
actually be more and of course this is
all part of sovereignty you can be more
able to be aware of more thoughtful
about making choices about how you want
to respond to this phenomenon and then
choose those who actually do certain
which may take some time to to suss out
so aesthetic discernment and
infinitesimal courage or two
characteristics that came up I'm another
one was I've told this one in the
language of information theory in terms
of signal discernment in general signal
up regulation and down regulations
there's like two movements one is like
right now as you're listening to me
spew nonsense out of my mouth to what
degree are you able to just separate the
signal from the noise
like if you're rejecting what I'm saying
because some of its noise then you're
wasting everybody's time if you're
rejecting what I'm saying because some
of this noise and then you actually take
the time to write that down on YouTube
you're wasting even more time but if
you're able to say okay look nobody's
gonna be telling the whole truth
in fact almost everybody's full of
 a lot because it's hard not to
people to I'm gonna listen and
I'm just gonna throw away the parts that
are noise and take the parts to the
signal and that's that that's just how
these relationships work all right so
that that's like three levels that I
just went through right one level is not
to be so fully reactive that you
actually waste your own time reacting
and then expressing your reaction not to
be reactive but then to actually just
learn that that's just you that's just
the world we're in or your real world
where you need to learn how to listen
and pull that signal which is the thing
that is nutritive for you throw away the
noise and then and that's the first
first move and then the second move is
then how do you bring more signal back
into the world and I may not be in this
conversation I may be in this
conversation you hear what I'm saying
you're like okay
Jordan like 85% we just said it's
 it's 15% sounds pretty good so
let's let's focus on that and it's up
regulate that and get that to like 45%
can we do that and here's how I'm gonna
try to contribute right so you're now
using your discernment in expression and
adding something back into the
conversation which makes the
conversation even richer for us and they
anybody else who perceives it or you
might just bring it into other
conversations could be anywhere right
you're bringing that signal back into
the world isn't that exactly where it is
as long as it is an increase in the
overall signal in the world hmm but I
was talking to a woman I think Romanian
descent who now lives in Germany named
Alex Alex s I think who's what she told
me to call her or how to name her and
she was telling me about a ritual that
she loved when she was a child I think
it's part of the Orthodox religion and
Eastern and the way that it worked was I
mean I I don't I'm just gonna tell the
story the way I have probably
embellished it so I'm probably not
telling you the truth I'm telling you a
story that landed for me that is largely
based about what she actually told me
okay I'll toss out the yeah
exactly
exactly perfect now we're friends I plan
we're playing together so midnight on
Easter the lights are out it's dark
candles are lit at churches people come
with candles unlit candles they come to
the church they light their candle they
come out of the church they walk down
the street if you encounter somebody on
the street with an unlit candle you have
a lit candle it is sort of the thing to
do to light their candles your candle so
in the beginning the source of light is
at the church very quickly the
overwhelming source of light is just
people in your community who are walking
through the streets and if you just by
the way do the math on this it's gonna
be a very steep exponential curve right
so for a while there's only a few people
who have walked into churches that their
candles were walking out but as they
encounter somebody with a unlit candle
and they lighted the number of lit
candles begins to increase the
probability of an unlit candle
encountering a lit candle increases and
you get an explosion and now the whole
town is lit by these candles of
relationships that people actually
encountering each other and these thing
the metaphor because the signal noise
metaphor is very similar to the light
heat metaphor in thermodynamics so one
thing is to become in yourself so I'm
now I'm using the metaphor the this
capacity that we're exploring is to
become a candle meaning become an object
that when exposed to heat can become
light and produce light oh don't be a
wet a green stick right where I can put
a lot of heat on you nothing comes out
except for maybe acrid smoke don't do
that become a candle we're just to not
too much heat combustion light and by
the way it gives off more heat so now
what happens is become candle is one
thing then seek the light as you're
walking around you've become candle and
you seek the light
seek the light find the light when you
find the light come close enough to the
light that you yourself have become a
source of light when you're a source of
light share that light as you see other
people who are becoming candle share
whatever light you have which actually
means also sharing heat to help them
combust but it's through the signal of
light to traction able to perceive that
relationship at the end of the day you
don't want you don't want to melt their
candle you don't it's like hold your
candle near their candle so just melts
you actually want to turn that heat into
light Oh enlighten them and if enough
people become candles and enough people
seek the light and that people share the
light skilfully then you get an
explosion an exponential explosion that
starts flow but if and maybe in certain
locations certain individuals or places
or places where the first candles are
lit but eventually more and more and
more of the candles are actually
happening from the community and then it
becomes everyone hmm are you just trying
to get me to accept Jesus Christ as my
Lord and Savior
haha if you will decide to Orthodox is
your thing then definitely you should do
that it'd be a very weird choice to
become a Eastern Orthodox and not accept
Jesus Christ but I imagine there are
other metaphors that can be employed no
it's beautiful one thing one other thing
that I want to ask you is about oh man I
should reduce how much time do you have
10 more minutes ok 10 more minutes ok
generative
collective's what did you say generative
something it was like tribes generative
tribes one of the things you were saying
about social media was people constantly
signaling in group non generative tribes
action is what I said and so the inverse
that would be a generative tribe yeah I
want to I want to point to the inverse
of it so okay I've been thinking a lot
about like what what makes up a
generative tribe and yeah and like
wanting to out like outsource and
experiment in in creating a tribe'
degenerative in nature and I don't know
what that looks like yet I'm just sort
of like hovering around that idea and I
wonder if you have any thoughts about
yeah boy do it it's yeah it's you it's a
huge topic and it's gonna be it's gonna
depend on like this particular tribes
disposition what their work is in the
world but just in the spirit of like
shining a light in that direction do you
have any ideas of groups that are doing
something something like this or maybe
just your own thoughts of how you could
see that being a potentially valuable
exercise I know that's the only looking
huge question when you say groups are
doing something too like this what was
the this was you're pointing yet I think
it's like um tribes that are groups that
are experimenting with with collective
coherence so maybe it's a start up maybe
for experimenting with generativity yes
so they're not so there at least at
least they're conscious they're
consciously aware of the possibility and
maybe importance of we might call
technologies of generativity in what
they are doing and they may they may be
just that that may be all they're doing
let's just do that or they may be saying
we're gonna do X but what we're doing
expert are also be mindful of this like
that's what you're talking about yeah
yeah so yeah yeah there's a an
increasingly large number it was
interesting actually now that I think
about it is that they seem to come from
a number of
different qualitative alright well
different kinds of approaches to
addressing that problem so I'll give you
an example one approach we might think
of as being architectural so I was
talking to a guy named Oliver Sauter I
think he's working on a project called
world brain of which one when pieces is
called mimics so they're looking at it
from the point of view of how do we
generate an information architecture a
technical tool like Wikipedia is a
technical tool that by its nature the
way that it's physically designed up
regulates the generativity of anybody
who uses it so that's one example by the
way it's very important the very
important example that sounds like we
said think that the media that we use
sure our expressive capacity in certain
ways and then don't further than other
ways well one of the things we can use
is design we can design or redesign the
tools that we use to upregulate our
generative capacity so in this case what
happens is the this piece this approach
has it has the advantage of scale in
some sense everybody on the planet could
use this tool and so everybody in the
planet would then be participating in
some level in a meta generative meta
tribe so that's one more approach as
another approach I actually participated
in a I guess a project or a gathering I
think that the overall project headline
is called Jubilee and they were using a
with you're calling a sacred technology
from the indigenous peoples of North
America called circle circle practice or
circle talking it's not it's not guys
since dr. circling it's more like a
Kevin's in the language so there's a
very specific term Anthony I know there
is anyway a circle of people talking and
particular characteristics exactly how
it works in what you do when your prep
is we are called called upon and they
were bringing in the inquiry of
endeavouring to actually do the work of
healing the primordial wound of science
which involves first the inquiry of what
is that primordial world and we may be
just getting to the bottom of it
healing them and what they brought
together was a quite diverse group of
individuals which was me as well as
individuals who are representing
different indigenous groups and
different cultures that were
participating in this circle in Oakland
and then there will be others in
different locations using the same
sacred technology and certain cross over
participants and there was a very
distinct awareness both in the circle
and then after by on the part of this
group of this of the sacred technology
itself like the technology the capacity
was saying ok you know we've got like a
you know Western scientists from just
straight down the middle in this group
and then we've got you know an in person
for an indigenous nation that they had a
lot of epistemological and historical
and emotional distance between them how
can we actually have a generative
conversation these are these are
actually two very concrete tribes that
are quite distinct and oftentimes don't
get along and can't enough times in fact
it pissed OMA logically can't
communicate and I remember actually a
particular story where it was a just
sort of spoken as obvious that we're all
part of the same human family because we
all started in Africa and the indigenous
guys like I don't know about you but my
people came out of a hole in the ground
near the river he just tried to impose
an epistemology on me about the nature
of reality that I don't accept
that's not my mr. Hollin gman so like
whoa okay so that's and she's trying to
resolve that gradient with an effort of
this particular sacred technology thank
you for participating in this it was a
lot a lot of that you know like guys in
stocks were circling practice is efforts
to figure out how to actually generate
relationality dynamics that change the
way that we're actually able to have
kinds of conversations I'm actually
beginning a project with gai and John
for baekje and Kris I don't know exactly
how it's gonna play out but the four of
us just started having a conversation of
being more self aware like being more
intentional about trying to do exactly
that kind of thing at a meta level what
I would say is that the there's like a
set of basic characteristics that will
give you the generativity of a of a
tribe but of a gathering of human beings
these are like the design constraints
and they're actually constraints and
they have tensions so I mentioned one
earlier like homogeneity versus
heterogeneity or diversity versus
sameness so a fully homogeneous group
has a very low generativity essentially
they collapse wasn't called a physical
point you know if you and I believe
exactly the same things there is no
difference between us we are the same
person and this that and then we're not
generative like our dialogue and I
helpful it's just some of us will be
dying with myself I'm closer to myself
to the degree to which you and I have
diverse perspectives the possibility is
larger and then the generativity is some
something but of course as the diversity
increases then you have the problem of
actually communicating I've got a lot of
space we have to traverse if you speak
Klingon and I only speak through a
language of light signals and you're
blind we're gonna have a really hard
time communicating of a huge diversity
of perspective but the diversity is so
large that the actualization of that
possibility is essentially zero and so
you're actually solving for two
different constraints you need to have
enough diversity of perspective the
possibility space is large but you have
to have enough sameness that the
actualization of that possibility is
real and those are there's a two
constraint you need to have and then in
between those two now you have your
psycho technologies or your sacred
technology or associate technologies
depending on what you'd like to do which
are precisely about enabling the
shifting of that gradient and so a wide
variety of different kinds of psycho
technologies cannot be regulate the
capacity to process different things
that get in the way of communication so
if I want to go in the direction of
language
Google Translate helps somebody who
speaks French speaks somebody who speaks
English to a greater or lesser extent
they help a lot better than that have
endured all right so let's say socio
technology that allows now me who speaks
English to have a much larger capacity
to actualize the possibility of the
conversation of somebody who's only
fluent in French and the possibility
between us might be quite large
there's something about languages it's
real and this is kind of a neat thing
circling practice since duck stuff
really helps with people when you've got
drama between people where the
relationality is an issue just to sheer
ability to be in relationship
is an issue and it creates a container
where we're actually exploring what's
going on in our relationship is almost a
primary inquiry and that dramatically
increases the possibility of at least
knowing what's happening and then maybe
being able to address it in an
increasingly mature and effective
fashion and then we can actually
potentially have generative
conversations outside of that and it may
be the only dinner to we we want end or
need is relational because that may be
the thing that we're trying to deal with
there's lots of lots I mean the spaces
absurdly enormous but broadly speaking
I'd say it's there's three primary
characteristics one is sovereignty so
this is your capacity as an individual
to more and more and more be able to be
in relationship with reality which
includes other people the second is the
set of psycho technologies that are
associated with increasing the capacity
to move from the possibility of a
conversation into exact shoe allottee
through the complexity whatever happens
through the characteristics of the
conversation and then the third is the
actual conversations who's talking to
who and what was the was the what's the
thing that's bringing people into place
what is the discernment that is allowing
people to choose exactly where they're
going to put their time and attention in
which combination of possible
conversations they can be having I just
mentioned by the way you can actually do
a nine dimensional it takes each one of
these three and feeds them through the
others so that nine dimensional is
probably a better construct but that's
probably pushing it too far
damn man this has been a really great
conversation I know I do I was gonna go
in it went into some really interesting
places yeah it feels like this is a
whole bunch of stuff that I don't
believe that I've said or talked about
outside of more private context so I'm
interested to see if it lands seconds
actually this felt like a really nice
conversation I quite enjoyed the where
we went even though it seems like maybe
we went off script quite a bit yeah
yeah it's neat and treat to see what
happens I'm also intrigued to see if
anything happened like what wallet was
going on like was there a few livestream
yeah that's the thing is like there is a
livestream and people have been talking
and I've just been noticing that like
this is the first time I've done it and
when I would try and look to see like
what was being generated in the chatroom
I would
lose the thread of what you know I had
to I felt like I was being pulled and so
I wonder if like if anyone you need a
third person yeah exactly
if anyone the group has any ideas of
what that that might look like and how
to have more engagement with the
chatroom you maybe there's a third
person that like will throw up the
question on the screen no you need a
third person who's watching the chat
room yeah and is basically sitting
outside the meta conversation yeah and
feeling what's happening between us here
but also feeling what's happening there
is able to actually say okay here's the
thing that's actually getting the most
medial energy let me you know like um
like a director or a conductor with an
orchestra he has like a directing the
flow yes yes exactly
okay I'll look into that I want to make
this a weekly thing if possible and just
like with different guests and have it
be it helps hold me more accountable
with this project it's a good tool
yourself okay holding yourself
accountable publicly will help you lose
weight quit smoking and make podcasts
okay thanks Jordan right I meant all
right talk you later