[Music]
welcome you found the portal
I'm your host Eric Weinstein and today
we have something that I think is going
to be very interesting for many of you
we are happy to have a guest that I've
been looking forward to meeting for
quite some time who's been a personal
intellectual hero of mine and he is a
the Gorter family professor of Islamic
Studies a professor of economics and
also a professor of political science
all at Duke University so welcome
har Sheldon is to our esteemed colleague
dr. Tim or Curran I'd like to be here
thanks for the invitation
so the reason that I've been so eager to
have you here is that this this podcast
is themed around the idea of escape from
a more humdrum existence that is can
starting to I think work less and less
well for more people and so we're trying
to find ways out of the sort of
cognitive traps that we've been held
within for quite some time and I first
became aware of your work when I was
searching for an explanation of why the
field of economics built such an utterly
simplistic model of human preference and
belief and I was led to a one-book of
yours in particular called private
truths and public lies hope I have the
ordering on that correct as private
roads public lies yes without the end
okay private true it's public lies which
brought an entirely new perspective in
the field of economics which is that of
preference falsification I wondered if
you would sort of just give us a brief
introduction to this theory and then
perhaps I'll say a little bit more about
why it's so powerful and also so
incredibly dangerous to the field so
preference falsification is the act of
misrepresenting our wants under
perceived social pressures and it aims
deliberately at disguising one's
motivation
and ones dispositions it is very common
and sometimes it occurs in very innocent
situations if I go into somebody's home
and they ask me what do you think of the
decor I've selected I might actually
even though I don't like the decor
doesn't suit my taste I might say to say
oh it's it's wonderful and compliment my
hosts taste i falsified my preference
but not much harm has come out of it
I've avoided hurting my feelings
but preference falsification happens in
a very very wide array of settings and
some of these settings it leads to
terrible consequences in the political
arena people are and people whether
they're on the left or what they
identify with with the right or the some
somewhere in between people routinely
falsify their political preferences for
fear that they will be skewered if they
express exactly what's on their mind if
they say exactly what they want if they
express the ideas excuse me that lie
under those those preferences and just
to give some examples from our society
immigration is one of these issues
abortion is another issues we have a
clash of absolutes you read the
pro-choice or pro-life and there's
nothing in between and if you take a
position in between and offer a
more nuanced opinion that you favor free
abortion let us say in the first
trimester but not later on you will be
accused by both sides there's very
little that you will gain and there's a
great deal that you may lose and in
today's society you may lose a lot of
friends because the main fault line in
American society today is political
ideology there are more people who will
object to their son or daughter marrying
somebody who holds the wrong idea who
supports the wrong party has the wrong
ideology then will oppose to their son
or daughter marrying somebody you have a
different ethnic group or a different
ethnic or a different religion so it can
lead what what can happen on issues like
this is happening on issues like this is
we simply don't come to a resolution
yeah so before we started this podcast
in the time that we were talking
together I sort of made an unfriendly
accusation which is that I think that
you have developed a brilliant theory
but that you have not actually even
understood its full importance and that
part of this has to do with the oddity
that sometimes to see what sub dangerous
and what's so powerful you actually need
curators so I'm hoping to help by
curating a little bit of what I've
gotten out of out of your theory how
you've taught me even though we've never
met before this week one of the things I
think that's fascinating is that we have
a democracy that is stitched together
through markets and when you think about
the role of economics it the free market
- or even a managed market allows us to
each individually direct a larger amount
of our action without central direction
and so anything that happens in the
economic sphere like a new theory of
preferences could have absolutely
powerful implications because of the
role the
our understanding of economics plays in
underpinning civil society one of the
things I think that's extremely
dangerous about your theory and one of
the reasons I'm attracted to it is is
that it is backwards compatible with
standard economics that is if my private
preferences and my public preferences
are the same preferences then without
loss of generality as we're fond of
saying in mathematics everything that
you're bringing to the table is just
some unnecessary extra variables because
in fact the two are coincident however
if my public preferences in my private
preferences are different then while I
can recover the old theory from your
work I'm now in some new territory in
which I've expanded the field to
accommodate new phenomena such as an
election that whose result no one sees
coming and we've we've broadened the
field to accommodate vast inefficiencies
that our political system that involves
people expressing their political
preferences once every four years or a
system that involves primaries
nominating conventions and so on and
ultimately an election that this system
ultimately produces an outcome that
reflects people's preferences when you
introduce preference falsification into
the picture when you accept it as
something significant and I would
suggest that its significance is is
growing you open up the possibility that
our political system can generate
outcomes that very few people want that
generates very inefficient outcomes you
open up the possibility that because
people are not openly expressing what's
on their mind that the system of
knowledge development knowledge
production and knowledge developed
and therefore solving problems that that
gets corrupted well in one of the ways
in which I've tried to figure out how to
make what you do a little bit more
mimetic so that more people start to to
appreciate it one of the ways I've tried
to talk about it with among friends is
that you have developed a theory of the
black market in the marketplace of ideas
that is underground concepts underground
desires unmet fears that can't be
discussed in the curated market managed
by institutions another way of saying is
that this is the economy of silence or
the economy of deception do those fit
I would prefer economy of deception
because people don't say stay silent we
we don't have you know in our society on
most issues people don't have the luxury
to stay silent when they are in an
environment consisting mostly of
pro-choice people or mostly of pro-life
people they are asked to take a position
so it's not that some people are
speaking and other people are silent if
that were the case we would know well
there they're 70 percent of society is
silent
they must not agree with either of the
two extreme positions pro-life and and
but people will say things like but
people actually pretend when they're in
a group that is primarily or exclusively
pro-choice or pro-life they sense this
they take that position that is
preference falsification and in doing
that they also fail to express or choose
not to express the reasons why they find
an intermediate position more attractive
sure and those all of those reasons get
subtracted from public discourse we have
a very distorted public discourse on we
Shh that is underlying our whole
political system so I mean there's so
much that's juicy to dig into I think
that there that you may be undervaluing
some of the aspects of silence where
somebody will say well look III I'm not
a very political person somebody else
might make an admonition keep your head
down stick to your knitting
stay in your lane there all of these
ways in which we we do favor silence but
those of us who have to speak in a
professional capacity we're expected to
form opinions on these things we really
don't have the luxury usually of staying
silent yeah I I think I will grant this
point that there many issues on which we
consciously avoid putting ourselves in
positions where we will have to take a
position we take ourselves out of the
game we take ourselves out of the game
but and we were successful in doing that
in most contexts but in going through
daily life we find ourselves in
situations in social events or in in the
workplace where we have to take a
position everybody's taking a position
there's an issue that is you're sitting
around the table an issue is being being
discussed and it has to do with
workplace policy on some issue and you
have to take a position and you have to
sometimes vote so your point is
well-taken that there are there are hole
in any person's life there there's the a
pretty broad zone in which you can you
can avoid not taking a position so yeah
let's go back through a little bit of
just modern history and talk about the
times in which preference falsification
even though people have often not had
the terminology for this theory really
came into its own in a way where people
were so surprised by a turn of events
that they came to understand that people
held preferences that were far different
than the Preferences that had been
assumed to be held and relatively let's
say radical radically quick shifts in in
that structure let me give you an
example of from Eastern Europe communism
was remains highly inefficient social
system inefficient economically highly
repressive also it was a puzzle to many
people that it survived for decades in
Eastern Europe and for a long time the
dominant view was that what kept
communism in place for decades in the
Soviet satellites in the Soviet Union
itself was brute force and people would
give the examples of Prague in 1968 or
the show trial Hungary the the show
trials of of Stalin this is the kind of
thing the gulag people would talk about
you know refer to Solzhenitsyn's
book when he put you actually looked at
these societies there were some of them
and which there were them there was no
gulag and the prison population was
smaller than the prison population at
the time in the United States as a
proportion Czechoslovakia is a good
example
so the was in Czechoslovakia wasn't a
place that we associate with show trials
yes there was we think of 1968 when
Soviet tanks came rolling in but even
after that you didn't have major trials
you didn't have huge numbers of people
disappearing so what is it that kept
Czechoslovakia communist Society and
what kept it a communist Society is that
people who hated the system pretended to
approve of the system
and turned against dissidents the very
few dissidents who had the courage to
say this is a system that is not gonna
last forever it's an inefficient system
it hasn't brought us freedom the state
hasn't withered away it's gotten bigger
it's more important in our in our life
and they would turn against them what
sustained communism all across the
Soviet Union and it's East European
satellites was preference falsification
now what this meant was that the system
was extremely unstable people were
falsifying their preferences because
other people were doing so I was even
though I was against communism you were
against communism
we both supported the system because the
other was now this a system where if one
of us besides for whatever reason that
we're going to call a spade a spade and
say this system doesn't work I don't
like it I go out in the street and I
start demonstrating a lot of other
people are gonna follow so what happened
is ultimately the when some
demonstrations began and it happened to
be the demonstrations started in in East
East Germany
these demonstrations started growing
every week more and more people found
themselves in themselves the courage to
say what they believed and to come out
against the regime the regime itself
didn't want to overreact there were
discussions and the political some
people said we better crack down right
now or this is going to get out of hand
other people said well if we crack down
now and some people die that can the
negative effects could be greater there
winters is coming pretty soon it will be
harder it will be people will be more
reluctant
go out in the in the street let's let
this pass let's not overreact before
they knew it the the Berlin Wall was was
down and that created a domino effect
nobody foresaw that and it's quite
significant that among the people who
who missed this were the dissidents the
the East European dissidents who were
the only people and I include in this
all the top experts CIA experts the top
academic studying Eastern Europe the
only people who understood what was
holding the system yeah Vaslav Havel
wrote a book called the power of the
powerless and its main message was this
society that hates communism holds
within it the power to topple it even he
misses even it was surprised even he was
surprised when Gorbachev came two weeks
before the Czechoslovak revolution when
Gorbachev came to town a million people
came out in Prague to to greet him they
were enthusiastic they thought change
was coming a New York Times reporter
Robert Apple asked asked Vaslav Havel is
this the revolution that you are
predicting is have people discovered
that they have the power to topple the
regime and he said I'm not a dreamer
he said I'm probably not gonna live to
see write this this happened so here's a
case of a system built on preference
falsification that was sustained by
preference falsification that suddenly
collapses when a few people call it out
and then you get the Cascade then you
get the Cascade so this is one of the
things that I want to dig into because
the cascade effect is really a
refinement
as I see it of the old story of the
Emperor's New Clothes where all it takes
is one person but then it's missing the
mechanism it's like Newton's laws
there's no ability to transmit gravity
it's an instantaneous action at a
distance to my way of thinking the best
way of understanding your theory for
most people is to understand a motif
that is found throughout American cinema
and the motif has a name I believe
inside the business which is called the
slow clap which is that somebody can't
take it anymore
and they give an impassioned speech that
nobody's expecting that start speaking
to the unmet beliefs of a large group of
people none of whom have understood that
there is a lot of support for this in
terms of private preferences that's the
first action now if I understand your
theory correctly people have private
preferences and public preferences but
they have some threshold of alternate
support in the group that will be
necessary for them to update their
public preferences towards their private
preferences and then the most important
thing is is that that crazy speech is
followed by some anonymous member of the
group who starts the slow clap and that
slow clap becomes oppressive because in
that group that person is saying we all
know that what has just been said
reflects the group and then the slow
clap is joined by a third person and
that you watch the cascade visually so
the way this is what you are describing
is a cascade that involves a large group
of people who have different thresholds
to read so can imagine that the very
first people person in your example who
gives an impassioned speech who's just
had enough at some point something
happens
this person was just boiling with anger
against the the regime or the system or
the policy whatever it is was boiling
with anger but nu has known all along
that there's a huge risk to acting on
this but something happens where that
person says I have just had enough I I
I'm willing to take the risk of going to
prison for 20 years I'm gonna make this
speech I'm just gonna say I can't live
with myself and there are people inside
with any given issue there are people on
any given issue and that and that person
on one particular issue might feel that
way
on other issues might might not then
there there's somebody else who is also
quite impassioned also boiling with
anger which is a little less so so the
person again to go to your example the
person who follows the impassioned
speech with the slow clap is that next
person the person with the slightly
higher threshold but that the person who
gave the impassioned speech awakened
that person that that courage and was
just enough to tip that person over the
threshold there are other people in the
audience who have slightly higher
thresholds it takes two people to call a
spade a spade say the Emperors is naked
say I'm opposed to this this policy that
person then jumps in and so what what a
cascade is is a self-reinforcing process
where every person who joins the the
movement who changes his or her
preference induces another person tips
another person over his or her threshold
and so the system builds on itself and
for a very short time you go from
condition where nobody is opposing the
status quo to where everybody is now in
opposition and it becomes now it can
become dangerous to support the status
quo ante and this is actually something
if we go back for a moment to the East
European example I spoke the famous New
York Times reporter Robert Apple will
two weeks after the checkers of Arc
Revolution
the New York Times decided they had
written about dissidents for two weeks
they'd written lots of stories about
dissidents and about all these people
who said oh it was so bad living living
a lie and I'm so now now we now we're
now we're gonna start living in truth
and so on it occurred to somebody in the
New York Times editorial board you know
this is a society that was run by
communists and lots of people who are
members of the Communist Party we should
do a story about them what's happening
to them you know they've been in power
for half a century and they've suddenly
overnight they've been pushed out of
power and let's send our best reporter
to back to the region to interview them
so the Robert Apple Lanson in Prague and
he he starts looking for communists and
of course he finds lots of people who
have held the Communist Party membership
but I said I'm not a communist I never
was that a communist I was I was
falsifying my preferences I had no
choice I have I have children I had to
you know put them through school I
wanted to keep my job I'm not a
communist I need any he wrote back a
famous article and the New York Times
said I kept like I could not find a
communist anywhere so what of course
this is this is not preference
oscillation in Reverse because there are
people who were benefitting handsomely
from the system so it's an overshoot
this is an overshoot there's an
overshoot now and now in Czechoslovakia
you did not have a witch-hunt against
the supporters of the old regime of
course the members of the old Politburo
were all are most of the more sidelined
that two or three of them managed to
repackage them as Social Democrats met
repackage themselves as Social Democrats
and continued in in politics most of the
people were were sidelined there wasn't
a witch-hunt but there were other
countries in which there was AI which
and so it was very it was then and of
course czechoslovaks didn't know what
was going to happen there was always a
danger that that the new regime would go
after the old communists and try to
punish them and punish people who ran
the jails and and had important
positions in the in the Communist Party
but but it was so because there was a
possibility of this danger now they
pretended that they were all all along
they were they were lying so events
massive events that changed the course
of history which were unpredicted after
the fact they become what one looks at
them and one finds it impossible not to
understand why they happened we have
their overdetermined right we have
tremendous amount of data showing the
why showing why the system had to
collapse yet in reality to go back to
your example if that one person had made
the impassioned speech this thing could
have gone on for more
let's play with this a little bit one of
the things that I find so fascinating
about the theory is it also sort of
starts to explain how in a society where
people's private and public preferences
are somewhat aligned they can go out of
alignment very quickly so I don't know
if you've seen the video for example of
Saddam Hussein coming to power at a bath
party meeting in Iraq which is
fascinating I'm not sure I have seen
some videos of Saddam Hussein and Baath
Party meetings I'm not sure I saw that
you'd remember that maybe maybe you let
me describe him for you as you'll see
the mechanism the opposite direct yes so
he's sitting there were on stage smoking
a cigar and he's videoing himself I
think knowing what comes next he says
hey we've got a special guest today and
a man who I don't know exactly who he
was stands up and starts speaking and
saying I have plotted against Saddam and
I have co-conspirators in the audience
and I'm going to name them now well you
see terror take over this auditorium
because there's also cameras if I recall
correctly on stage filming the people
and these names get read and these
people are being led out and then the
preference falsification sets in and you
start seeing the private preferences
suppressed and the public preferences
going into nonsense territory and people
are saying long live our brother Saddam
he is the one because they realize that
their life is on the line and according
to legend and I don't know whether this
is exactly true those who are left at
the end are given sidearms to execute
those who have been let out to make them
complicit in the crime to freeze in the
preference falsification or if you like
people are now preferring to to save
their lives rather than preferring to
explore their politics
so do we I mean I'm just trying I hadn't
seen this video I've heard just as a
little footnote here that in court in
North Korea the Kim's have used the same
sort of thing
where they actually will say that
they're going to name some people in the
audience
the latest one were was where a relative
of kim jonghwan was might have been an
uncle or something who was actually led
out this was the same sort of thing that
happened in that case I don't think it
was somebody from the audience who
pulled the trigger but everybody could
hear a shot go he was obviously murdered
everybody could hear that this was
instantaneous if you did if if Kim
decided that you had betrayed him you
would be put to death well this is what
I I have a pet project of mine which I
don't think I've ever advanced
sufficiently is what I term the analysis
of message violence that there are
certain violence that is committed
theatrically as a instrument of
transmission to induce preference
falsification so this is used by the
cartels in Mexico it's used to great
effect by the Kim's it was used by
Saddam Hussein and with message violence
the idea is to create something so
horrific beyond what is necessary to
silence someone through murder and death
to communicate to others the instant
necessity of beginning to falsify their
preferences so that a it's a leveraging
effect where a small amount of violence
results in the maximum amount of
preference falsification yes this does
happen and there plenty of examples we
can give we can go back to the show
trials of the Soviet Union or every
single member where Stalin got rid of
every single member of Lenin's
pelipper all the heroes of the October
Revolution and the building of the
Soviet Union one by one who got rid of
them through through show trials and the
fact that such heroes could be executed
in such humiliating ways sent of course
a message to the entire society that if
this happens to them is left to adapt to
anyone but I would want to emphasize the
preference false question even massive
preference falsification can occur even
without such theatrics and to come back
to our own society jumping from the
Soviet Union and in Iraq to the United
States today there are many issues on
which we do not talk to each other
honestly on which there's a great deal
of polarization and people and and
expressing nuances can get you in great
great trouble and we cannot point to a
single event we put too many smaller
events but no single event that has the
theatrics of saddam's Saddam's
executions or what the kids are doing
well and I'm so glad that we're making
this transition because as interesting
as the historical examples are and the
those that are particularly bloody the
best application of this theory in my
opinion only comes from when we realize
that violence can be moved from the
physical sphere to the reputational and
the economic sphere so if you think
about your reputation as part of what
Richard Dawkins might have called our
extended phenotype it's something that
you carry around with you that is
necessary for let's say employment we
now worry about reputational violence
which can be exacted theatrically for
example through social media so the
question of what we can say what we can
discuss what we can explore has a
similar character if I take the James
d'amore situation at Google this was a
particularly you know whether or not you
thought his memo is brilliant or
but tone-deaf it certainly wasn't an
insane exploration of misogyny it was
some exploration of differences between
men and women at the level of Big Five
personality inventories the idea being
that success or failure might have a lot
more to do with one's big five let's say
hedonic decomposition of our
personalities rather than our actual
gender and then if males and females had
different hedonic profiles at the level
of Big Five personality inventory traits
that could explain some of the
imbalances and he was actually to my
mind talking about the fact that if you
wanted to have a more equal society of
Engineers there are things that you
might explore to try to actually better
utilize women in the workplace now
whether or not you buy into that or it
certainly didn't seem like an insane
thing to suggest and yet the
reputational violence that was exacted
on somebody who was told to attend a
seminar and asked for feedback seemed to
me to be of a piece with this kind of
message violence but not at a physical
level at a reputational level do you
think that there's some parallel there
yes I think the reputational violence
can do enormous harm in in the society
not only can it can it affect your job
prospects your prospects for promotion
and the company that you're working for
you can lose a lot of friends it can
affect your prospects in the marriage
market 50 years ago when people were
asked Americans were asked whether they
would mind whether their daughter or son
married somebody of the opposite party
about 20 percent said that it would make
any difference to them by contrast more
than half of American
it's said that if their son or daughter
married somebody of the of an opposite
of a different ethnic group or of a
different religion this would matter to
them and many people said they would not
accept the person from a different
religion different ethnic group
different race into their their family
those numbers have come way down over
the years
by contrast the numbers regarding
ideological differences and party
affiliation have gone the way up today
so this so being attacked though coming
back to reputational violence being
pigeon-holed as a Radical Republican or
even as a Republican or being
pigeon-holed employed a radical is
implied for many people are same on the
Democrats being pigeon-holed as a
Democrat even even and now you're
radical not even and not even not even a
progressive Democrat just I related to
many people the all Democrats are the
same whether you know the nuances
between their lib terms at this book
we're the progressives and the more what
we call the many of us would call more
moderate Democrats there's no such
distinctions they're all on the wrong
side and there are people who do not
want to befriend them who would be
completely against their son or daughter
marrying a democrat or republican
depending on who they are and you can
see why it's at the Thanksgiving table
the tensions would be enormous because
it would bring them to bring Democrats
and Republicans together even moderate
Democrats and Republicans together these
days let alone people on the on the
right side of the Republican Party with
the progressive Democrats is a is a
recipe for complete disagreement for
opening up
issues that will expose hatreds because
the two sides no longer talk to each
other because no one accepts the
possibility the viability of a middle of
some kind of compromise people don't
know how to talk to each other people
don't know where their differences begin
and where they might actually have some
room for for compromise and so there's a
reason why these days people feel that
if they are pigeon holed if they say
something that then allows others to put
them into one of these pigeon holes
political ideological pigeon holes that
their life will be ruined
and so this is let's go back now to the
East European situation this is similar
to what the this dissidents faced in
Czechoslovakia yes dissidents who didn't
distance like vats love Havel who did
spend small short periods and in and out
of prison but mostly he was allowed to
be a dissident playwright but he got
enormous amount of hate mail most people
even people whom he knew from earlier
times in his life would not say hello to
him for fear that the friendship would
imply that they sympathized with his
ideas they they did cross to the other
side of the road that they saw him
coming just so they wouldn't have to
confront him this so his his social
circle got got smaller the number of
people he could go to asked for for help
diminished so all of this was all of
these inconveniences this is happening
right now
in the United States
it means that if if you cannot live with
somebody of the other party as a cost
relative of yours if you cannot talk to
the other side because you think they're
just beyond the pale they're subhuman
their ideas just are are inhumane
they're just that there's no way you can
even begin to consider their validity or
consider them as worth discussing as
part of a part of a conversation you're
certainly not gonna see them as people
you can go to in a time of trouble that
is why you would rather live in a
neighborhood consisting if you're
Republican where everybody's Republican
and if you're Democrat where everybody's
a Democrat because you like in a time of
need and time of emergency you'd like to
be able to go to your neighbors you'd
like you'd like to have neighbors with
whom you can have pleasant chats when
you meet them in the street when you're
walking your dog and you meet them in in
the street and not have to ignore them
and see them as evil people well so this
is I mean it's fascinating to me so many
different ways to go here I'm trying to
figure out what the best line through is
one thing that I'm fascinated by maybe
we'll come back to this is what is the
force that makes the middle so difficult
to hold that pushes more and more people
to towards either being sort of what
I've termed troglodytes or dupes and it
makes it very difficult to to I guess
what my model is that you have an
a-frame roof as the a-frame roof gets
more and more peaked there are fewer
number of Fiddler's who can stay on the
a-frame roof without falling over to the
left or to the right and so that right
now I think that the skill level needed
to inhabit a sensible position is priced
out of almost all of our abilities I
mean this is
it what what leads you from a position
where 50 years ago where we had again
people on the extremes we had people a
favor
segregation people a favor desegregation
we had we had serious disagreements
before but there were many people in
society who held positions had strong
opinions but also felt that the people
on the other side were humans were
well-meaning right and could be parties
to a conversation right and you could
compromise with them
so when you picked up the New York Times
after some vote in Congress 50 years ago
there would be a list of Democrats
voting for Democrats voting against
Republicans voting for republicans
voting against there were there were
lots of people in all four of those
groups and all four of those groups were
considered legitimate right even the
people who had voted yes considered the
people who had voted no in their party
they considered them as legitimate
senators or legitimate Congress people
and they on some other bill they
cooperated with them so this was and of
course you just mentioned a skill set
there was a skill set that went with
that the skill set was that you could
you and I could disagree on issue a yeah
and and and debate for days and days and
days and why you're I could say that
your thing is gonna lead to disaster
along this front and and you could say
the the same thing about me at the same
at the end of the day one of us would
win the bill would either pass or lose
or there would be this would go into
some conference we'd have some kind of
compromise you and I would accept
compromise as legitimate and so we would
we developed the skills as we did this
we developed the skills of compromise
the whole political system developed
this and society saw this and accepted
the people Republicans and Democrats is
both legit assenting legitimate sides of
legitimate positions on issues subject
to screaming we gradually have moved
it's a cascade right that has moved us
gradually that has expanded the area and
area of absolute positions on which we
have apt is on which we have absolute
positions and they're not subject to
discussion and what's happening what has
happened in the last few decades is that
the number of such issues has grown as
this has happened we have the the number
of issues on which we no longer discuss
we just have absolute positions we're
pro-choice pro-life we don't discuss we
don't have conferences where we discuss
what kind of bringing people from both
sides and what kind of compromise can we
well this compromise at a political
level but I think it's also a question
about the intellectual basis of our
conversation so let's just take pro-life
and pro-choice yes I talk about
sometimes dining a la carte
intellectually where I can't get my
needs met in a low-resolution world
anyplace and so I sort of pick and
choose which bits of things I need and I
sort of think of this as political
flatland that people are trapped in
pro-life versus pro-choice and my real
position is a plague on both your houses
I'm not pro-choice to the extent that
I'm willing to call it child for minutes
before its birth fetal tissue nor am i
Pro
life to the extent that I'm gonna call a
blast a sphere a baby
both of those seem patently insane to me
and nowhere do I get to discuss Carnegie
stages in embryonic development which
would be sort of a kind of more
scientific approach to what quality of
life is it that we're trying to preserve
and yet I caucus if you will with the
pro-choice community not because I hold
the idea that it's simply a woman's
right to choose because obviously
there's something else that's going on
inside of oh and there's the whole
miracle of gestation and reproduction
but if people see that I caucus
pro-choice then they say okay you're
willing to sit with somebody who's
willing to terminate a third trimester
pregnancy frivolously because they're
ideologically committed to it ergo you
are evil ergo we can no longer be
friends and my key point is look I'll
drop these people in a heartbeat if you
give me some nuanced room in which to
maneuver let's talk about in the neural
tube formation let's talk about what we
think of as life is that the emotional
connection to seeing something one
recognizes as human is that the quality
of the of the brain is it something
mystical and ineffable are you coming
from a religious tradition the key point
is to make it impossible to have a
discussion and you know I remember being
beaten up on a picket line and a picket
line weird there was a group that was
picketing a abortion clinic and I was
demonstrating for the right to keep it
open and I got beat up in Rhode Island
on camera and after this incident I
think I had a chance to talk to the
person I thought who hit me with a
picket sign and it turned out that we
could come too we couldn't get all the
way there but there was at least a
partial rapprochement where we could say
well I see where you're coming from I
see where you're coming from
maybe we can understand that you were
both motivated by the best interests
that we as we perceive them that has
gone away in large measure
because what we've taken or at least
this is my understanding as our
institutional media and our sense making
apparatus and they've become complicit
in making the center that is the
sensible and analytic center absolutely
an uninhabitable yeah does that matter I
think this is happening and I think this
has happened in a growing range on a
growing range of issues which is why now
we go back to New York Times lists of
who and which party voted which way
sometimes that list doesn't appear
because simply party they say is just a
party line vote and this is a reflection
of society that and it's not that within
the Republican Party or within the
Democratic Party you don't have people
on whatever the issue is you don't have
people in in the middle but that if they
take if they bring up the nuances if
they try to bring the conversation a
little bit toward a compromise they will
get skewered by the people by their own
people on the other the other side right
and the other side will not come to
their defense and in fact if the other
side does come to their defense that's a
terrible signal for them and they'll be
skewered by their own so what concerns
me here though is is that we are
dependent on people of integrity who
risked everything when it was least
popular to do it so that we we can sort
of hold these people in reserve so when
the madness becomes too great we can
turn to them let me just take a couple
of examples that matter to me one of
which was the Patriot Act and then when
the Patriot Act was voted in in the wake
of 9/11 and there was this sort of mob
hysteria to do something because
something very significant had happened
to us only one person only one senator
voted against it and that was Russ
Feingold
and so I don't have a clear memory of
the other names in the Senate at that
time but I will always remember Russ
Feingold for the courage to stand alone
a different sort of version of that I
think about as Katherine Hepburn who is
the sort of the most loved of all all
Hollywood actresses I think she had four
Academy Awards that she used his
doorstops for her bathrooms because she
didn't seem to give a whit what other
people thought of her and she went and
did if I recall correctly you know
Connecticut Community Theatre during the
McCarthy era because she was just gonna
wait out the stupidity the excess and
the idiocy of the movement whereas a
Humphrey Bogart who organized an
artist's push to fight back against this
was immediately cowed by an article in
Filmfare magazine if I recall correctly
he said well sorry he had to write an
article saying hey you know don't call
me read I'll never do that again
and the great Humphrey Bogart the tough
guy of movies crumbled under this
pressure whereas Katharine Hepburn his
co-star you know sort of stood tall and
waited it out do we have these hyper
individuals these incredibly
disagreeable people in the sense of the
agreeable component of the big five
personality inventory who we're we know
who they are and we note to whom we can
look in times of crisis well on
particular issues you will find people
who write books that advocate a mental
position that identify all the nuances
that portray both sides as having
legitimate goals they don't necessarily
get attention so they they write a book
whether whether the issue is abortion or
immigration it takes some kind of middle
position it doesn't get the play in the
media
that it that a book that takes a very
strong position a very absolutist
position does so so yes they're due on
and it on any given issue there are some
some people who you you can find people
who are trying to start a dialogue you
can find here they're little
associations little nonprofit
organizations that are trying to start a
dialogue doing so but they just don't
that's not where the what the media pays
pays attention to so effectively they
don't exist and the the groups that
increasingly the groups that get
attention are the groups that pigeonhole
people into one so you read the for us
or against us and the two sides the two
extremes both of whom are playing this
game of your your with us or against us
actually reinforcing each other yeah
yeah they're agreed they're completely
agreed on that yeah there is no middle
position and having a middle position
and having the media pay attention to
the people in the middle would hurt them
both yeah I don't think it's in the
middle I mean I really think and for
those of you were watching rather than
listening I think that there's this very
flat low dimensional plane where these
positions live and that what we're
calling the middle is not the thing
between these it's in a higher
dimensional space that combines these
crappy low resolution moronic positions
and it projects to the middle but it
isn't the middle absolutely absolutely
there are many more dimensions that they
see these it's simply that these simple
position position side no I completely
agree with that and and the middle is is
often is more complex involves many more
dimensions and
these dimensions to go back now to these
extreme groups they don't want these
dimensions to be brought into the
picture so for the pro-life group the
issue is are you going to terminate a
life or not right and for the pro-choice
group is do you respect the woman's
right to choose and so each one of them
for each one of them is just a
one-dimensional thing there's a yes/no
answer there's no answer and there's no
bring in some other dimension is he
immediately gets you in trouble so I
want to talk about the specific
weirdness of economic theory yes
now I claim to be an economist I've
never taken a class in economics and
partially the reason for that is that I
developed a theory with my wife about
gauged theoretic economics I always
thought that if we could get attacked
when somebody could say well you're not
really an economist I'd get a chance to
defend myself because it dealt with
another aspect there they're the great
adjustments to preference theory
preference falsification is yours gauge
theoretic changing preferences as ours
Paul Samuelson had one about incoherent
preferences that was he buried in his
Nobel acceptance speech which is
received very little play almost nothing
he was the one who pointed it pointed me
to it saying you know this idea that we
don't actually even have preference this
is something I always thought was
important he saw it as the lack of
integrity of tangent planes to create
indifferent surfaces if for those of you
geeks following at home and all of these
theories about what's wrong with our
preferences George Soros has one about
beliefs with reflexivity have been
really effectively kept out of the
mainstream of economic theory and I find
it I view economic theory is a little
bit like it's not quite as totalitarian
as North Korea but it's very similar to
certain places in Eastern Europe where
there's that what
you can explore freely in that which you
can't talk about or at least it was this
way until recently now I look at the
moment where I think you had your kind
of Saddam Hussein moment about what we
can and can't discuss now I trace it in
part it's as funny even think of it in
these terms to Becker and stigler's
paper called de gustibus non s dispute
undeb and in it they hardened the theory
of fixed preferences to a Dogma by
comparing a preferences to the Rocky
Mountains and they said on our
interpretation there's an alternate view
of why we can't discuss tastes and
that's because like the Rocky Mountains
they are unchanging over time and the
same to all men and you know my jaw
dropped as an outsider because I hadn't
been indoctrinated when I read this and
I thought that is the single craziest
idiotic
thing that could be said about human
beings and their beliefs and preferences
and yet somehow it became a famous paper
as opposed to being left out of the
field
well there was here's again an example
of a theory that is foundational to
discipline that gets falsified the I
think his first name was Richard Richard
Herrnstein you would does the name ring
a bell
the Harvard was Richard Robert I
remember but anyway Hearn Stein he
developed a theory that explained a
phenomenon that that Becker swept under
the rug which is that an addicts a
heroin addicts preferences hyperbolic
discs do change so Harper Baalak
discounting so up there are many addicts
ooh after they've taken their fix want
to they understand
now the the panic attack has gone away
and they understand that this heroin
addiction is ruining their life and they
very sincerely want to give it up they
very sincerely want not to take more
heroin right but a few hours pass and
they need their body starts jonesing did
they start craving yeah heroin again
they need a new fix and they get to the
point where their preferences change -
let me have one more oh quit asteroids
and I'll quit afterwards I am prepared
to quit now a few hours ago they were
prepared to quit immediately now they're
willing to quit but after I get my next
fix and this thing can go on again again
so you have inter temporarily
inconsistent preferences so this is
another problem with the with the
economics discipline but economics is
not immune to the forces that we've been
talking about well there is preference
falsification in the economics
discipline there are certain
fundamentals of the discipline and if
you challenge them as a young person
you're never gonna get a job right and
if you and if you challenge them before
you get tenure you're not gonna get a
job but if you develop a reputation to
get tenure you have to develop a certain
reputation and that has involved
adhering to the conventions of the
discipline theoretically you could after
you got tenure you could switch but the
costs then are you
because you've developed a certain
there's a lot of reputation or capital
to you well but and we're watching a lot
of prominent economists sort of changed
their position without announcing that
they used to be in effect working for a
nonsensical theory or at least quieting
themselves I mean it was astounded by
Paul Krugman's column or maybe as a blog
post called a protectionist moment where
he starts talking about the scam of the
elites forever freer trade where I
associated that with sort of the
intellectual force of jugdish bhagavati
and and some of these theorists who
clearly were sort of pursuing a
political position where you know in in
the case of like free trade there there
are two separate phenomena you can say
that something would Pareto improve the
society if everyone is made either as
well-off as they are today or better off
and then there's this other kind of more
technical version of this called Kaldor
hicks improvement which is that if we
were to tax winners to pay losers then
everyone would be Pareto improved and
I've noticed this very interesting thing
about economists where they have two
voices they have the voice that they
have to use in the seminar room because
there's nowhere to hide from the fact
that a lot of these public
pronouncements are absolute nonsense and
then the claim is is that oh well when
we're in our seminar voice and then
maybe this was Dani rodrik's phraseology
I can't remember whose it was but then
when we speak publicly we're allowed to
say something that is actually different
it's not the same thing in two different
voices it's an idea that there's an
exoteric and an esoteric way of
expression which is a sort of Strauss
Ian theory and the esoteric is reserved
for one's colleagues but we're actually
allowed to lie to the public to help the
fortunes of the politicians we favor
when we're speaking publicly what the
hell is going on so that there there's
some people who have achieved a certain
stature in the profession and yet they
feel there's certain thing
things that are wrong about the the
profession or that they can't say within
the profession they develop a second
persona which is there are ped personal
policy on hand they're right there their
policy entrepreneurs and there's public
intellectuals they're much more critical
of the discipline than they are within
the discipline or they have decided that
there really isn't possibility of
changing the the discipline but there's
certain points that have to be made and
they're gonna make them anyway and
they're gonna make them in a much less
technical way and there's there's a
third a charitable interpretation I
think this does apply to some of my
colleagues I would say they believe that
the the the core principles of economics
even if they're not true even if they
don't give you a reflection of the real
economy they lead to youthful
correct thinking that they're very
useful for disciplining your way of
thinking thinking as an economist and
that they represent they give you a good
base model which you can tweak right to
to bring in reality so I have had some
people say to some people who for years
did not take my work on preference
falsification seriously who have now
come to the position that this is a
useful extension of economics and
they've said you know you did use
standard economic tools of utility
maximization yes in order to get to this
point and there is
but that's where your said there is
there is a point to that yeah but
there's a point to that the problem is
is that that's why it's actually
intellectual kryptonite so because your
theory can be accommodated within the
standard theory yes the question is well
okay the version of it other version of
it well III think I could do a pretty
decent job of shoehorning it into this
sort of Samuelson neoclassical
perspective the problem is it's a
ready-made upgrade to the existing
theory in which nothing is lost but new
degrees of freedom are gained and that
could have an absolutely unpredictable
effect on the entire field because it's
at the level of the substrate the the
the big danger is that so many
propositions evolving efficiency that if
you let the system and reveal you've
left it and and the the principle of
revealed preferences that that that
actions reveal people's people's
preferences that goes out the window and
many efficient purposes that if you
allow people to to interact with each
other you're going to get efficient
political solutions you're going to get
efficient solutions in in the market my
way of thinking leads you to multiple
equilibria and one equilibrium can be
preferable to another so this is one of
the great dangers for economists as high
priests which is that if there are
multiple ways in which a market can
evolve therefore you can't say that the
market finds the optimum because you
can't say which of these things actually
was the optimum and as a danger to
political economy which is that the
political system what the political
system generates is not whether you have
elections or not and whether you have a
secret ballot or not this is not
necessarily efficient because if you in
a system where people are not
cannot speak freely many ideas are stuck
on the ground they're not being
expressed people are when people are
going through the primary process
they're not thinking of all the options
they're not thinking of all the
dimensions they're thinking in in a
single dimension and so they're not
coming up with the with candidates who
hold the best positions
whatever your values are or a set of
coherence is something we haven't talked
about is the coherence of various
policies yeah one of the things that can
get you in great trouble is if you say
within the Republican Party or the
Democratic Party look this policy on
this policy I'm with you on this other
policy I'm also with you and on this
other third policy I'm also with you but
the three policies you cannot put them
you can't we we don't have the resources
to accomplish all drug into right here
between ideas what are your what are
your and some of these policies
undermine others these are not
necessarily isn't obviously consistent
with one another so in the head with
these these parties are coalition's
these coalition's have certain
objectives right they are they are
deliberately keeping quiet about the
contradictions well I think among these
among these I think there are some
contradictions that we legitimately even
lies I talked about load-bearing
fictions yes we have to have some number
of load-bearing fictions in any society
because you can't actually just do
everything in broad daylight and hope
that every everything that we want can
be harmonized some people are gonna have
to accept that there are trade-offs who
can't intellectually accept that there
are trade
and they will require load-bearing
fictions for example we do can we do
convict innocent people using our system
of justice and there's nothing magical
about 12 people on a jury being able to
decide what actually happened but if we
don't have some kind of mysticism around
the wisdom of a jury of our peers we
won't be able to mete out almost any
justice at all so I don't think that we
can hope for a sort of a child's vision
of an honest society but what I find
really impressive is the rent-seeking
aspect of keeping it so expensive to
investigate something that it's
impossible so you talked about a system
of selective pressures where if you
raise certain questions you won't be
employed and therefore through survive
directed survivor bias there's nobody at
the top of a profession who will speak
about something openly and in public one
of the things I've been curious about it
my wife has a concept that she's talked
about called economic squared the econ
economics of economists so economists
are famous for training their lens on
everyone else except for themselves
they'll talk about what are the
economics of a physician in trying to
figure out how to allocate scarce organs
very upsetting things and the the
culture of economics for those who don't
know is that economists don't blink when
they talk about things that are
incredibly upsetting that this is
they're part of a technocratic class who
considers emotions to be beneath them
the one place that I can find where they
cannot actually have an honest
conversation in general is if you say
let's talk about the economics of being
a macro economist you know if you're so
good at understanding the economy you
should be able to trade in a market
which is relatively complete because
there are instruments of every kind to
place any bet why are you asking for a
grant because obviously if you're any
good you should be you should be rich
not because if you're so smart why
aren't you rich works in general but you
happen to be concerned about the one
thing where that would be the proof of
concept can economics squared be born
well this is I mean asking I cannot
imagine
being in a department meeting where
somebody asked this question and says
why don't we base our hiring on say
macroeconomists on how well they've done
in a market or I I I think they would be
immediately left out I don't think it
would ever make make it onto the agenda
I think the institutional pressures
against applying such a criteria are too
great because economists also believe
most academic economists that they have
come into an institution where the
primary goal is seeking the truth
they've given up possibly more lucrative
careers and they should not be therefore
judged on the basis of how well they do
and I'm not saying I'm trading you could
ask the question for example does being
an expert witness as an economist yeah
for one side or the other influence the
objectivity of your judgment you could
ask the question does the prestige of
being invited to Jackson Hole affect the
quality of discussion because people
don't want to be excommunicated from the
priestly class you could ask the
question of whether or not the secret
Harvard jobs market meeting which as a
particular problem for me actually
serves the interests of economics or
serves the interests of the higher-ups
in the innovative profession by being a
direct interference and the free trade
of ideas all of the really fun questions
that Iike not economists would ask in a
heartbeat about anyone else they refuse
to ask about themselves so it's quite a
bit more pull
than just asking for trading prowess
among macro economists you've the
profession and this isn't against you a
profession is trained its magnifying
glass on everyone else when do we start
doing the economics of economists you
know again I think there are a few
people here and there who publish in
journals that very few people read who
have done this sort of thing there have
been studies of the economics profession
mirowski Philipp Moravsky more heat than
light more heat than light I think might
be what he has done some work along
these lines
the economics is fail physics
yeah but the people doing this are not
people at the top of the profession as
perceived as as perceived as perceived
by the departments that get take the
first picks when the junior job market
opens are considered in the rankings in
the US News World Report rankings are
considered the top departments to get a
PhD from and so on based on on that
ranking people who are at the top are
not among those asking the question so
again as with other issues which were
very polarized other issues on which
there are taboos right areas that
questions that involve or that raise
questions that nobody can really or that
bring to mind questions that nobody can
really ask at least in polite polite
company
as in in those cases here
the questions the contradictions you're
raising have been noticed there are
people who have written they just don't
get attention
they don't again admit it to me like
it's like saying you know who is the
greater wrestler gorgeous George who
wrestled in part of the professional
wrestling arena where everything is
fixed or it could be numeric a meta who
wrestled inside of the UFC who is an
unbelievable grappler well I don't think
that Nomura gue Madoff has ever achieved
what has been achieved inside of the WWE
when everything scripted you can do
things that are so much more fantastic
than anybody outside and yet what we've
been trying to do in part is to ask the
question why can't we smuggle legitimate
economic kryptonite into the economics
profession so that it can grow into a
real field if I think about the favorite
example is imagine that you've got
alchemy and chemistry in the same
department or you've got astrology and
astronomy in the same department yeah
the great opportunities to get rid of
the astrologists and get rid of the
alchemists right because it's not that
all of economics is nonsense but so many
of the perceived top players in the
field are actually acting as
professional wrestlers that it's time
for the revolution that I would imagine
your theory actually predicts it's so
ripe and so many of us who are
mathematically inclined look at the kind
of the history of mathematical
intimidation and we think this is
mathematically its meaning you guys
aren't even that good at math you know
this this may actually happen through
the young generation and it might
actually take a couple of generations
one huge change that has happened in the
economics professor since exactly since
Becker and stickler wrote de gustibus
known as despondent yeah that was I
believe 1977
yeah since they wrote that the most
prestigious field within economics which
used to be economic theory has lost
prestige the best economists now go into
data heavy area and they are driven by
empirics and often the theory follows
the empirical work that they do if
there's a theory at all you know
something deep learning you don't even
know what the theory you don't even know
what the theory is and they start with
so much data that they they just start
analyzing it from some some corner of
the the issue and then I hope hope to
come to and that leads and the very the
very best of those works then generate
new theories so we're now the empirical
parts of the profession are driving the
theoretical yeah and the theory and the
theory and the theory the the old
theorists who were trained as theorists
never to touch and to look down on
people who worked with with data look
down on them many of them are retiring
they are being replaced by theorists who
are who are getting accustomed to
operating in departments where the
bigwigs are the data Cowboys are the
data Cowboys and this is going to have
some effect on the tree because the
empiricists that I talked to in the
economics profession now consider a lot
of the theory a waste of time a lot of
it
highly highly misleading yes some of it
far too abstract and and irrelevant and
that the that the theory taught to the
first-year graduate students and even
going before that to undergraduates and
master students that this has to change
nobody yet though has come up with the
equivalent of Paul Samuelson's first
edition that I kind of well this is
worried I wrote for a week here's a
framework in a commendable framework for
which he almost any question that can be
posed can be posed within the framework
within the framework and and it was and
it was it and and within a few years
all major departments were using either
Paul Samuelson's textbook or textbooks
written according to the same template
following you know basically offering
the same thing at a somewhat higher
level somewhat lower a lower level but
basically and that is that has come down
to the the president there have been a
few attempts to bring in behavioral
economics for example they're they're
textbooks that are not quite popular
people like Bob Frank Daniel Kahneman
have of course introduced new ideas
about concerning behavior and our people
how people think and they've been
attempts to bring some of these ideas
into textbooks but they they don't
define the mainstream yet well this is
this is the thing that I think people
don't realize about economics which is I
could make a decent argument that our
two greatest theories our two greatest
intellectual theories that we've ever
come up with
would be Darwinian selection in the in
the realm of biology and which I think
has flaws and what I would call
geometric dynamics which covers both the
modern and understanding of the standard
model and general relativity and what's
weird is is that economics if you think
about it is a decision to make a
continuation of selection by other means
which is to come up with an as if
physics to mediate selective pressures
between Apes which is us and it's the
only place I know where there's a
meaningful interaction between our two
greatest ideas so for me the really
interesting part of economics is that it
is the one place where our greatest
ideas might even touch and reproduce the
problem I have with the profession is is
that the fear of what could happen if we
started to do real economics has locked
out the kind of innovative spirit which
requires both much more detailed
knowledge of selection as per condiment
risky and much greater understanding of
mathematics it's not that you guys have
used too much mathematics that you're
not good enough and you're not advanced
enough in mathematics lots of people
have master's degree very few have PhDs
and very few of those are trained in the
few subjects that would reveal market
markets to be truly geometric which is a
revolution that happened between
geometry and physics in the mid 70s or
for the standard model or the teens for
Einstein's theory of relativity you guys
are next and it's a question of people
holding back the possibility for genuine
innovation so this is what place where
I've been hoping the preference
falsification would actually lead to the
cascade effect that we began this
podcast talking about well this is I'm
not sure that actually don't think
this is going to happen through people
who have who are currently falsifying
their preferences to agree with the
direction you go and then they become
disguising their preferences that if
they the chairman of the major
Department and they suddenly suddenly
redirect hiring and the department
changes I don't think it's gonna happen
that way I think it will happen through
the emergence of new departments and
[Music]
smaller departments lesser-known
departments that George Mason that
decides Oh George Mason as as a
particular direction particular
direction something and there were some
brilliant people Buckhannon taluk Vernon
Smith joined them later on who had
problems with the direction that
economics was going with what it implied
for political science for political
markets and they were they were pushed
out of the mainstream of the profession
they just decided to form their own
department and they of course they all
congregate it at Virginia Polytechnic
Institute then when they decided
Virginia Polytechnic Institute decided
crazily
I think that they'd rather have a
mainstream department they just packed
up on laughs and George Mason jumped at
the opportunity so this can happen that
that is the model that I that I think
that there will be a group of people
some of them young in fact probably many
of them young young enough that they
still have kin energy very soon energy
and creativity and think of think of
developing their ideas for several
decades whoo-hoo and there's some
university with with with a visionary
president and some entrepreneur who
gives a big grant to establish a new
department and you get 1015 people
collect somewhere that is I think the
what will happen to shake up the
economics the the profession and shake
up in particular the theoretical or of
the discipline I think the empirical
parts of it yeah I think are just being
shaken up daily or through the data
coming in and through the the very
interesting results and findings that
are there coming up as people are
developing huge sort of new datasets
like if you think about natural
experiments you happen to have a flood
that you could never actually you know
ask for because it would kill people and
it would destroy crops but once you have
such a thing you look at the peculiar
thing that happened as a control expert
so I do see that there's some hope the
concern that I have is that the theory
is gonna get thrown over because it was
handed to the wrong group of theorists
and that the right group of theorists is
not going to be allowed in who could
actually change the theory well this is
this is in a sense the George Mason
people have would have never been
allowed in the Buchanan and his group I
mean he did win a Nobel Prize he did he
has he's actually been more influential
outside the United States in mainstream
economics departments that he logged in
the that in the United States but there
are did create a self-sustaining group
right and they've generated enough PhD
students who have gone to departments
generally departments that are not in
the top 20 30 maybe not usually not not
in the top top 50 and they're doing work
that continues the Buchanan ration this
is the way it may start but just because
the that Buchanan's experiment didn't
result in the quote-unquote conquering
of major departments doesn't mean that
the next one that the that that takes on
the core theory right I can I didn't do
right Buchanan dealt with the political
implications of political markets and he
objected to to applying the competitive
economics model without some
modifications to political markets that
there were certain inefficiencies that
people were overlooking this was his yes
problem I'm talking about he wasn't he
wasn't he wasn't challenging the
fundamental and if you look at the the
the basic economics that is taught at
George Mason it doesn't challenge the
core no ideas of what this is the thing
that I want those of us who are trying
to upend the core to actually go into
open intellectual combat with the
stalwarts who are defending the core
from updating and if the core is so
fantastic they should welcome and I
don't see that happening let's switch
gears slightly yes you grew up in one of
my favorite places on earth many people
may not know this I guess I don't know
if we mentioned at the beginning Turkey
and you grew up in a very interesting
context that I was learning more about
which is that you happen to be very
aligned with the sort of governing ethos
of Turkey which was unlike any other
Muslim majority country in the world so
far as I could tell and you came to
understand that the preferences of
others were being falsified even though
your preferences were very much in line
with the country given what we've been
seeing with the Act party and air Dewan
and all of the changes in Turkey can you
take us through a little bit of your
evolution as a
as an observer as to what exactly
happened to change Turkey so radically
so quickly so for the listeners the
Watchers perhaps a minute or two on
Turkish history is would be useful
Turkey was the center of the Ottoman
Empire which where the law of the land
was Islamic law in the nineteenth
century a growing group of intellectuals
started seeing Islam as the source of
the Empire's problems and the Empire was
falling apart and the problem turned
into an existential issue as major
components in in Europe
taken away and in World War one when the
Empire's survival was at stake and the
danger the Europeans would just colonize
what was left of the Empire was becoming
more acute by the day these
intellectuals were many of them were in
in the military they fought for the
Empire and then for turkeys independence
after Turkey was on the losing side in
World War one very touch-and-go
situation and the most of the most of
what is modern-day Turkey was occupied
by Western powers divided among them
they fought to gain back these
territories and they won and they won
the turkeys war of independence and
created an unbelievable opportunity that
was actually seized exactly it gave them
they made them heroes and the leading
hero was Mostafa Kemal atatürk who had
fought the British in Gallipoli who had
who had put together a coalition to to
defeat the Italians the the Greeks the
British the French the Russians and he
was a hero and he sensed he and the
people around him there were many other
heroes around him sense that they had a
huge amount of political capital to
modernize the country and to do
something that was unthinkable until
that point we talked about how crazy
these reforms were which was one of them
was to abrogate Islamic law and replace
is Lama Claw with secular laws legal
systems borrowed from the West and
adapted to Turkish society abolished the
Caliphate and send the the Calif packing
and one by one introduced a series of
reforms Changeling iured changed that
would change the orthography changed the
the script which the Arabic script land
and explicitly openly make
westernization a goal of the society law
tradition versus outlaw traditionally me
dress outlaw polygamy give women the
right to vote
long before several other countries
including Switzerland
even women there a right right to to
vote rewrite history and of course this
involved introducing their own myths now
we could go on and on just describing
these the the reforms it was it was
unthinkable cultural revolution and of
course the the economic institutions are
changing at the same time the political
institutions are changing the country
sense of identity replaces a religious
identity with a national identity so
nationalism so people are to call
themselves Turks not Muslims and being a
Turk takes precedent over being being a
Muslim really marriages have to be civil
involves civil ceremonies religious
ceremonies have carried no legal weight
at all so the reason I'm so animated
about this is this is almost like
communistic level reforms but in it in a
different idea in it in a different
idioms and done by people who had who
were genuinely supported by large
segments of society now this is not to
say that there was no reaction now this
is where we come to the preference
falsification and the bubble that I
lived and so on we'll get to this so
there are of course people who are
illiterate who have no contact with the
with the West who are very religious
they're suddenly being told by their
leaders that they don't have a religious
identity they're now
Turks what unites everybody is
Turkishness not religion that they and
the Christian and Jewish minorities are
our equal not only before the law but
also Marley and they're all they're all
Turkish there to accept this the
education is completely secularized that
their religion is no longer being taught
that's if you learn religion in the
family that's fine that's your business
just don't but the regime is telling you
don't make that public and increasingly
this new regime is radicalizing itself
so this is building now you have a
self-sustaining self-reinforcing system
of secularization where people are
trying to outbid themselves I'll bid
each other in being secular in public
how how much corny Western Medeiros how
much how Western you can look in your
dress right how Western you can be in
the way you interpret history how
western you can be in not being Muslim
so people start falsifying their
preferences in the direction of say of
being secular so people who are actually
personally religious turn religion into
a private matter
they do not fast in public or at least
in ways that are noticeable so during
Ramadan but Islam allows you if you if
you miss a day during Ramadan you can
you can for whatever reason because
you're traveling you can you can
substitute for it
and it gives you a lot of freedom to do
that so people would there were people
and we find this through memoirs we know
about this through memoirs were
published posthumously ok couldn't
express themselves they couldn't say
this is happening this is this was
happening among top-level among some
people who were among other Turks
closest associates who were religious
but who could not have a religious
persona so while the West is cheering
for Turkey's modernization and lots of
this is positive we start sowing the
sort of weird undercurrent where people
who are genuinely religious are being
repressed people who are genuinely
genuinely religious are being repressed
and people who are appearing religious
in public are denied jobs are denied
promotion opportunities this is not
happening explicitly there are no rules
that in in any government agency or in
any major corporation that if you are
religious and a few are using prayer
beads you know when you're sitting at
the at the meeting and giving people a
sense that you're using that that that
you're religious that this is gonna hurt
you but it's well understood by
everybody that if you want to advance in
this society now you have to appear
irreligious this is generating a lot of
resentment and there's also there is
there is a void that the nationalist
mythology creates that it's not
satisfying to people it doesn't it
emotionally it doesn't resonate with
some people who want to want some
religion so you have a lot of religious
what we might call religious preference
falsification and this eventually turkey
becomes after a period of secularists we
can only call dictatorship or at Argosy
may be benevolent dictatorship it
eventually becomes a multiparty
democracy and as you would expect in a
democracy politicians aspiring
politicians notice the existence of a
constituency of privately religious
constituent
see that would like to be freer in
publicizing its religiosity and would
like to avoid the discrimination they're
at they're facing so before we get to
that one component I just want to check
to see that my understanding is correct
as an outsider is that a weird thing for
Westerners to understand is is that
secularism and supposed modernity is
guaranteed not by the democracy but by
the army yes so the army while this is
happening the army has a special
position in Turkish society and it owes
that to its enormous victories following
World War one and to the fact that the
practically all the leading modernizers
were trained in military schools so the
army is considered the protector of the
it's part of the checks and balances of
that of the system that if the system
goes off track the military has a right
to intervene to step in and knock some
heads the politicians and push out the
people of caused trouble and restart the
system and this in fact so you do start
getting political parties with the
military in the background you do start
getting political parties that start
catering to the needs and desires and
visions of the pious people the
privately religious some of them also
publicly religious but some of them
publicly irreligious people and these
parties start advancing and they start
gradually altering the discourse and
things that were unthinkable to say in
during Ataturk's lifetime or the
lifetime of
the next president you know start being
said publicly and gradually the support
of these parties grow the military
intervenes several times when it sees
that the that secularism is being
challenged to dangerously is from from
their perspective they intervene for a
few years the secularists remain
dominant but then the worst keeps coming
back force keeps coming back and every
time it comes back in it's even stronger
so we get through this this process we
come to the erred on era our dawn forms
our dawn with with a number of other
people belongs to a very what what is
even today a very extreme Islamist party
that that's where his roots are a party
that favors an Islamic common market and
and reducing contacts with the West
dramatically a return to many old
cultural forms and so on but our the one
sense that they could never come to
power if they maintain those extreme
positions that yes they had a core
constituency of 1012 percent but they
couldn't grow much beyond that but if
they advocated greater religious
freedoms without threatening the
secularists and others that they could
actually have a winning majority so do
some good and maybe even fool some
seculars and so he forum
new party which is the aqua party awk is
the acronym Huck means white in Turkish
was very clever a a clever acronym
clever name for a party the real name is
a daletech I'll come apart see Justice
and Development Party and the
development was to was to reassure the
business elite that they were so
committed to development and justice
could mean many things to the different
groups but to his core constituency it
meant we would get religious freedoms
and so we first came to power he gave
the impression that he was could expand
the freedoms of the of the pious masses
yes without taking away the freedoms of
the cyclers know this yeah yes at this
point I became very mystified because I
was watching it from here and there was
this phrase that was invariant in
American news the mildly Islamist party
and I kept hearing that and I I wanted
to get the wax out of my ears what do
you mean mildly Islamist
so mildly Islamist it was it was never a
good choice of terminology right but
what they meant was that this is a party
that had certain Islamist goals it
pursued those but without Iman really in
in my in moderation and without doing
damage to the rest of society and this
is precisely what our dawn did and it
was in fact under his watch in his first
few years as Prime Minister that Turkey
formally applied to join the European
Union
and this was something the party he came
from the extreme party this was one of
their nazma absolutely anathema to to
them they wanted not only not to join
the the common market they wanted to
reduce trade with him they there their
party platform said that they would do
most of their trade with with the Arab
world and the Muslim world now what
exactly they would be buying from the
Arab world and where they would get
their machinery and this is this was
knows who knows this was one of those
things that nobody could be getting back
to getting back to you know truncated
public discourse within that media you
never asked this question you know how
this was going to be you were as a
secular turk from the western part of
the country that's very very modern did
not see this sort of welling up of
preference falsification particularly
concentrated in Eastern the in the
Anatolian region I didn't I didn't
growing up growing up in Istanbul and
growing up in a family that had been
that was part of this westernization
movement my paternal grandfather fought
in the Ottoman army and then in the
Turkish war of independence during that
that process while he was taken prisoner
by the by the British and since spent
some time as an officer as a as a
British prisoner came to appreciate the
the strengths of Western society he used
that time to try to understand why the
British were had stronger armies then
then the Turks tried to understand what
it is that made them invent weapons that
the Turks had not wear several centuries
before this wasn't the case and he
became became convinced that out of Turk
and the people around him want the
westernised turkey make turkey anchor
turkey in the West they were 100% right
after he after the War of Independence
he resigned from the Army became a
contractor worked for the government for
the rest of his life supported the
supported Ataturk's party the People's
Republic n' party was the end of his
life a committed western Iser as was my
father as were all my close relatives I
didn't I grew up in a melee where people
didn't falsify their preferences people
were truthfully did the people supported
the government supported the government
supported the direction they were of the
country because they approved of this
and it was a what they didn't know was
that in part it was a bubble what they
didn't know was that it was a bubble and
what they didn't appreciate of course
they did appreciate that there were
these that the word that there was
resistance and there were in during the
decades from the 1920s to the 1970s 80s
there had been minor rebellions in parts
of eastern Turkey it was understood that
there were people who objected to the
country's direction but it was also
understood that they lived in poor parts
of the country they represented it was
the interpretation was they represent
the past as Turkey gets its more more
educated they will fade into the past
the next generation will not will not
support them so this is a transitory
problem so it's not that I didn't
understand that there were people who
objected to the objective direction of
the country and that when they migrated
to Istanbul they brought some of those
ideas with them there were people in
poor communities in Istanbul 'z and the
in the shanty towns who pretended when
they worked for major corporations that
worked for the post office of the
government actually supported the the
country's direction but they actually
didn't do it this much I understood but
I but I thought that this was this was a
minor transitory phenomenon this was not
something deeply felt by large numbers
of people that could actually change the
trajectory of the country this is
something that I missed and there's a
lesson in this that for if I may just
for a moment jump back to United State
earlier jump out to the United States in
the bubbles that we have here in our
left bubbles on the left and bubbles on
on the right with people who are talking
to each other and just don't realize how
many people there are who don't agree
with them and who have very good reasons
of their own for thinking differently
let's search like if you take it in the
US the anatolia would be analogized to
the middle of the country and some over
states yeah well I never used that term
because I just detest it but yes so
nobody did but it is I mean it means
something to to oppose the law evils and
then you the coastal elites is how the
the middle of the country demonizes the
edges yeah but but more than anything
you know it's not until you start seeing
the head scarves coming out of a BMW
that you realize that your picture is in
some sense not an accurate one that
people are quite well-to-do that they
are coming at this from a cultural
perspective that you may not understand
and that well this is where the word the
whole what preferences start starts
coming in at various levels
because now the the religious the
genuinely religious people start gaining
political power Miranda Kerr's with that
political power comes government
contracts comes a reduction in the
various regulations that prevented you
from getting rich so there are a lot of
people who are rich who are culturally
culturally conservative that become rich
right and so then you start seeing they
start buying BMWs and they start start
you know and you start seeing people
wearing headscarves BMWs you driving
BMWs you start seeing increasingly
elegant headscarves whereas initially
the party that that that built up this
this movement and it promoted a version
of Islam that involved modesty in cloth
coat Republicans would be in it yeah
modesty and they wouldn't you know they
wouldn't be flaunting their wealth and
so on well we get to a point gradually
where is where those who get rich start
spending the money on increasingly
expensive cars extremely a more more
expensive headscarves and you get to the
point where flash-forward to the to the
present where you have a president who's
living in the largest presidential
palace in the world a thousand one
hundred rooms he has some like fifteen
twenty I forget the exact number private
private planes Frances is luxury altered
all the the his the lead members of the
government and people close to him all
drive cars or have cars driven for them
emotional fervor that are what's what's
that can we discuss well this is
something that in Turkey is very
difficult to discuss if you discuss it
and get you in
in trouble anything involving the
president's finances or are we spends
his money or how his consumption is over
the top can get you in trouble there
many journalists who were in jail at the
moment for for saying this but you get
this now here we get into another form
of preference vocation within the Occupy
movement now these religious the the
people who wanted to publicize do want
wanted to advance religious freedoms we
jumped over one phase which I should
come back to now which is that our dawn
as he's as he provides expands religious
freedoms initially he doesn't take away
any freedoms from the secularists he
doesn't reduce their opportunities to
drink if they want to drink he doesn't
try to close down restaurants during
Ramadan if you're not religious and you
want to have lunch during Ramadan fine
that was at our dawn during his first
few years but during this time he is
gradually chipping away at the checks
and balances of the system and the thing
ultimately that he needs to get rid of
is this the power of the military to
essentially remove a government this was
something that was in the Constitution
now I'm gonna make a parallel here that
I wanted to see whether you're gonna go
or you won't
yes in some ways I view the military in
Turkey as having played a role similar
to the sense making apparatus in our
universities and our newspapers has the
guarantee the sort of Medicare and tours
of a stable democracy and that my
serious concern about the United States
is that we are headed down a path that
we cannot imagine actually ends in
literal dictatorship of some
as yet unknown form as we lose the thing
that eroded that dictatorial impulse so
that what I see is I see our newspapers
our universities our political parties
this institutional class that was
supposed to be quite honestly somewhat
elite and somewhat above the fray
increasingly become this completely
untrustworthy weakened version and we're
era Diwan was weakening the military was
the guarantor of secularism which was in
the process of overreaching
our situation is that our sense making
apparatus is weakening itself because
it's economics is starting to crumble I
think that there are parallels will be
we come back to this maybe finish the
the the Turkish case so what our dawn
does I think it's important for readers
and Watchers to to understand this he
disarms the secularists and makes many
seculars and divides the secularists and
peels off enough of them by making them
feel that he will perfect Turkish
democracy by getting rid of the role of
the military by pushing the military out
of politics through a referendum by
actually changing the constitution and
you need that you need to have the
country vote on a news having a military
dude aren t a democracy a secular
democracy was always a little bit of a
kind of a dirty illusion it was it was a
dirty solution it was something that
didn't any and our drone would always
say this this is not being Western I
mean this was at one being trying to
trying to sell his tried to try and
remove this check on his power by
appearing Western and he convinced
enough secular genious enough secular
people so the referendum passed by I
think 50 and a half to 49 and a half or
something got through this and the
margin the five percent margin that he
needed
came from secularists and I have many
friends who voted for him saying he is a
Don we hate to say this but he is the
one bringing true Western democracy you
cannot have a democracy if you ever
point show me one European country where
the military has the power that it has
in in Turkey yes the problems with that
Iran will deal with that within
democracy and but let's get this as our
so this is in the u.s. context I find
that both Trump and AOC are telling me
some of the things that have an
inexorable logic that no one will say
and I'm watching my friends peeled off
in both directions towards Trump and AOC
and I keep sort of saying don't you see
what's coming next in both of those
situations but there's something about
this kind of appeal to it it's almost
kind of a self-hating nature of the
secular that or you know maybe that
would be more in the case of a osc and
this is sort of appeal to a little we'll
just let trumpian deduce enough mischief
to shake things up and I keep thinking
that that these entreaties are clearly
going to go to super dangerous places
which I can't convince either sides
well the parallel was the parallel here
is that Ardoin was taking removing one
of the checks and balances in Turkish
democracy and preventing it from from
going in any direction towards in any
ideological direction toward
dictatorship right he was removing he he
removed this without putting in place so
they're just about that's perfectly said
now so here's the parallel with the
United States we have right now two
extreme groups that
hate each other that consider the other
side inhuman and who are willing to
suspend all sorts of democratic or all
sorts of democratic checks and balances
to defeat the other side Trump is doing
this and aoc like to do this as well and
there are various things that are
happening in society there are the
equivalent of of that and they're
leading us toward a dictatorship of one
kind or another well and there very few
people who are willing to say I can see
this problem both of these are saying
things that resonate with me both of
them are presenting dangers and there's
no place to go to say hey our problem is
our is our extremists and our our
exploitative entrepreneurs who are
seeing the turmoil in the country and
offering us these solutions because what
I see is I see bravery and courage on
the extremes and cowardice in the middle
and there is no kind of a courageous
prett perspective that says what are we
talking about giving up all of this
great stuff that defined our country so
quickly at the first sign of trouble yes
and yes we don't have and with in
American politics today the hope is that
within the Democratic Party there will
be some moderate candidate who will say
what you have just said and defend
compromising with the other side and
defend moderate solutions admit openly
the complexity of various issues and
start a conversation on how we
prioritize solving these these problems
what's happening is that all of the
candidates are afraid of crossing in the
case of the Democratic Party AOC
and the people around her and so they
are not saying the things that could
actually form a counter coalition and
the the party is being driven to an
extreme and the people at the extreme
including AOC and her her squad they are
are think of many of Trump supporters in
the same way that ardent krump
supporters think of AOC and there's a
narrable way in which I agree with both
of their verdicts about the other in
that the extremes of trumpism and the
extremes of this sort of you know
justice based thinking that throws out
civil society I have to say that I
understand the fear of closed borders of
open borders of people just saying such
dumb stuff with no adults anywhere in
sight and nobody pointing out the
implications laying out all the
implications of any of these whether
it's whether it's completely closed
borders having no immigration or which
war having to happen which totally open
borders we're talking which can which
can can never happen and there are and
most Americans believe in a policy
package somewhere in between
well that involve that involves some
immigration right with restricted with
restrictions with certain certain rules
they're not for closed borders or open
well so I've been trying to figure out
there's a game that gets played by
demographers who are trying to help but
a candidate get elected which is can we
identify
a sector of the economy that nobody's
found yet that can be swayed so soccer
moms was an example of one of these sort
of Democrat demographic discoveries
another one was the ex herb so you had
rural you had suburban but nobody
noticed that before you got to sorry
before you got to urban from rural there
was the ex herb in between rural and
suburban and that had a voting block to
me one of the largest voting blocks
which is there for anybody I talk about
this all the time and it's it's amazing
to watch people falsify that it even
exists I call it Xena philic restriction
is imputed by other cultures they've got
foreign friends they're interested in
having immigrants as being a vital part
of our society but they're not cooked up
on this sort of beautiful nonsensical
dream at the base of the Statue of
Liberty which somehow has this mystical
hold on immigration expansionism now of
course immigration expansionism is a
weapon for transfer of wealth among
Americans that is if you can selectively
open borders in an increase certain
groups share the pie George Boris's
showed mechanisms by which you can
transfer wealth you claiming to take a
tiny little bit of efficiency called
harberger triangle but what you're
really trying to do is transfer a giant
amount of wealth which we might call the
bore haas rectangle from american labor
to american capital now you can't have
that conversation about the misuse of
immigration as a tool of transfer
because our media will instantly set
upon you and say well the only reason
you're talking about restricting
immigration is your hatred of foreigners
and you can't disguise it from me so you
cannot be as eno philic restriction
restriction is select that cannot exist
by definition it cannot exist right of
course because and so this I introduced
this thing called the four quadrant
model and the idea is is that the media
in particular enforces a narrative that
all restriction ism 100% essentially is
motivated by fear of foreigners and then
you get to fear of brown people and fear
of people who are not like us or people
with accents
and it is the largest dumbest lie that
is a huge lie and even you could
minorities talk about brown people and
black people many of them would be among
the people hurt by open borders look
because they would lose those jobs well
that you would get cheaper labor from
doesn't anybody know any immigrants
doesn't anybody know any brown people
but the idea that it's the dumbest thing
I've ever heard it's like some white
person's crazy idea of what restriction
ISM is about it has to do with pushing
out labor supply curves it's it's this
is including the vote this should be
part of the discussion part of an
intelligent discussion that we can have
and reasonable people could can agree
can disagree on where what the optimal
trade-off is right and ultimately
reasonable people who disagree can come
to a compromise you're not gonna get a
hundred percent of what you're looking
for you're not gonna get a hundred
percent of what you we're going to come
somewhere in the middle we're gonna have
a national policy and that's a national
policy that can have some dynamism to it
every four years we can talk about it
again we can move the needle a little
bit depending on we really this is the
way we can do it but we have massive
massive preference falsification on this
simply because people are afraid of
being called xenophobes that's you want
to have crazy now we have massive
knowledge falsification which goes along
with this people cannot because you're
afraid of being of being put in the
wrong box in terms of your preferences
of whether you're a zero filer is in a
robe you don't you don't say things that
should be obvious to everybody
there are going to be major effects on
the labor market that are not going to
be distributed evenly there are going to
be some they're going to be perhaps
major owners of big factories are going
to gain a lot from the falling wage
rates and a lot of people living in the
inner cities are going to be hurt by by
this this is something you cannot say
because you'll be you know I've already
realized something yes you want to know
how crazy this is I used the phrase
doesn't anybody know any brown people it
doesn't anybody know any foreigners I'm
gonna be excoriated for that because I
didn't say don't any white people no
it's like even when I'm speaking glibly
yes like the cost of any stupid aspect
of phraseology is this ridiculous
drumming up by the people who want us
not to talk about which i think is for
economic reasons I think people are who
are in control are terrified that they
will come they will encounter the idea
that in general Americans are
pro-immigration and wanted at lower
levels we're open to foreigners we think
it's a vibrant part of ours to say but
we're not stupid we understand that if
you have free healthcare for all free
education for all you know a nearly
limitless opportunity to cross board you
cannot do all of these things we don't
want our votes diluted there's no
ability to have the conversation and so
a lot of what the portal is about is
we've got to break out of this enforced
conversation of morons to some place
where we can actually potentially get
enough resolution to say oh here's what
I'm really at about I don't think we
should be blocked to the you know the
most dynamic people coming from overseas
well we need some ability to admit
refugees look at the the people who've
been you know a death's door and we've
saved and said what an important part of
revitalizing country we have to be able
to talk with specificity and what I see
is a media that doesn't have
any interest in this long-form kind of
interaction simply because it's trying
to enforce low resolution speech and
that low resolution speech involves to
put it in concrete terms if you want
restrictions on immigration your four
cages
well most Americans are not for caging
children either they they're appalled by
that they would like more orderly forms
of restrictions more humane form of
forms of restrictions but we cannot get
to that point if we cannot have
reasonable people cannot have
conversations they're going to involve
some disagreement if they cannot have
conversations that are probed by the
media so that the underlying assumptions
are identified that the gotchas without
the gotchas the underlying assumptions
are underlined are identified the
trade-offs are brought out the knowledge
on on which people's preferences are
based those are scrutinized there are
many myths about what the composition of
immigration is so that we actually are
we can we can we can get rid of some of
our myths and start talking about these
issues on the basis of facts sound facts
so what we cannot we cannot do this if
we can't speak freely well the so and
the thing that I don't understand is the
university so you're you're sitting
there at Duke you're part of this
archipelago of higher education there's
a major note on it what the heck
happened that our universities became
places where you can't explore ideas as
opposed to the Citadel's in which one
can or am I wrong about this this is
has been a slow process and I think it
has to do with well-meaning it started
with well-meaning policies to help
integrate groups that had been excluded
from blur that it the the universities
had been insular the university said
headaches that explicitly excluded
certain sort of groups for example
african-americans and when you bring in
groups that have been excluded from the
university system you bring them in
there are going to be some adjustment
problems and I think it was I think
there were some well-meaning people who
wanted to help them help them adjust and
started special special programs that
and and these involved what we're called
third world in the university that I
went to college that I went to it's
called the third world center or they
were African American centers or
something so these centers not these
were again created to give these these
groups in this case African Americans a
place where they could share their their
grievances where they could where they
could talk to talk to each other they
were not meant to be closed to others
who wanted to communicate with them who
wanted to help them them integrate
gradually they be they turned into
activist centers they and they started
pushing universities in the direction of
of making special of efforts hiring
African American professors bringing
African Americans minorities into the
administration and so on all this was
also initially motivated by driven by
well-meaning people that
there were that you had administrations
and departments that were in fact
genuinely racist that had histories of
racism that had over that had overlooked
very talented african-americans but it
got to but it eventually starting from
from from there it started taking on
unrealistic dimensions and one I'll give
you an example I'm right now a professor
at Duke Duke was one of one of the first
universities if not if not the first
university to have a plan put in its
long term plan or a ten-year plan that
every department in the university would
have at least one african-american
professor on it's it's faculty this was
a policy put in place well before I got
there in the nineteen 1980s it was not
feasible because in some professions
there were very few african-american
professors who could teach at a at a
research universities and the
competition for them because what was
happening at Duke was happening at other
universities as well the competition for
them was very fierce so given the
numbers some places no matter how hard
they tried some places were not going to
make their make their targets well this
was then interpreted as not as a
consequence of low numbers and the over
ambitiousness of the of the initial plan
that's something that could be
accomplished in in over a longer time
period couldn't be accomplished say in
in ten years instead of being
interpreted
in that manner it was attributed to
racism and it got to the point where the
the policies that were being proposed to
to reduce the imbalances the racial
imbalance and the faculty in the student
body so the policies that were being
being proposed at opposing them started
putting you in danger
sure and that you could be you could be
attacked as racist that shut down
conversation now this is one thing that
I've given you one example because it's
it's the one that I've that I've studied
the struggle in universities over
affirmative action but it has happened
in other areas as well other groups have
used the same strategy to shut down
discourse on cultural issues and to to
[Music]
to have universities build all sorts of
new units designed to help particular
identity constituencies right well so
I'm actually quite quite interested in
divided in my own mind about this what I
don't understand is why it is that we
can't frame these problems in ways that
contain both explanations about human
bigger bigotry unfairness misogyny
racism
let's have that as a component and then
let's have non oppression based
explanations and let's try to figure out
what percentage of things are due
to both and what everyone seems to do is
that they either want to exclude one or
the other from consideration so that we
can't figure out the mixture now I I you
know became a mathematician I went
through Penn Harvard MIT in the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem I think it's the
case that at the time I was in each of
those departments there was not a single
female full professor on the faculty now
I have no idea what that is it's there's
so many fine female mathematicians in
the world and I could you know certainly
reel off five or ten that everyone would
agree were first-rate mathematicians off
the top of my head but there is a wild
imbalance in the field and I am
convinced that there's a component of
this that has to do with men have
erected mathematics in the way that men
are most comfortable with because there
have been so few women in the field and
I'm also reasonably convinced that
there's some asymmetry maybe not an
intellectual ability but certainly an
interest in spending one's life
negotiating a world mostly of symbols so
I have no idea how to call it but I
don't think that either component of
that vector in two dimensions which is
oppression based explanations and non
operation but oppression based
explanations I don't think either
component would be zero it's ultimately
an empirical issue one would demand a
way with with these with as with that
every empirical issue we need to collect
data and we need to approach the issues
the way scientists but we're not allowed
to set up the problem but we're not
allowed to set up the problem we're not
allowed to pose the question and this is
this is a big big danger this is where
we become where the situation we find
ourselves in is analogous to the
situation of the Soviet bloc yeah
where you could not ask the question of
why East German Ladas were so so
inferior to West German Mercedes and
various other West German cars VW's
first rate you could not ask this
question you could not even after you
started you could start you could pick
up television stations in in West
Germany and see how incredibly different
the lifestyles of workers there were
that in the so-called workers paradise
where the proletariat was in power in
that society in East Germany workers had
a much lower standard of living than in
West Germany the Turks who had who had
been brought in to West Germany were
living much better than the the nice
German workers you could not a fun thing
you could not point that out but
secondly you could not ask the question
why what is it where did we go wrong it
wasn't that the will wasn't there
marx and engels and the other
theoreticians and lenin had had certain
ideas and a certain sense of how the
society worked and I believe that they
they sincerely passionately believes
that in fact they could create the
Utopia they had in mind they were there
were certain very critical elements of
human nature that they didn't appreciate
but if the the East Germans have been
allowed to ask these questions and put
these issues to empirical test and so on
they would have come up with the answers
and they could have actually made the
transition without a revolution team or
I could talk to you forever so I think
what we're gonna do is we've been at
this for a little while and with a
question it's been much on my mind
having to do with in my case wanting
potentially to retake the White House
and for the Democrats in an honorable
way which I don't think will happen
not particularly close to the Democratic
Party in fact it's been driving me crazy
but it is where I grew up and then I
would love to invite you back at any
time you like to continue the discussion
but the theory that really has
captivated me is how to figure out the
appeal of Trump and I have in part come
up with this idea of the checksum theory
of politics now a checksum has to do
with your receiving a binary and let's
say is a computer program and you want
to know whether it's been corrupted and
so there's some very quick Chek without
having to be able to see the program to
know whether or not it's the program has
been has been corrupted on its way to
you the three things that I've settled
on which allow me to know that the
Democratic Party and its media organs
are lying
have to do with a belief that
immigration is more or less a pure
positive and that anybody wants it
restricted can only do so out of
xenophobia a belief that trade and
globalization is a simply positive force
that should be expected to lift all
boats and the belief that there is zero
connection between terror in US and
Islam no matter how many people cry
Allahu Akbar at the end of a killing
spree now that is not to say that
there's no aspect of white terrorism as
it's not to say that there's no aspect
of trade that is positive surely it is
and that's not to say that immigration
doesn't carry positive benefits I think
we've extolled several of them in the
course of our conversation but it's the
simplicity and the violent ferocity with
which these things are defended which
have caused large numbers of Americans
to say I don't know what this is but
it's like invasion of the Body Snatchers
no one could possibly believe anything
is simplistic stupid and as threatening
as what you've created and it's driving
people in droves to embrace anyone who
will say otherwise am I wrong no I think
that there's the there's a lot that
makes a tremendous amount of sense and I
want to Reese a what you said in a
different way and explain
the reasons that I think Trump came to
power vast numbers of people including
diehard Trump supporters think that he's
not the type of person they'd like to
have over dinner there's not the like
they're they know there's he's not the
type of person they would like to go
into business with he's not a
trustworthy person he's not a moral
person he's not for the millions of
Evangelic also voted for him
not the not somebody who gets close to
representing Christian values but
there's one thing that distinguishes
president of the jew politician works
what's that
there's one thing that that trump
demonstrated that no politician
democratic or republican who came close
to being a candidate a characteristic
that he had and that is the the ability
to take on the sacred cows of both the
Democratic Party and the Republican
Party and it's important and it's
important yeah and it's something that
he he demonstrated as soon as he
announced his candidacy he started
insulting various groups of societies
now some of them are groups that do not
have like Muslims like Hispanics we
called he called all of them rapists all
11 million Hispanic immigrants he said
they're all rapists and the reason
didn't he I thought that was very early
on I
early on I worry I don't think that he
did he played around with a lot of
things that could be parsed one way or
the other but so can anyway anyway he
said some very awful things about the
about immigrants maybe I've was playing
with fire he was playing with fire he
certainly said awful things about
Muslims now their voting power initially
those were the initial groups that he
targeted can say maybe this is something
that a smart politician my populist
politician might do they don't have much
voting power but then he started taking
on groups insulting groups and accusing
groups of certain groups of doing
horrible things groups that had
significant voting power some of them
were primarily Democratic voting groups
so you could say well that makes sense
because that's gonna energize the
Republican base they're people in the
Republican Party who don't like these
other other groups that makes sense but
then he started insulting and demeaning
and humiliating groups and the
Republican Party major groups in the
Republican Party and that included the
one that sticks in my mind or is the
veterans he insulted John McCain who was
somebody was an icon not even for
Republicans including Republicans who
didn't vote for him and when he ran for
president and the primary but there's
also somebody highly respected by
Democrats and he accused McCain of being
a failure because he had been it gotten
arrested and he preferred soldiers who
didn't get arrested and so on this is
something that insulted so many so many
veterans now after this happened his
poll numbers went up after he said this
generally but also among Republicans and
even among veterans and this was just
absolutely stunning to me and it to me
it said people are looking for a game
changer and
what they're looking for is somebody who
can take on the vested interests in
Washington and somebody who is who can
be so open in criticizing criticizing
groups that are so important to the
Republican coalition will be fearless
against anyone and if there's anyone
who's gonna shake up the system it's
gonna be Trump and I think that is one
source of his his strength and I think
that going forward whether he's going to
succeed in the next election is going to
depend on whether people believe that he
is in fact that that attitude has
generated something for them whether
he's actually he's actually taken
measures against immigrants that that
for for the people who voted for Trump
for this reason because he would shake
up the system whether this proves that
he will stay on that path and this is
what the country needs what the country
needs more of to move forward you know
just listening to this reminds me that
the phrase out of control has two
separate meanings the Democrats see him
is out of control in the sense of a
destructive force that threatens every
everything around around him the
Republicans who support him and maybe
even some Democrats who support him but
let's say it is Trump supporters and
Trump detractors Trump detractors see
him as out of control in the sense that
he's a danger to everything Trump
supporters see him is outside of control
and therefore he can weirdly be trusted
because
clearly nothing is holding him back he's
not he has no paymaster somewhere
because nobody could act like this if
they were part of the institutional
makeup of the country and I wonder if
that's really what divides us and this
is I think what is dividing us right now
and the people who feel that he's just
destroying so many things that are
valuable to them are willing added
intensely hate him and that hatred is
now driving them toward politicians who
are willing to suspend various civil
liberties that are central to the
American system or have been central to
the American system because getting rid
of Trump is more important than anything
else and and Trump insofar as Trump is
is not that the the the trumpism will
not be gone after Trump is no longer
president insofar as these people who
hate the establishment and hate the
various vested interests insofar as
they're there they're gonna continue to
pose a problem politically they're going
to continue to be a political force
somehow and the Trump the group that
you've labeled the Trump detractors we
might call them the Trump Trump haters
many of them would like to suspend
various liberties various checks and
balances to get rid of this clear and
present danger that is one way we can
get to a dictatorship another way is of
course allowing Trump to pursue some
visit agenda that's another way to
clinch halves to dictatorship and again
we get back to this issue of
tremendous need that the society has for
the people who are falsifying
preferences in one way or another who
see the complexity of the issues to come
out of the closet and to find a leader
of their own who is going to have the
charisma yeah that is going to out Trump
Trump and out a ococ this is were
lacking well may we may we find such a
person inshallah I hope so inshallah
okay well you've been through the portal
with dr. Tim or Quran of Duke University
thanks for listening or watching and
we'll see you next time
[Music]
you
[Music]