welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
okay chickens just gonna give you the
co-host access raven do you have it if
you can let people in while I'm talking
thank you
do you have close access can't find your
name I do not okay
I'll figure it out in a moment all right
so check-ins I'm 11% nervous I feel calm
I feel kind of like like there's like a
really nice do mos
coming up because I'm I was reading the
side view earlier and it's it was really
really good and I brought my turtleneck
game for everyone because that's how
much I think this this issue is awesome
so welcome to the stoah I am Peter
Lindbergh the Stewart of the Stoa the
Stowe is a place for us to cohere and
dialogue about what matters most at the
knife's edge of this moment and today we
have a party the side view launch party
and we have a crater the editor of the
side view Adam Roberts here today there
a tomorrow but I should say and what's
gonna happen is him and I are gonna jam
we're gonna have a conversation about
the side view about this particular
issue for maybe 10 20 minutes so and
we're like a podcast format if you have
any questions or any statements just
write it into the chat box will give a
chance there's a lot of the the authors
in the chat room today so we have a
chance to have people to speak I'm gonna
I'm gonna please any loquacious Ness
because you know we only have 60 minutes
of the recorded session so let's be
cognizant of everyone in the space and
then after the 60 minutes the lovely
Blackbird Raven Connolly is going to do
a sense-making session Raven you want to
speak on that just a little bit hi
everyone
so the 30 minute sense-making session is
just more like a roundtable discussion
where everyone can have their voice
heard and will be
about questions that come up in in this
recorded session and I'll be keeping
track of statements and questions that
come up in the chat to bring to the
discussion for the half hour of
sense-making towards the end so invite
you all to stay and join us for the
discussion be wonderful thank you
beautiful so after the 60 minutes if you
want to leave you can leave and we'll
stop recording and then and it's a raven
with a sense making session so that
being said Adam how you doing
dude great Peter thanks so much for
having me
it's so nice to see everybody I mean I
feel like we have we have contributors
new and old in in the audience like this
is I mean it's kind of amazing to me to
just see all these folks show up for the
side view and its really great cool how
you feeling excited you've released it
like what's what's that feeling like
just launching into the world it feels
really good I mean you know you you sit
on something like this for for months
and months
you know and so many of the writers many
of them are here and I want to I want to
hear from them later but so many of them
have put together just just such a rich
collection of I mean every essay is just
I mean a gem to itself and I'm I just
couldn't be happier with how this came
together and the way it came together
just felt so natural or I you know there
was just something in the air about this
moment that I tried to capture with my
with my call and it was just like you
know every every every person that you
might imagine or want to show up in
response to that call showed up so yeah
I couldn't I couldn't be happier and I
know the writers put in a lot of work on
their pieces and you know we put in a
lot of work you know putting it on the
website editing you know Alex Crito
helped with you know putting the journal
together and you know so it really takes
a village and yeah really happy with how
it turned out I've been enjoying a bit
of reading the the essays and it's just
like geeking out about it you
so this is my jam right here this is
sort of like my my sense making tribe
making sense and it's putting me at the
edge of my thinking just reading the
essays so before we get into this
particular episode or essay or I should
say article what is the side view
like like what is it about why'd you
start it yeah that's a good question the
side view is well it's an idea or it's
an approach or it's a perspective it's
an attitude it's a practice it's maybe a
disposition and it's uh it's this it's
this multimedia environment so if you're
not if you're not familiar with the side
view or if this is just your first time
checking it out we do these essays we
publish the essays online but we also
publish them in print the print is
coming a little later this time and as a
digital download so you can you can kind
of read them and share them online or
you can download them and kind of I
still prefer that kind of slower digest
of you know having the whole you know
the especially with this issue the whole
really matters it's not just 13 essays
that are you know loosely related they
they do come together into kind of an
emergent structure and so for me just
having that ability to kind of take them
all in at once is really important so we
offer them in the in the journal format
and then we also do podcasts I've done
some events you know just like live
speaking events we're hoping to do more
of that kind of thing in the future Nick
Bryce wits is here for issue 2 we did a
[Music]
little launch event at the interval in
in San Francisco a really cocktail bar
run by the the Law Foundation that he's
a part of so we're trying to move out of
like a single format or a single medium
because so much of what we do has
involves practice it involves not just
you and your whole body you know in
action but you know groups of people
communities it involves art and religion
and spiritual
in science and all of these different
things things that you can only capture
you can only capture a certain dimension
of them in sort of traditionally
academic discursive settings so we're
trying to like hit it in in all of these
different ways so the the side view is
that I don't know what else I should say
about it I guess the name is kind of the
attitude right we're trying to we're
trying to look at things from the side
from a side view which basically just
means trying to understand not just if
you look at a lot of history books for
example you see that you see if you're
looking at a history of philosophy for
example you see a history of completed
texts completed works sort of set epochs
and periods and it it's all there it's
just everything there in the finished
product but the the side view
perspective is to actually try and take
on all of the practices and experiences
and and into intuitions and methods that
actually led those people to create the
things that that we kind of see as the
finished product so that's really what
the side view is it's an it's a focus on
the on the practice that leads to the
book the artwork the scientific
discovery the technological achievement
right right and you and I were talking
last week about this is my opinion but I
think other people should participate as
well is that how the side view is sort
of like the gold standard of the like a
para academic journal in this sort of
sense making web game beep at a monitor
space whatever you wanna call it and you
and I both belonged to the same
philosophical lineage with the basically
appear at OU and peer it was mentioned
multiple times in the side view
Nick's paper with Brent's paper so maybe
you can talk about how it's sort of like
that para academic journal thing and
also how peer hadou plays such a central
role and you're kind of thought and
decide you yeah I mean those those two
things are definitely
related for me peridot if you don't know
who peridot is he's a huge influence on
me he's a huge influence on the side
view
he wrote a a series of books were very
much built around this idea of
recovering the practice of philosophy or
what he called philosophy as a way of
life and he saw philosophy as first and
foremost rooted in these practices that
he called Spiritual Exercises you could
also think of them as like existential
exercises and the word that he used to
describe these practices is askesis a
thesis
you might recognize is very similar to
another word ascetic which we still see
use today quite frequently which which
people think of as sort of like some
kind of an act of abstinence or celibacy
or withdrawal and kind of a monkish way
you're kind of withdrawing to the
monastery and abstaining from sort of
ordinary life those definition is a
little bit broader in that he he views
askesis that the general definition he
gives up askesis is of any exercise that
you engage in on purpose in order to
transform yourself and particularly in
order to transform your perception so
right there he sees this kind of deep
link between your being has a person who
you are how you are and what you're able
to see and do in the world and so those
things are united in this notion of
practice and so through practice we
change who we are and in changing who we
are we change how we see and what we're
able to do so we're really talking about
a certain kind of perceptual
transformation here or some people today
use the word perceptual learning is a
phrase that they use in cognitive
science to describe the way that not
just your cognitive understanding
changes when you sort of gain
intellectual knowledge but how your your
physical sense
is your bodily senses actually change
you actually transform sedation at a
pretty deep level and I get all of that
from it though
and other people he's certainly not
alone in it he's sort of the person who
invited that notion into my life and so
I I continue to think with him and
continue to be inspired by him but he
also in addition to having that kind of
you know deeper understanding of what
philosophy is also had had quite a lot
of opinions about how philosophy was
taught in these earlier Greek contexts
and how they're how its taught today and
he definitely sees a a loss of a kind of
the existential or spiritual or in some
context you could say religious
dimension the therapeutic dimension
perhaps that has always been a part of a
philosophy has been something happened
to it and something happened to it with
we don't have to go into the whole
history that he gives of it but
something happened to it with the rise
of the modern university system where we
we we got into a focus of getting really
good at learning about texts and
learning how to criticize texts and
building up these figures who have these
kind of encyclopedic knowledge of the
history of philosophy without very much
emphasis on the practice of philosophy
in their daily lives and so I that's
also a part of what the side view is
it's it's on the one hand recognizing
that there are there are aspects of the
academic process there are there there's
a real lineage and a real tradition that
goes back thousands of years of teachers
and students of of mastery of really
understanding what philosophy is like
you know a lifetime of study
acknowledging that that's important but
also
recognizing that somehow that needs to
be brought back out into the world in a
way that it just isn't right now so the
side view you know circulates freely on
the internet it's it has elements of an
academic journal it's it's certainly not
popular reading I would say but it's
also not
lodged behind a paywall that's
inaccessible both financially and
because of a lot of arcane jargon is
used in a kind of insider baseball
conversation that's only relevant to a
handful of people so we're trying to
bring it out into the open I I do think
that you still have you still have to
you need that desire to kind of get into
some of these pieces they are not this
isn't the Huffington Post
you know to put it that way it's it
still demands something of you but at
the same time it doesn't demand that you
have a graduate degree it just demands
that you're interested and that you're
willing to put in a little bit of work
to get you know I think a deeper
understanding so we try to try to share
it everywhere and also again try and
bring people into the process so that
maybe they can start putting some of
these things into practice in their own
life I've seen over the past few years
just a tremendous amount of interest in
you know like philosophers or
philosophers academics of all kinds
going on YouTube and you know giving
their lectures and thousands tens of
thousands sometimes hundreds of
thousands or millions of people are
viewing these lectures but then kind of
seeing where they take that conversation
realizing like oh they don't they don't
they're not really getting away into
being able to reproduce those insights
for themselves so that the pedagogy that
you would get in a traditional context
isn't quite there so can we do something
about that can we bring it out into the
open but without having that sort of
precipitous drop-off between like the
genius YouTube broadcaster and you know
the ugliness the transpires in the
comments below you know something like
that so the side views is trying to move
into that space that's great that's
great Nasreen knows I get angry with the
galaxy brains and the YouTube things so
if any questions start throwing them and
and
the chatbox and I think we were thinking
about allowing each sort of author to
have a chance to speak I'm gonna veto
that because intellectuals usually talk
a lot and we have a certain time period
right here and I want to kind of place
loquacious things so if you have a
question for either Adam or any author
in a chat right now because there's a
bunch here we have no need to roll we
have Brent we have my favorite drinking
buddy Christopher
we have Nikolas Jason Jeremy we have a
bunch of them here so if you have any
questions for any of the authors if you
read some of the piece right in the chat
box and if you're not then you have a
question for Adam or another author you
can write it to them I wrote a piece too
on the neck mediation feel free to ask
me a question so just throw in the chat
box and I'll warm add them up with a
question about this latest release so
you have the three sections you have the
wayfinding cultures ecology of practices
and meta modernism I'm curious did you
these just naturally emerge or were you
kind of looking for these themes no
there there there and I mean in some
sense they're really obviously there and
in some sense they're a little bit more
subtly but the I mean we can go through
the three of them the wayfinding
cultures is well Bonita and her essay
talks about wayfinding wayfinding is a
kind of sense making but it's the way
she talks about it maybe Bonita wants to
speak to it but she's talking about it
in I want to back up a little bit
actually because the way we talk about
sense-making
on the side view is a little bit
different from the way sense-making is
used in the kind of a larger
conversation they overlap and they're
related but they're also a little bit
different and if you read like Benitez
si you get this kind of this notion of
sense making that's coming out of the in
activist tradition that draws on people
like merleau-ponty and Francisco Varela
evan Thompson all kinds of figures and
that's notion
sense-making is really kind of opening
up how our perception works our lived
experience our day-to-day sense of
reality in our sense of salience and
meaning and how we navigate and all of
those things and Bonita picked up this
example of wayfinding where we faring
seafaring all of these different ways
that people learn how to get around
territories where they don't really have
a good representational model like we
usually think about it so there's that
piece coming from Bonita Nick in his
piece is talking about a civilizational
scale perception how do we think on the
scale of ten thousand years in in either
direction right that's that's the long
now foundation thing and how do you how
do you embody that and so we're kind of
doing this this exercise in you know the
issues called collective navigation so
it's like it's this kind of collective
sense making at the level of
civilizations right can we do that is
that something we can do that's like a
question for me and how does it have
what does it have to do with these other
sort of more embodied more individual
more internal modes of perception is it
just or just connecting up or what are
the emergent properties what are the
feedback loops what's feeding back down
and what's feeding up you know all those
kinds of things and Wolf Wolf tae Vee
sorry from pronouncing your name wrong
wolf all had this kind of bigger scale
you know image of how would you actually
run a society if you were in charge of
it you know how would you do that
and same thing with with Nora Bateson's
essay oh she had this she was this kind
of group it's it's a kind of like
participatory sense making it's a
complexity science in the first person
and so like that's kind of the first
group and they they all just fit
together really nicely and so it's the
this idea of like collective sense
making can we like what are the what are
some of the words that we can put to
that you know
in the second one ecology practice
centers a little bit around you know
John Verve a key
Christopher master Pietra who I am
meeting for the first time virtually I
can see him in the little chat box down
there you know just this notion of the
meaning crisis and the ecology of
practice my ecology is a practice that
we can bring to a meaning crisis and so
that kind of was the orbit around that
group of essays
davood Rosalie had an essay where he was
raising some really salient points about
our are we are we alleviating alienation
and atomization by engaging with each
other through YouTube videos through
podcasts it's a very singular kind of
activity
maybe there's something structural
that's going wrong there so that we're
listening to all this good stuff about
how to overcome the meeting crisis and
yet we're doing it you know alone with
her air air pods or earbuds and kind of
still in that isolated atomized mode or
Jessica Burton it's kind of spun whole
thing on its head and you know if you
listen to Jessica she's having a great
time you know online it's like there's
ideas flowing there's you know all this
interaction is happening and you know
things are mutating and evolving like in
real time and you get a really different
sense so there's there's all these
different kinds of Ecology's of of
practice and action transpiring and then
of course we have I want speak to your
essay Peter book maybe you and Jason can
say something about your mediation
pizzas at some point and then the last
affection was met a modernist that that
one was really because we have we have
two three really strong takes on meta
modernism just what is it and I I was
kind of new to the whole thing coming
into this and I learned through through
these essays and following you know the
bread crumbs that they left going
through the links that they left going
through the reference lists and so we
have these different accounts of meta
modernism so yeah the
the major sections were they were just
kind of there it was just just a matter
of putting them putting them in the
right sequence right so we'll turn to
questions now it just to circle back to
something we talked about last week
which i think is really cool and excited
for how you wanted your podcast the side
view podcast where you want certain
people to talk to each other so I just
read two hoots article and was like oh
my god that was awesome I need some shot
fires at genre Vicki so be good to have
them to talk on your podcast yeah some
Liberty looking forward to that so neat
Roy you have a question yeah you know
you called the invitation I think but
it's or something that like really threw
you off like surprised you like is this
going where is this going
like what was something that was salient
that was unexpected or better or for
worse well I'm a little bit curious
about what's in the water in Toronto I
didn't I didn't really understand that
Peter and John and Chris and davood have
all these prior relationships with each
other and I had no idea about any of
that and I still don't really know how
those relationships hang together but
they write about each other
and in in a very I think did a little
bit of a there's a zeitgeist II charge
to what what's happening over there and
I didn't know about it and I actually
didn't even know about it reading essays
is something that I learned after the
fact and then there's just you know
there's
Jeremy Johnson's here he I just he's
just another one of those guys where
you're just like something's happening
something's happening with this guy it's
really interesting I had been reading
Shawn Gibbs sir
you know he's years ago and I think
whatever it was just the contact I
thought he was really really interesting
but you know some of the folks who were
interested into him I just didn't think
it wasn't alive for me and then Jeremy
wrote this wonderful book on on gebser
that I highly recommend to you all in
kind of like hey this whole fresh spin
on it and and I you know I realized
reading out that that's that's Jeremy
that is Jeremy coming through there and
he did the same thing with his essay and
so of course it's like you you try and
you try and put something out there and
you don't know what's gonna happen
and you don't know what's gonna come
back and you don't know what it's gonna
look at and look like and so you just
have to have some faith that it's there
and that you're touching something real
you know some of the links in the in the
intro essay I wrote were from you know
but last year there was a fellow Peter
Jason maybe you can remind me his name
as an anonymous account that he he
created these graphs of how all of the
podcasts and social media accounts fit
together in these like multicolored webs
in a really neat way and I I had a
little bit of an epiphany looking at
those because I realized that I I had
done so much of what I had done with the
side view independently of knowing about
any of this other stuff you know and so
all of a sudden I was I somebody had
given me this visual tool to see this
emergent structure that what I was doing
was like in the middle of like this
little piece right there but it was like
oh we all responded to some some kind of
ambient signal and this structure sort
of crystallized and so with this
this issue I wanted to like kind of
capture that feeling just by invoking
some of the words that were kind of
involved in that in those diagrams like
what who are all these people what are
they doing what what what are the key
words they use okay let's it's okay
that's us there's some kind of a spell
here this is like we can string this
into some kind of incantation and
something will emerge and what emerged
is this issue for me it's like
transmission by wayfinding yeah right
cool thanks Bonita rain Jess your
question Thanks
so I think creating a new publication or
a new form of media is really rich for
this question of what's different about
it and we have our the old broadcasting
centralized broadcast model and we have
the contemporary web web which is sort
of like a weird amalgamation of total
anarchy and decentralization along with
Twitter blasts that end up just being
broadcasts anyway so I'm curious how you
see the relationship between the speaker
and the audience changing if you imagine
the side of you having a new
relationship between speaker and
audience I think I think a lot about
these questions in terms of kind of
having sedimented layers are kind of
like strata I don't think I don't think
this is an either/or situation I've been
in learning environments where it was
kind of completely horizontal sort of
circular it's good for some things it's
really poor for other things so I think
it's important to maintain what's
healthy and beneficial about that
structure and also look at at other
structures
and I think the same goes for the
different types of ways that you're now
able to put out writing is but I think
mostly about writing and you know think
about writing and editing and things
like that but you're never gonna replace
a book with a blogpost you know you're
never gonna replace a blogpost with a
tweet but they can complement each other
and having like that kind of competency
about what's the right medium for this
idea is more interesting to me than okay
we're not doing broadcasts we're not
doing broadcast style anymore we're not
doing 300 page books anymore we're just
gonna do online shareable medium
articles like that doesn't make sense to
me so just finding and finding the right
mix of things is kind of how I think
about it and it's just it's fascinating
just seeing how this like switch from
sort of podcast world to whatever this
zoom situation is kind of exemplifies
something of a transition like that
where I think if this had happened Peter
before the pandemic you and I would
probably be having a podcast just you
and I about this but for whatever reason
this is one of the second-order effects
of being stuck at home is that now we'd
do it like this and I think that's very
positive so I think we should do more
things like this because kind of break
some walls right so Raven has a question
for me so I let her ask that and then I
have a question for my number one
frenemy
Jason Schneider so uh raven hi yeah that
really connects well to what you just
said Adam actually in the case of
speaking about how the stoah has emerged
as a like since making form that's
around dialogue and communitas and also
about practice with the kind of psycho
technologies we've been experimenting
with in the wisdom gym so my question
was about is there a kind of a natural
complement between the side view
it's exploration of text and the
multi-modality ways that we can get at
the communication of things through
artifacts and also how the stoah is
treating interaction and and practice
and this live event format and I think
someone said in the chat are they
siblings are they lovers are they
pentose so I don't know if you have any
insight into that into that question
yeah yeah I'm curious Adams thoughts of
the others say that I have philia for
the side view maybe it's just because we
have shared philosophical engages with
hadou but it seems like we're gesturing
towards the same thing and so any form
of collaboration that can emerge I'm
very open to it and he mentions a
question I wanted to answer the question
that you didn't ask there but you wrote
in the chat it's like how can you speak
on your piece of memetic mediation as a
stoic kind of compliment I just want to
mention that just mentioned that briefly
that Jason Jared and I we have a
mediation campfire every Sunday here at
the stove 3:30 p.m. Eastern Time and we
talked about mimetic mediation how do
and maybe one definition of that is
getting different mimetic tribes or
different memes into right relationship
with each other and how to do that and
the idea here is just invite people from
all these different ideologies all these
different philosophies in the wild to
get them warm by the digital campfire we
had Michael Brooks we have you know he's
a progressive issed Bernie Sanders
supporter we had Jack Murphy's a man''ôs
for your guy can to get warmer around
the campfire and eventually can they or
their you know followers come to dialog
with each other in this space and so I
kind of want the stoah to be this sort
of space where people can engage so I
have a question for Jason but I'm
curious if Adam has any any thoughts on
how many of that just yes I mean I think
the more the more we can do this kind of
cross-pollination the better I
I think about this you know one we're
we're kind of creating a sort of an
artifact that people can look at but and
think about on their own but poor work
there's there's a kind of a question of
culture and participating in a culture
and just taking responsibility for the
fact that that culture doesn't just
happen it has to be made and it has to
be made with some intention and that's
that's what I see you know as kind
almost most important is that it just
like whole communities spring up around
these conversations you know and I have
I have competencies and comfort zones
that I just when I started the website I
knew I knew it should be multimedia and
you it should be podcasts and events but
the podcasts have always been more
challenging for me just because it's not
it's not where I feel highly competent
but writing and editing and getting into
people's ideas and back and forth you
know I can do that you know all day long
so I like the idea that we bring kind of
a different emphasis to the work that we
do and I think that's important but I
wonder Peter maybe we can sort of bring
in some of the writers I you know this
is mostly their work and me just trying
to act as a kind of antenna slash
facilitator so I mean so please yeah so
have I see ray down there Brent I can't
see all of you but I you know I know
you're out there so I'm curious I'm just
yeah Carter sort of time we have 20
minutes do you have any questions to any
of the writers I don't directly
no I'm just so happy that this all came
together and I just I know you know
having written for a number of other
publications myself just how much of a
labor of love it is and how frustrating
it is and how like you know you can
really grind your gears on this kind of
stuff and then you know it's not like
we're getting paid tons of money to do
this so it's like I'm just extremely
appreciative that everybody shows up and
you know puts it like these I've worked
as an editor for universities all across
the country for different journals and
like this these are high quality
thoughts and words and I'm just I'm just
in awe of all the people who just you
know responded to the to the to the
bat-signal and showed up and yeah so
thank thank all of you because that's
that's that's what this that's what this
is really so Jeremy Johnson you had to
should have thought about the quarantine
about community I'm curious if you would
like to share it with the group
everybody so yeah just just a quick
comment that you know this time of
physical separation has diso highlighted
I don't want to just say the value of
community but the practice of being
together that we're using these digital
interfaces and zoom calls and whatever
else we're doing like I used discord
quite a bit to really kind of come at it
as if it's a novelty right like we
haven't really used the social space
spaces online in my experience anyway
since their early days like this right
when YouTube was brand-new and we could
you know Matt Segal's on here we had a
kind of an interesting video blog
practice community where we would
philosophize and send each other
10-minute videos and replies and have
like a reply thread through video and it
was so exciting it felt so genuine you
know there's a kind of a genuineness I
think in the way we're using zoom and
social media today that perhaps we had
taken for granted for quite a while so
just sort of an interesting Anan Tod
reversal of the way we're coming up
these social technologies
yeah totally raven you have a question
that you got got a plus-one up she liked
to ask it yeah I would and it seems like
Greg also wrote an essay kind of about
the subject so if he feels invited to
answer the question I would I would
really love to hear from him so yeah I
was kind of there has been a critique
that meta modernism and game B some of
these emerging sense-making communities
are lacking aesthetics and I was
wondering if the side view and its play
with mediums is an emergence of an
artistic movement in association with
these intellectual practical movement I
mean I definitely think a lot about
aesthetics aesthetics is not
we think of aesthetics as like I think
Tim Martin the philosopher had it right
when he said we think of we think of
aesthetics as the sprinkles on the
cupcake but they're they're really much
deeper you know aesthetics really matter
not just not just in the sense that it's
nice to look at nicely designed things
but they're actually part of well
they're certainly part of the structure
of nature and they're part of the
structure of our well-being in some
important way as for like artistic
movements I think these things are just
they just erupt and there's no there's
no way to kind of say that that's what's
happening it's just you you learn after
the fact and if you did it right
somebody else will give you a label for
what you did you know so I don't but
aesthetics yeah in general we should
think more about it maybe Greg has
something to say about meta modernism
Thanks
well I think my essay is kind of a
foreigner kind of in the world of the of
the volume and I'm a little bit of a
foreigner here in this chat so I kind of
came to clarify what meta modernism
origins are as a term and I don't know
if you've had a chance to read my essay
but it actually originates as a theory
of aesthetics specifically and so it's a
theory of contemporary aesthetics and
aesthetics that have kind of been at
play since around 2000 so the aesthetic
movement and the aesthetic artifacts and
cultural artifacts have already emerged
and are all around
and then there's kind of this other
sense of meta modern is of the word
mount of modernism that I think maybe a
lot of the people here are familiar with
where it's a kind of proposed
transformation to society and I guess I
can't really speak to whether it lacks
the aesthetic dimension although coming
from my perspective I think one of the
things that's kind of unique about game
B is that it does have kind of a fun
flavor to it that is almost an example
of the kind of meta modernism that I
talk about in my essay so I'll just look
at that cool I just can I just get
plugged greg's I say one more time
because he he actually gives you some
really clear examples from you know like
pop cultural references that you'll all
kind of recognize immediately and it was
actually reading Greg's essay where it's
sort of like it's like the idea of meta
modernism sort of really clicked for me
in a different way like what it was and
it was it was Greg's sort of just the
ease with which he was able to kind of
pull from the you know the cultural you
know regime of products and say here
look at this and then if you look at
this you'll see that the same thing is
going on here and if like I finally got
the concept in a way where then I was
kind of like walking around being like
oh and and this would also be an example
right yeah okay I get it now like I I
was able to like use it you know I
finally learned how to use the word in a
sentence so make sure you check it out
beautiful and like I was just reading
princess a too and had a good overview
like the intellectual history of meta
modernism so these they seem like they
really complement each other and so we
have about 15 minutes we'll still
continue with the structured format and
we're gonna have like a sense-making
free-for-all when we stop pressing
record so you can hold on for that but
Bonita I know you said he wanted to
add something there no no I'm gonna go
to David's question yeah so I'm gonna
geek out here little so aesthetics so
I'm going to go back to caught maybe
Adam you can follow up after I say this
yet three critiques get a critique of
pure reason and it could take a
practical reason and he had a critique
of judgemental reason and the only way
out is aesthetic reason and the
difference between all of those is that
aesthetic reason so I want to say that
like what we need to add but and I think
the side view is is doing this like it
doesn't have pictures and it doesn't
have artists but we Adam looks at their
work not from pure reasons yes from
practical reason not from judgmental
reasons but I think he has this more
like this aesthetic reason which is
every piece stands on its own in its
hole in its kind of concrete Universal
in its own expression so you can't judge
like this Vermeer is that this level of
consciousness and this you know Jackson
Pollock you know it's not this this
judgmental there's not a rational
approach I think that when we look at
what it is that the site view is doing
or what it is that we should be doing
this notion of aesthetic reasoning I
think is is key and you know I just
wanted to make this statement but yeah I
just want to comment real quickly
because Matt Matt Siegal linked in the
chat to an essay that was published in
issue 2 by heidi Gustafson of
of ours and she has some kind of
anesthetic
some kind of a I don't know some kind of
a magical intuition in her painting but
also in she actually sources all of the
minerals for her paints and she writes
in her essay about how she does that and
she is driven by an intelligence that is
not the kind of explicit rationality
that would typically be associated with
sort of like going out into a landscape
and finding minerals and I think Juanita
is right there's there's a there's
signal there and I try to translate
whatever signal I'm getting into some
kind of aesthetic for each for each
piece cool David you had a question yeah
oh yeah yeah David add questions to
Jason okay thank you I think I mentioned
in response to your Benitez question
that he was surprised by the Toronto
connection that Peter and Christopher
and John and David all knew each other
from before but I happen to know it goes
quite a bit deeper than that because I
see guys interacting in Twitter and
guesting on each other's podcasts and in
slack so my question for Jason is
however the other authors here
influenced your thinking and your
article
as Jason Schneider right Jason we can't
hear you or I can hear you kidding it
can anybody else hear Jason there's no
okay cool
he's just shouting like a madman and to
his computer right now now he's on a
rampage running downstairs Paige just
hide the children
he's Davis from Toronto - so you kind of
know that insider baseball here David um
yeah it's kind of weird what's happening
here there you go you can hear me now
yep
okay well wow that's a big question I
mean I just feel very fortunate to have
been included inside of you because I
see many of the authors I read them all
at once just Anna marathon session and
you know I'm just kind of blown away you
know the level of insight and lateral
thinking yeah I mean we let's see have
many many of these folks on our podcast
jeremy is yet to be released and how has
it influenced my thinking well I just
feel like I'm trying to keep up right
like I just feel like there's so much
you know intelligence collective
intelligence you know sharing ideas
emerging ideas that I just try and keep
up and you know try and get a sense of
you know what is like some small little
area that I can contribute to you know
in terms of you know perhaps there's
some kind of misunderstanding between
you know one particular person that we
you know that we might find on our
podcast or another and that's where
mimetic mediation comes in is like I'm
just kind of like where where can there
be a little bit more signal transfer
instead of noise transfer and you know
is there is this a fundamental
disagreement that cannot be resolved or
is it some kind of misunderstanding
yeah and Jason I were supposed to
actually write a piece together but we
couldn't mediate a motion our selves so
we did separate pieces
Danita that was one thing that surprised
me I forgot about that they were gonna
co-write this piece and then I get an
email I get one email from both of them
basically at the same time they're like
I don't think it's gonna work like the
mediators can't write a mediation piece
what is going on yeah like the real
story as Peter didn't like what I wrote
and he was like I don't want this to be
part of my brand or something
I think that's unshared of it to me
but I let it sit I'll be stoic about
that the misinformation that you're
providing them I'm hoping that I can
mediate the two of them and then the
third wheel here and usually I feel like
a third wheel between you two so I'm
glad the roles have changed
Jerry got to drive a point home but if
we adopted aesthetic judgment we would
not need the realm of ideas to be
mediated we would not argue over what
painting deserves a key point for my
essay is that the engine of mediation is
from a keg in stage three point of view
which is relational and aesthetic that's
the connection I try to make and so I
agree with you juanita
that often times sub ideological
aesthetic and you know relational
connection is much more powerful than
anything else so I'm going to jump in
because this is getting fun so I think
we should pivot to the sense making a
question we only have five minutes left
of the allotted time for the recorded
portion before I hit it over and hand it
to Raven Adam gave any kind of closing
thoughts about you know the episode of
the issue or whatever I don't but I if
we have five minutes and if you're a
contributor and you want to say
something and you haven't been able to
please take five minutes
and again we have 30 plus minutes
afterwards to the jam together but if
anyone wants to say anything up for the
reported portion I'm a past contributor
and future contributor and wanted had
listened with good to see you with the
emphasis on ascesis or practice I'm
reminded while I was raised Southern
Baptists and questions there we're sort
of are you saved as a practicing
Buddhist it's so refreshing that the
question typically meeting another
Buddhist is what's your practice and I'm
interested in asking what you Adam do as
practice how it feeds you huh benefits
you and will say as a immense compliment
how much I find your intelligence as a
hopeful thing a progressive thing a
contributing thing so the question is
also and you can go anywhere you want
with it
what's your practical hope I'm gonna +1
that question hard so I think there's a
good one to bring us home Dave thank you
I
so this is like the question that
sort of sell yourself the way I sell
myself this is the question that you get
and I I keep changing my relationship to
the kind of answer I want to give to
this question at first it felt really
inadequate like I didn't have a like I
felt like people were asking for like
you know like my daily regimen and like
it had to be good like it had to be like
really good and be really disciplined
going deep all the time and then I
thought no you know just just get into
like kind of more like a list like these
are the things that you do and so I
started giving lists of like the
practices that I had and then I had an
teacher of my mind just kind of comment
like oh you're just so forthright about
all of that and he was like you know
he's an older gentleman he's kind of
like you know in my day we used to kind
of we were we weren't so open about it's
good - it's good to show don't tell
you know and I kind of then I kind of
like all of a sudden I felt like I was
being sort of silly or crass so my
relationship to that question changed
again and so now like you know and Jason
actually says something similar in his
piece cuz we were at when we were
editing it I was kind of like okay so
how does it work you know like take me
through like some examples of how you
would how you do this mediation work and
he just wrote an essay you know like I'm
not gonna formalize this into a pedagogy
it's like I have practices and they they
produce results but I we don't we don't
need to create this like bulleted list
of things and so I keep coming back to
the question of like how do I answer
that question and I really don't know
like what a good answer for that
question is other than you know I could
tell you like like silent meditation
martial arts reading study contemplation
all of these things but that it's like
yeah that is what it is but I think in
some sense it comes down to something
else it some it comes down to something
like having trust so that your intuition
goes somewhere and then one figuring out
what the fuck is your intuition actually
saying and to like follow it through and
like there's there's a lot of there's a
lot of issues that crop up dealing with
both of those sides of it and so the the
practices are about getting clear on
what that is and then sort of being able
to pursue it even when all kinds of
other things
throw you off course or try to convince
you this is sometimes those convincing
you know take the shape of insecurity or
negative comment or some other
extenuating circumstance that demands
your attention so it's just like how do
you staying focused on that thing and
just to kind of bring it back to the
second half of what David was saying
just just that thing is whatever the
side view is trying to be and there's a
lot on my side that goes into
understanding how it works and all of
these different facets but like staying
on that line is is what the practice is
very very cool I can sign up for that so
we're gonna close off this portion if
you have to leave feel free to leave
right now and then we'll be in the
sense-making portion in a moment but
first thanks so much for launching this
coming today to the stoah thank and
we're gonna just plug a few events for
those who have to leave right now at the
store that are coming up so tomorrow we
have a stack day we have trauma truth
and technology with Joshua fields this
ridiculous handsome Scottish man that's
at 2:30 p.m. Eastern Time
relational exegesis which is a psycho
technology that Fraser is working with
where we read a text together and make
comments on it live and we're reading a
Keith Johnstone impro tomorrow so that's
pretty really cool and then Clyde
Rathbone the founder of letter wiki
we're talking about sort of my daily
writing exercise and how you know the
slow practice of writing to yourself
basically to discuss that and see if we
can spire the people that's all tomorrow
and Raven can you talk about the event
that we have Friday yeah of course so on
Friday for those of you who don't know
I've been running a session called
Socratic speed dating for the last few
weeks and one of the things that we've
done in this is play a game called
asshole and a school was created by a
rationalist intellectual a friend of
mine
who is a very interesting Twitter
personality who asked very controversial
questions her name is Ayla girl and
she's gonna be coming in an hour before
talk about the game its evolution how it
came out of the rationalist community
how she's used the game to like break
social boundaries and kind of create her
own set of psycho technologies so I'm
gonna be talking to her and we'll be
doing a Q&A session and then afterwards
we'll do an hour of playing asshole so
it's it's always fun and it would be
lovely to see all of your faces there
yeah it's a great that's doing a
kick-ass job of the Socratic
speed-dating it is so fun when we played
that game last time so I recommend it so
go to the website the store that ca2 RCP
to those events to sign up for the
mailing list and to look into the gift
economy which the stoical is based off
of all right that being said I'm gonna
stop record and then hand it over to
Raven