[Music]
hello you found the portal I'm your host
Eric Weinstein and today I'm here with
University of Chicago professor of
philosophy dr. Agnes : hi Agnes welcome
thank you I want to talk to you about
everything do you mind yeah okay so you
just had an interesting and bizarre game
but I didn't know that you were coming
out to Southern California and you said
to me that after a meeting we had at in
your office at the University of Chicago
hey you should take a look at this
article I wrote partially based on our
meeting and the meet the the article is
one about negotiating initial meetings
and what are all of the layers of
dynamics that are going on when two
people collide for the first time yeah I
think that when two people collide for
the first time I guess there's sort of
two things at the base level that are
happening one of them is like they're
trying to figure out how to get along
how to cooperate and the other is
they're trying to take the measure of
one another and those activities aren't
totally separate from one another and
I've noticed a pattern with you which is
that you take great delight in talking
about the things that many of us do sort
of naturally or unconsciously and might
be very uncomfortable to promote to full
consciousness so that you can use your
metacognitive facility to interrogate
and dissect what is going on on many
many different levels
some of them fill out the philosophical
some of them rooted in biology some of
them maybe with allusions to literature
when you and I met were you aware of
what you were going through in real time
or did it come to you later that this
was gonna be grist for an article
totally later I was my mind was
completely on another article I was
working on so you were concentrated when
we were when we were meeting on our
meeting no not really
I mean I mean I think that a lot of the
time
love that um you know I feel like um a
lot of the thinking that I do is like
unpacking thinking I did earlier but
wasn't realizing I was doing or
something like that so like it's hard
with this language when you have to say
I and you're actually realizing that you
have so many different processes right
yeah okay keep going
but I guess maybe one common threat I do
like to yeah maybe I have a kind of
affinity towards like the provocative or
something but it may be at a at a deeper
level I think that there's just like
when we talk about ourselves when we
think about our lives there are all
these sort of cracks in the facade of
like who we take ourselves to be and how
we represent ourselves and but the thing
is that like we've kind of convinced
ourselves that the cracks are parts of
the design cuz we've been looking at
them for so long right look what a
pretty pattern and I just want to split
those cracks open and be like look
there's something incoherent in the way
that we think about ourselves and we've
covered that in coherence over with a
certain kind of language and just a lot
of the time those cracks are to be found
exactly in the places that you would
call maybe provocative or something like
that but sometimes they're not and I'm
interested in them in those places too
it's just other people who are not
philosophers are less interested in
nursing cracks right so I wrote my
dissertation on weakness of will where I
think that there's something because
will like Ulysses lashing himself to the
mast well that would be a case of
strength of well right but yes he's
responding to the prospect of the
possibility of weakness so he's using
his agency ahead of time with a strong
will so that he can actually go through
an adaptive Ally of weak will that he
anticipates correctly he's yeah he's
sort of turning a synchronic problem
into a diachronic problem right he's
giving the diachronic solution to a
synchronic problem but like so which I
could do say if I know that I'm very
susceptible to certain forms of
temptation I could in advance make sure
that I don't encounter those forms of
temptation right so what Ulysses is
Odysseus is doing um but I'm just I was
very interested in just how we described
a situation in which we say I know I
shouldn't have another cookie but I take
one anyway um it's totally familiar
we're totally comfortable talking in
that way I think it's an incoherent way
of talking so that's an exact where
where that's an example where it's not
provocative it's not country like
controversial in the sense of a
sensitive topic but it's just a place
where our speech about ourselves is
cracked and incoherent but we just have
done it for so long that we don't notice
it only because the cookie isn't a three
simmer a pile of cocaine no I think it
would be justice incoherent in those
cases if you could say to yourself it
would be provocative oh yes absolutely
right the issue of provocation doesn't
have to do with the abstract
universality class of the problem it has
to do simply with its particular
instantiation correct though I think
that there are problems where even um
like they're the correct level of
abstraction is to abstract from the
difference between cookies or cocaine
cookies and cocaine because that
difference isn't philosophically
interesting but there are some problems
where the correct level of abstraction
is the provocative level right so I
think the status one it's the
provocative level say more about that I
think that I guess I think it's not the
case that I'm the problem that I raised
there about status about you know
wanting on some level to be worth more
than other people but then also
recognizing that that desire is somehow
not one that you can ask another person
to recognize right that problem isn't
some instance of a more general problem
I don't see it as an instance of a more
general problem where the solution would
lie that abstract level I think that's
the correct level at which to address it
why do you imagine that why do you
imagine that status you saw in your
article you say that the status game is
one in which you can't really discuss
your desire a need for status yeah is
that true it's not it's not true in all
contexts like I could I got you know I
wrote a column about it so obviously I
can discuss it and I can just cussing it
with you right now but there's this
[Music]
there would be something wrong like you
know I had this interaction with
somebody who I felt was asking me to
acknowledge their status recently and I
had this instinct to say
I would like to acknowledge your status
you're more important than me now can we
just go on and I couldn't do that that
wasn't allowed I knew that was not
allowed within the game that would've
been offensive right so it's a rule of
the game that you have to pretend that
you're not playing it but um you can
then sort of like take a step back right
and then be like oh let's analyse do
that and I'm sorry you can't always do
it but you can sometimes do it but
that's not this that's almost like
putting the game on pause and then
stepping back and analyzing what was
happening so in other words you have the
game in a debugger and you're stepping
through line lines of the code in a
different facility than that which is
actually running the code yes okay so if
that's the case why is there a feud
there's no guarantee that you won't then
be reprising the game at the second
level well so that's the issue which is
that each layer of analysis that you put
on it becomes non meta relative to the
following level of meta analysis that
includes that layer and then you have a
question of convergence in essence where
you have an initial game then you have a
meta game so your article is ostensibly
in the second level of that game but
then effectively what you did was you
communicated to me whatever status game
you and I negotiated in your office I
have a different status game which is
that I have access to a alerted journal
in which I can write articles I
thoughtyou important enough to write an
article in part inspired by our meeting
and then I am communicating that I too
you know have levers that may not be
available to you and I wish to let you
know that you are both important enough
to warrant this thinking simultaneously
don't think that you got away with
something because in fact I can see
things awesome
yeah I think that's right so I think
what that reveals is like I so notice
you use in a couple of your practices
where metacognitive and I think that I'm
much more of a skeptic about how much
work the meta can do at least
immediately for exactly this reason I
think that like like when you step back
it doesn't matter what you're stepping
back from okay you like you're in a
situation you let me step back and think
about
let me step back and cool my you know
from my emotions let me step back you're
never stepping back you're always just
the same person you are
it's an illusion to think you can step
back um but I think what what does
happen when you step back is like
stepping back happens at least a moment
later then I don't think so in some
sense because really what eyes the way I
see it I'm eager to hear I'm wrong in
your eyes is that what we just did is we
had a zero with later which is our
initial meeting then we had the issue
where you wish to notify me that you had
written an article partially inspired by
this and then I wish to bring this up on
the podcast which is the next layer and
then we can talk about the fact that I
just and my point in doing this is that
we build an infinite Tower of analyses
of the previous level analysis so meta
is not a different facility but simply
the recognition that layer I plus one is
commenting on layer high right but the
thing that that the metaphor of the
tower the problem of it is that it's
synchronic and so I think that I've
changed between our initial meeting okay
and like the writing that article it
wasn't like I just sat down and wrote it
I had to think really hard about that
meeting I had an initial version that
was totally scrapped I learned in
between our meeting and writing that
article and I've even learned in between
like you know talking about it with you
and now right so I'm like a different
person you're talking to a different
person than you were talking to when we
first met in one sense in one sense yes
in the sense that I've it's not a tower
like I've sort of incorporated some of
the lessons from that interaction so and
I think one thing is like you know it's
a little bit like I remember there were
these when my son's preschool when he
first started there were these charts
that were like diagrams of how kids move
around a room in like a put so he's like
two or three years old right like so it
was like this line like first they go to
the sandbox then they go to the block
some night right so what was amazing is
you look at the lines for like a
three-year-old yeah
and it's like just this like Scrabble
Scrabble they randomly wander around and
then and you then they had these
diagrams for like the five you know not
even know I think it would be like a
couple months later towards the end of
the year of the same so they're the same
age where they're like a little bit
older and they're like much more
organized right so I see that as
happening with conversation with you
where part of what's happening is like
learning to focus right and that's not
really well captured I think with the
idea of a meta level not sure that I
understood that well um V so can we talk
a little bit about the particular status
game and our subsequent interpretations
of what it meant okay so it was very
interesting when I was just talking to
before the show you talked to me about
saying I'm not even sure that status is
exactly the right word for what we were
negotiating and that was an intuition
where I hadn't grounded yet in language
it's in some sort of more primitive kind
of intangible state and I had forgotten
exactly what the issue was but that
you'd note you'd known very little about
me I think Tyler Cowen had maybe alerted
you to me yes and that wasn't
particularly surprising I mean I didn't
don't expect people to know who I am but
what little you did know about me was
that somehow I was part of a money
machine as a managing director of a
family office and that that was going to
be kind of the expansion point that that
was going to be like the 0with
approximation and then we'd add first
and second and third order
approximations based on that expansion
point bank which drove me nuts
right because that would never be the
expansion point that I would choose for
myself nor do I think it is the correct
one and then we had some interesting
other issues if I yeah which is that
I've heard a great deal about you more
than I've read of your thinking and work
and many people that I like regard you
highly and I thought okay well this is
likely to be a singular person and it
would be a shame to lose a singular
person based on a wrong expansion point
in a conversation so there was sort of
an emergency need
to rebase the the conception of the
other around a more fruitful point so as
not to lose a potentially interesting
interaction and then when I communicated
this to you you and I both share an
aversion to talking about the world of
exceptional people which often the
members of the world of exceptional
people constantly regard themselves then
and the other is exceptional in a kind
of self congratulatory display so the
whole thing kind of descends into an
orgy of analysis on analysis on analysis
and I wonder why we're not just more
capable of doing this more simply like
hey I'm worried you're forming an
incorrect impression of me or I need
some acknowledgement from you that there
is an issue of accomplishment or you
know so that you don't start lecturing
me about basic mathematics if I'm a
mathematician let's say right so first
of all like I think I actually do think
this is probably a sort of a difference
between us in that suppose that I
thought you knew me as just all that you
knew about me was that I was a mother or
something okay
like I'm not sure like I guess what I
thought you knew about me was that I was
like an academic or something and I'm
not sure that that would have mattered
to me like which of those you had picked
but um so so so but in terms of why we
can't just directly ask for this I think
we could have if like we were like
teenagers or something but I think we
learned not to do it like we learned we
learned how to interact with people
right and that's a rule and so we're
both following the rule somewhat I mean
I think there's also this problem maybe
I'll pose it to you why truth doesn't
work like I'm not a huge fan of truth
the way some people are and I'm a huge
fan of truth
oh that's beautiful so I posed them the
problem of if I have only mildly bad
breath and you wish to let me know that
for my own benefit what's a way in which
you could communicate to me that I have
mildly bad breath and I've actually
never met anyone who solved this puzzle
so you should try the zero with order
first and we'll see why it gets into
trouble right so that would just be
saying you have mildly bad breath right
now because of the context of that the
interpretation of that statement is my
god
is such a taboo to talk about someone's
breath must be hard that it must be
horrible for you to say that it is mild
and so what you've done is you've
communicated an untruth even though you
intended so then you start thinking
about the problem of like your eyeball
is distorted so you need a second
distortion and this in this case your
spectacles so that the aggregate of the
two is undistorted can I give my answer
yeah please
I think you're the philosopher it would
be awesome I think I would be like oh my
god I can't believe this is actually
happening because this one time I talked
to Erica Weinstein and he posed this as
a problem what do you do what do you
tell someone when they have mildly bad
breath and now I'm in that situation
that's what I would say to the person do
you think it gets read that way I have
no idea I mean I'm giving you an answer
in the abstract no acting from the
person right I'm trying to I'm trying to
make the point that my point is that
would be a cool wait like I would say
that just because I would be curious
what's how the person's are gonna
respond so like there's a question how
do you how do you do this what's a
successful interaction right for me
that's a that's a promising response
because it might generate an interesting
conversation it will generate an
interesting conversation the the issue
though is to my way of thinking that you
have to give up on truthful
communication because of its
impossibility in order to start seeing
what is possible but where truth is a
component in an interest but it can't be
a goal in other words if I say you know
what is the fractional representation of
Pi doesn't mean you can can't come close
but you can never going to get there
with two integers dividing one by the
other so my claim is is that it's very
important to give up on the possibility
of truth from the from the get-go so
that doesn't seem right to me so um I
mean one thing is it may be that I
cannot immediately communicate
to you the truth I think was I learn you
that I then I will realize that you
speaking in the undistorted fashion you
believe no um I think that um one thing
that happens is that people they learn
like a new shared language like they
learn how to communicate with one
another right and they become better at
doing that and it may be that it seems
to me that the goal of that process is
always to communicate better and more
truthfully though it's also I think
really important to distinguish which
Truths are important and are unimportant
to communicate or less important to
communicate because you have to focus
somewhere - right but I think that the
only goals you can have in modulating
that process
the only possible goal is being able not
and not just to communicate but to learn
truths from that person that's the
fueling the whole process otherwise what
would you be in it for well the the four
things that I try to reduce my
objectives - and I'm this is subject to
change in fact you somewhat frighten me
maybe I will have to change it based on
what you're going to say next
our truth meaning fitness and grace so
something can be truthful but it can
lead to a reduction in my fitness as a
creature so a self-extinguishing truth
is not an interesting truth to me Jordan
Peterson tried to fold Fitness into
truth itself and he got into trouble
with Sam Harris who was having none of
it
then there's a question of meaning maybe
I'm something is true and it means that
I will be fit but it actually Rob's my
life of meaning when somebody I care
about deeply is regarded as an aggregate
of hadrons and leptons and force
particles that may be true but it did it
completely Rob's that person of meaning
if I realized that you know with 26
letters let's say and a few spaces I can
take let's say an alphabet of I don't
know 40 characters or less and raise it
to a very high power and said that
Hamlet is
somewhere found within that is a that
may be truthful maybe that there are a
finite number of works possible and
Shakespeare merely selected one from a
giant lookup table but that tends to rob
the work of any majesty in meaning and
then there's an aspect of grace which is
that even if I can find meaning and
fitness and truth together if the
solution is brutal and cruel and lacks
some sort of ineffable quality of mercy
and and kind of I don't know simplicity
of heart I tend to turn against those
things where one has to do something
absolutely despicable for example to
perpetuate one's group's fitness so I
don't know how to get beyond those four
object those four sub components of an
objective function and what I'm always
astounded by is people who are crazy
about truth yeah good so um maybe can I
defend being crazy about truth I can't
floors you so so first of all like I
think anytime you divide things and like
philosophers disagree about this um like
some philosophers are fine with a sort
of thing I'm about to describe but like
I think you can't just divide things
into four things you're like here are
the four things these are the things I
found I'm like well what's the principle
of division like is that just something
you made up like what if we come up with
a fifth one so I want to understand
amenable to I want to understand sort of
how the whole is articulated into those
things until I understand that I just
don't feel like I've I've understood
anything I'm like why not okay why not
pleasure
why isn't pleasure one of them enjoyment
well in part that is part of meaning and
it's also part of grace as long as the
the proximate of pleasure
see pleasure arises in my concept
concept as the as proximate to fitness
so the way in which that we're
structured as animals is that our
ultimate concerns like nutrition and
consolidation of long-term memory are
encoded as hunger and sleepiness and the
the proximate cause us to take actions
to service the ultimates so pleasures
that is in some sense the divorcing of
the proximate sfrom their ultimate goals
I just ate a cupcake and I really
shouldn't have but the proximate
pleasure because my body thinks that I'm
starved for sugar when in our current
environment it's abundant so I you just
gave an argument that suggested that
pleasure does not fit into fitness
because the proximate pleasures can be
divorced from its ultimate goals right
so at least some people might think that
would warrant putting pleasure into its
own into a separate category but I don't
want it right but what I'm saying is the
fact that you don't want to that
indicates that for some reason you're
wedded to this quadripartite division
that which is not to say quadripartite
yes I've never said that um but so let
me let me tell you how I would divide
okay okay
so I would start with thinking okay
there's thinking right anytime you do
and I think conversation is a form of
thinking in fact a lot of times it's the
best form of thinking and I think that
anything he has to have a goal well
there's an exception but okay the main
case thinking us to have a goal and I
think there are two goals I thinking can
have one of them is understanding okay
where truth is a necessary condition has
to arrive at the truth in order to be
understanding it's not sufficient
because you there are just truths that
are not important to know and so so a
lot of thinking that we do will end when
you've understood whatever it was you're
trying to understand you're like I got
it there we're done and some forms of
thinking are wonderful like a lot of
mathematical forms I think you're
wonderful precisely because you reckon
it's really clear when you've gotten to
that point and you have this like aha
moment Plato actually described that as
almost like you're remembering something
you knew before because it has that
recognition like memory okay that's
understanding then there's another kind
of thinking and I think of it as very
different and you are right that some
people want to collapse these two and I
don't think they should be collapsed
which is thinking that aims at the good
in some way and that's deliberation so
it's reasoning about how to achieve some
good and I also think we often do that
with other people and so we might want
to bring something about and we think
about how to do that okay I think those
are the basic aims of thinking either
understanding or
some good that we're trying to bring
about and I don't think they're the same
and some people like specially like some
like economists I think are especially
prone to collapsing them you know Marx
his idea the point of philosophers have
tried to understand the world the point
is to change it it's amazing because the
Humboldt the philosophy department in
Germany in the you know the the Humboldt
University actually has that as their
slogan and I was like guys you are
philosophers how can that be your slogan
you're trying to you're not trying to do
this you're the one people should not
have this as your slogan um but in any
case that idea that Marx but not just
Marx um is trying to collapse the
theoretical on the practical the the
idea that understanding is a goal and
it's like the only reason you would ever
have to understand is that you want to
achieve something good that's a way to
collapse the two so I don't think they
should be collapsed I think they're
separate but that's the basic division I
actually think we do some thinking that
doesn't fall into this division that's
very very interesting I think some of
the kind of emotional upheaval in our
life doesn't fall into this division but
for me see that's a principle just
division right and truth has a part in
it now I think a lot of the things
you're worried about with meaning like
are there these truths that robbed my
life of meaning what I would say is that
those are situations in which you have
accepted a descriptive analysis as a
reductive one so like it's true that I'm
made of atoms okay that's true I think
it's true but that doesn't tell you who
I really am it's it's a truth about me
but it's not a good answer to a certain
question and so you shouldn't confuse
the idea that something is a true
proposition with the idea that it's a
good answer to a question in in a sense
the question who I am I really is like
the question you were seeking an answer
to when we first met and and if I had
said oh I'm a bunch of atoms like that
wouldn't have satisfied you it wouldn't
have been an answer to your question so
I would fold the meaning into
understanding with the proviso that you
have to you have to hold on tight to
your question and make sure that what
someone has said in answer to it isn't
just a true statement but actually an
answer to the question to my way of
thinking I would not say the category
are that questions or as physicists
would call them observables are tied to
a strata and that there are certain
questions that are
badly suited to a particular strata so
your description is atoms in your
description as Agnes correspond to two
different let's say effective theories
which is sort of the tower of lies where
there are more lies when I call you
Agnes then when I specify each of the
atoms in your body but the point is is
that the question about what is Agnes
like is not really questioned at the
atomic layer it's a question at this
personality layer with it with so in
fact it is a kind of category error to
explore meaning doesn't belong at the
atomic layer there is no atomic meaning
right exactly but that's why I think
that you don't need a separate meaning
box you just need to keep track of your
questions well that would be a since you
know just the way polar versus
rectangular coordinates are two
different ways of talking about
something I think you could you could
make that point but what I think what
I'm trying to get at is that I watch
people you know he the reason I've never
taken a particular interest interest in
philosophy is that once you've taken a
particular interest in mathematics you
understand just how sensitive many of
these things are to small issues of
language right and this is partially
what happened to philosophy is that
there were a lot of big interesting
questions and then there was a period of
time where it became a focus on language
rather than on big meaningful meaty
questions I don't know that the human
layer supports this level of analysis
because of some of the reasons that
we're talking about so you know we can
notice I mean I don't even think for
example that there is a status game I
think that there's a panoply of status
games and that they're taking place
simultaneously in a million different
dimensions and the key question is can
we isolate the principal components of
some of those so that we understand like
whether what is what is where's the
majority of the action happening or are
we actually doing violence to the
problem by virtue of the fact that we've
singled out a few of them and then we've
missed named it while that was going on
in the status game so for example any
univariate measure has the property that
it has an ordering on it but every by
variant measure unless
as a metric does not imply an ordering
like if you have one attribute that's
positive that is greater than mine and
one that is worse until we can say in
some sense how those two things
interrelate we can't say Agnes is better
than Eric or Eric is better than Agnes
however if there's only one attribute
like who can run faster then one of us
is better and the other of us is worse
unless there's a bizarre tie now what
what I'm trying to get at is here we are
21st century beings and we're outside of
the confines of the Academy and the key
question is what is this philosophical
modality doing in our lives how does it
is the is the examine life really aided
by philosophy or is there a sort of
infinite tower of questions and that
it's sort of an intellectual
check-kiting scheme by which you keep
getting into deeper and deeper water by
noticing something only to find out that
the noticing created a larger problem
than the previous one that you had I
think one way to put the case for
philosophy is like you have to have a
right you have to UM you can't just draw
a distinction you're just not allowed to
just draw a distinction that's why I
said I think about the quadripartite
you're not just allowed to slash the
world up into bits the place where this
company place where philosophy comes
from is permanent communities was really
the first philosopher okay and you know
this is pre Plato right this is the
pre-socratic philosophers um and you
know he he like Zeno's paradoxes are
sort of woven into permanent en ism but
the basic idea of based pontus basic
thought is that there's only one thing
you can say it is so there's just
there's just one thing it and there's
one thing you can say about it that it
is and you're like well Parmenides no
look there's also like this chair is and
Parmenides is saying says well if you
say that the chair is and you want to
say that the chair is something and is
different from say that table right then
you're saying that the chair is not the
table
so you're saying
the chair is not but you're also saying
that it is Parmenides and generations of
people have different entities thought
this was like just this really terrible
puzzle about how non-being can be how
can how can there be anything that isn't
like this chair not being this table and
the the the the problem of non-being is
has a lot of different manifestations so
DIF is one manifestation change over
time how can the chair at one time exist
and then later it's collapsed and it's
not there anymore and you know
Parmenides thought was that our like our
thinking cannot support this way of
talking it's like it's just words when
we when we when we talk about the
diversity out in the world and there's
only one thing we can coherently say
there's only one thing where when we say
it we've understood what we said and
that's it is now Plato comes along and
he's like no Parmenides that's nuts we
have to be able to talk about some kind
of difference but you're right that the
entire world as we see it right the
entire sensible world that's just
nonsense that doesn't make any sense
that's a bunch of contradictions but
there are these things called forms okay
like the beautiful or the just or
whatever and at least the beautiful it's
always beautiful the only mystery about
it is that it is beautiful and that's
something I can say the beautiful is
beautiful the just is just so at least
I'm I'm like one step beyond Parmenides
right I'm like I can talk about these
forms I still can't talk about the chair
right um okay and then you get Aristotle
and Aristotle's like um though guys we
have to be able to talk about like human
beings and things and and we need to
enrich our language further now the
reason I bring all this up is that the
basic philosophical impulse is that when
you draw distinctions and you carve
things up and you talk about layers okay
you've in a sense you've in a sense
collapsed your own thought into a bunch
of different things that are like not
unified right and you need to be able to
see the unity of them if you can't you
haven't actually had a thought like you
haven't thought anything you just said
words so philosophers are constantly
attuned to this worry that we might just
be saying words and not having thoughts
and that there's a standard
for the unity of a thought that's like a
pretty high standard and and so like if
you draw a distinction you need to
understand the unity that underlies the
distinction and what legitimates the
distinction and so like if I say you
know if I say even like I ate the cookie
even though I knew that it wasn't the
right thing to do and you're like well
wait a minute you free lead the cooking
you chose Danika cookie yes
so that was an intentional action yes so
an intentional actions when we have a
reason yes so a reason means that you
think that it's all things considered
the best thing to do yes that's what a
reason is wait a minute you just said
you thought it was all things considered
the best thing to do and you thought
that there was something better that you
should do you just contradicted yourself
right and Parmenides thought that
contradicting yourself was written into
this is a chair and this is a table
right and so you know so we've come
really far we can talk about so much now
but only I think because only if we can
sort of back those checks that these
distinctions have some way of like
holding together breathe with me
yeah I don't I don't know why I'm so
singularly unmoved by this kind of
thinking well object to it well where
did I go wrong at least I went wrong you
know Hegel at some point said the
absolute idea the ideas unity of the
subject of an objective idea is the
notion of the idea a notion whose object
is the idea as such and for which
objective is idea and object embracing
all characteristics in its unity okay
when I talk like that I sound insane to
myself and the key question for me is
what is an idea that settles down when
its analysis doesn't sort of alter and
destroy it it's sort of a fixed point if
you will under analysis so if I
communicate the problem with let's say
with the status game with which we began
our discussion this is that in some
cases when you call attention to your
need for status you diminish your status
that's also true I think that's not the
only reason why you can't cause but
there are ways
which you can try to call attention to
your status in which the amount of
status that you achieve by calling
attention to your status remains
constant that the calling doesn't
effectively alter the problem for
example you might signal that you're
comfortable enough in your own skin to
talk about a part of your minds petty
needs and a part of your minds
reasonable needs for status I have both
for example and I don't think it's a
terrible thing to say that there are
times when I simply want to be regarded
because I am and that there are times
that I want to be regarded because it is
important not to deranged a conversation
let's say I only have 45 minutes for
something and if we begin with the wrong
notion of Who I am it will take too long
so there's always this question in the
bad breath example the problem is is
that the talking about it has to do with
an interpretive complex or own
client-side and your internal inside
your interlocutors mind and so your
input stimulates a process that is
transpiring within the client-side
architecture and it leads to an
uncomfortable and unpleasant and not
untrue outcome if I could find the input
which when processed remains the input
right in other words it's like an
eigenvalue of truth an eigenvector of
truth then that's something which is
philosophically interesting to me what
what concerns me is the tower of
concepts and conflicts which don't seem
to settle down the more we understand
them you know that so one thing is I
really liked what you said about Hegel
when I talk like that I sound crazy to
myself so I think that is Parmenides
this point about saying that something
is not Parmenides is the guy who
realized when I talk like that when I
say the chairs not the table they sound
crazy to myself you're really used to
talking that way cuz that's just how we
talk Parmenides saw the giant crack in
everything and and so if you think about
how like when I hear someone say I know
I shouldn't have this cookie but I
really feel like it so I'm gonna have it
if I talk like that
I sound crazy to myself and so I'm like
I can't I can't talk like this I have to
find another way of talking okay so
that's the idea that at some level first
of all you need a primary description of
the most of us understand weakness of
will intuitively but we don't understand
weakness of well as a is emergent from
fundamental principles and I think you
don't understand it intuitively you just
think you do well again you can pick out
the phenomenon you can be making this to
your point about the practicality you
may be able to work with it at a
practical level so for example I might
be able to sell a product where you put
cookies in a time-release safe and so
you you can't get it your own cookies
until one is dispensed to you people
will immediately understand that but the
key question is you know can I take a
placebo and get the placebo effect if
it's labeled placebo you know these are
the sort of unstable non fixed points of
the of the philosophical problem one of
the reasons that I really love physics
as an alternative to philosophy at its
ground level is is that it tends to be
stable under analysis when we have an
idea of a known quantum mechanics the
propagation in quantum mechanics has a
very stable interpretation it may be
wrong but we didn't think we know what's
going on when we're asking how an
electron moves and it's when an electron
gets measured when you're asking a bad
question which is are you in state a or
state B and it was in state a plus B
mm-hmm
then the multiple-choice nature of that
quantum mechanical question is bizarrely
accommodated by the system somewhat
randomly falling into state a or state B
as a weighted probability no that
bothers us because we have the sense
that maybe that's not really a fixed
point how did we know what we were when
we asked the question where we part of
the quantum system did we hold ourselves
aside and keep ourselves classical while
asking that the electron be considered
quantum mechanically was it in a semi
quantum semi classical state so we're
not really sure whether we've committed
a sin against God and logic in that case
yeah good I mean I think that a lot of
your worries about the the tower and the
I still think they go back
- something there's a question whether
we ever make any progress in a
conversation that seems to me to be the
real question they're like can we learn
from each other and can we learn from
each other in some sense without making
any without taking as the frame of our
conversations something that we just
happened to get slotted into and that we
don't question right and and I actually
think that it's true about philosophy
that you are not guaranteed in any way
that the answer to that question is yes
you don't know that it's yes and there
you've had epiphanies in conversations
which you've changed your life ah my
problem is that I have too many of them
but yeah it's not a dearth of epiphanies
it's a total state instability but can I
just say there's that there's that
there's this moment okay
um like I feel like you're um you're
Mina okay this is the soccer this is
Plato's Meno and they're having this
conversation Socrates is like you're
you're a big opponent of excellence
Socrates Meno comes to Socrates knees
like I want it I want excellence how do
i how do I get it
and Socrates is like well let's start by
figuring out what it is and Mina's like
that's not hard right um that's super
easy Meno says it's easy about like the
seven times in a row it's really funny
he's like here's what it's here's what
it and Socrates like refute some bunch
of times and a certain point Minos like
look this is not going anywhere like
obviously you can just sort of come up
with more words against my words how do
we ever know we'll ever get anywhere
with this right and Socrates actually at
that point turns to math and they use a
mathematical example about finding the
double square so if you have a square
and you want to find the square whose
area is twice as big as that square and
how somebody who's goes into that
problem making a certain set of
assumptions will never find the answer
we talk about you why it's great example
um but the point is afterwards Socrates
is like yeah the truth is
there is no guarantee we don't know
right but I think that it is better we
will be better men and braver if we
believe that we ought to inquire then
not and you know you say you like
physics but I don't see it as an
alternative in a sense that it's not
gonna give me it's the layers levels
problem right it's just physics it's not
gonna give me the answer to the
questions I have and I can't just
abandon those questions and I would be a
coward if I didn't try to find answers
to them what coward is in a very high
state of the stack for a high level of
the stack right in some sense the
questions that really have come to
animate me throughout my adult life have
to do with this question how how can we
improve upon it is without involving
ourselves in the equation maybe that's a
good I'm mostly interested in the
equations that essentially involve me
right so that might be a big difference
when you say coward-like I think in some
sense courage is what makes life worth
living like I wouldn't if I didn't if I
thought it was person um if I thought I
didn't care about courage like if I
thought I was okay being a coward yeah I
would think that my life might not be
worth living
I think courage is the sense the at
least the sense of the importance of
courage is the sense that life is not
merely a biological the life is worth
something well okay so think about your
background you are not only Jewish but
Hungarian Jewish yes that's good
notice anything I mean you want to talk
about a group of non cowardly human
beings I would say Hungarian Jews are
about one of the most courageous groups
of people I've ever dealt with
ethnically courage is a huge trait
different even from other parts of the
Ashkenazim I think it was very
courageous of my parents to come here
yeah yeah but I don't think that they
like I don't know did they did they I
don't think courage is something you can
like hand down
that way though I do think that you can
facilitate the conditions of its
acquisition and you can kind of there's
a system of selective pressures that
existed in Hungary in the Jewish
community that produced an exaggerated
extrema file response right I mean
Edward Teller came from a firmament
there was the you know you can't look at
a giraffe in isolation from the trees on
which it feeds sure that that could be
right um that mode of thinking is one
that it's a little bit like the Addams
you know it doesn't for me shed light on
like like the circumstances in which I
have to fight and what I have to fight
for under this I have more courage and
take another look at it I mean in other
words there this is the this is part of
the problem which is that there are
there is that what you feel and I'm not
gonna use anything personal because I
asked you going into somebody like I get
you know I had this erotic actress in
your chair not too long ago and I didn't
want to ask her about the details of her
sex life I wanted to talk around sex not
about her sexuality which is what
happens in every so I don't want to talk
about anything that you haven't already
surfaced but for example you held a
seminar at the University of Chicago
with an ex-husband talking about divorce
now that is an incredibly courageous
position from many from many
perspectives right because you're
dealing with something that would
usually cause feelings to well up and
might touch on things that would
actually alter and perhaps deform your
life but you felt that you had enough
ability to do that with strength and
distance that it was something that you
were not only willing to do but
interested in doing in front of an
audience right so maybe one thing it's
interesting about the personal you know
I think I wrote this to you in an email
that I it's just I guess this is a just
a psychological factor but no it isn't
justice I think it's connected to some
philosophical things but I don't things
that other people would find like too
personal and uncomfortable to share I
often have to consciously classify in my
head
which of those which are those things
and be like don't say it that way yeah
yeah and so like I like I've just
learned by experience and we'll make
other people uncomfortable if I say
things to someone I don't know that are
too personal but it doesn't make me
uncomfortable so I don't have an inner
sense of that so there isn't really
anything where I would be like I mean
maybe there is better you can't think of
it that it wouldn't be interesting for
me to go there to prove to you that that
exists for you right but that's relevant
I guess to the divorce thing like I
think it's not as courageous as it would
be for other people because I think it's
not as courageous for you as it would be
for other people but are you really
looking like I think you know another
person who sat in that chair was Bryan
Callen the comedian and actor and he
made the point that there are no tough
guys that ultimately the human condition
is so frail and so prone to abuse an
insult that in the face of actually you
know incredibly destructive pressures we
all fold and you can discuss that
straight okay so then courage is also
important to me one of the reasons I'm
doing this the show and and the whole
idea of naming the intellectual dark web
and all that stuff
has to do for me with answering the
question what would I have done during
the McCarthy era is that I watched my
family terrorized by this government and
I wanted to know what I would I have
stood up or what I have cowered under a
table so it's a particular kind of
courage and by the way it's been very
unpleasant many days but it's also a
kind of courage to which I am partially
well suited okay so my question is isn't
it a question of marginal courage and
the marginal courage to which you in
particular agnes are particularly well
suited i mean the act of bringing
another life into the world turns us all
into cowards I guarantee you that you
were a coward when it comes to your
child um I actually think that question
of courage with respect to one's
children is much much more fine-grained
like it comes up a thousand times a day
in my interactions with them so it's um
but certainly certainly there are
circumstances in which that you can say
I'm a coward with respect my children
and other circumstances I think I have
to exercise a lot of courage with
respect to no nobody I don't want to
talk about your child because I find it
actually I brought that up and I would
like to that would be the last time I
would actually bring up your actual
child okay if I think about Sophie's
Choice yeah I get very angry at the
existence of that book right because the
issue of deforming people by choices
involving their own children where they
lack the power to choose what items
should be on the smorgasbord and are
forced to choose between the
souffle the salad and the soup
yeah there's an evilness too simply
making us participate I'm thinking about
Saddam Hussein's penchant for executing
a family member and selling sending the
bill for the ammunition used to the
family so that they're forced to become
complicit right everyone who brings a
child into this world is that almost
without exception either a monster or a
coward and in fact this is the ax
brahmic sin I'll tell you the version of
that thought that I have and then I want
to answer the marginal question about
courage the original I thought of that
about that I've had is like there are
things that so when you invest yourself
in anything right it's a point of
vulnerability and if it's your child
then in a sense you've invested like
your mind into them in this way where
there are things that could happen to
them that you would never recover from
and so it's almost like you've made
yourself someone who could become insane
because you have opened your mind to be
wounded by the world in certain ways
that you cannot control anymore right
and I don't know what that is I don't
know what the name for that if that's
correct it's certainly in order to
prevent those things from happening you
might do anything and so that would be
the cowardice maybe right but it's more
than that right it's this kind of kind
of exposure of yourself where like in a
way you're
isn't your own anymore um that in a way
maybe that's even deeper than the
question about courage marginal question
bout courage so the way aristotle think
about this is that there's a lot of
different circumstances a person can be
in and we call them courageous relative
to a set of circumstances that are also
relative to them and that's how you were
think about the marginal point so like
there are certain circumstances so
extreme that we couldn't expect of
anyone to do anything but be crushed by
the pressure of the circumstances and we
wouldn't call them a coward for not
responding but then there are also
circumstances where we would sort of
expect of anyone that they would stand
up and we would call them a coward right
and then there's the intermediate case
and of course it's intermediate relative
to us in some way so what I mean is you
have to care about courage and that is a
way of putting the March at the point
about the margin I have to I have to
care about not just not just immediately
caving to certain pressures I mean can I
can I give an example that I actually
think is a better example in the divorce
one please but totally I will never
attempt to interrogate your person if
you don't offer it up yeah that's good
you know in a way this this this this
sort of reveals our difference it's like
I think through my personal life that
that's like the lens or something you
think you think through your personal
life that's not theirs but there are
levels of which I could interrogate that
would be different than the levels at
which you're interrogating yes
absolutely but I might still have those
in my head even if I don't say them um
so like when
when I like having that conversation
with my ex-husband who I'm good friends
with we were divorced
you know 2011 a long time ago right yeah
um that really wasn't so hard but
there's a thing I did in 2011 which is
that I gave a talk about getting
divorced
in 2011 because our divorced caused a
huge
he's faculty member at Chicago and it
caused this huge sort of emotional
response in the whole community and a
lot of people hated me a lot of people
still don't really talk to me as a
result of it just because of your
divorce even though the two of you have
accepted yourself correct um but it was
like you know sometimes there are wounds
that are created and then they get
supported um they they they they I don't
know what the right word is it's like
they they get scarred over is that like
it comes from the divorce it comes from
the etiology of the divorce yes right so
it but I gave a talk about this about
getting divorced and falling in love and
what love and marriage and divorce are
and I gave this talk because I was
worried I didn't mind if people were um
didn't like me or my choices or whatever
except my students I was worried about
my students I was worried that if the
students that I had taught came to sort
of I don't know except a bunch of gossip
and rumor about me that I would that it
would both undo the teaching that I had
done of them and get in the way of
potential teaching in the future
that it was like a professional
obligation that I had to clarify the
situation for my students like I don't
mind if people gossip about me but I do
mind if the people I'm trying to teach
but I don't even think you're I mean I
don't believe you that you don't mind if
people gossip about you you may not be
able to start I do I write that's all I
meant what I meant was I don't have a
moral obligation to try to correct that
but I did feel I had an obligation and
there was a lot of
like people you know through
backchannels we're telling me like don't
give this talk do not like you know do
not give a public talk about your life
and and it was like can you say what the
contents of the talk wer about or some
day it was so I mean really in some ways
the talk was quite academic it was a
talk about love so it was it started
with the circumstances which is I was
married to someone and I fell in love
with someone else
okay and then I was like I didn't think
that that was like the kind of person I
was the kind of person to whom that
could happen but it did happen and I
tried to explain it and I tried to
explain it using some of some of the
texts that I think shed the most light
on my own situation so they were I think
I talked about this passage from Henry
James as wings of the Dove and from
Plato's symposium about what I thought
love was and how it was related to the
kind of quest to become a person okay so
that that's what the talk was about but
it was like it was like I wanted to give
to my students my own understanding of
what had happened to me I felt very much
like this might be self aggrandizing but
I felt like Socrates when Socrates says
in the sympathy apology I want to show
to you the meaning of what has happened
to me and he's he's speaking there after
they've condemned him to death and he
says and he's already spoken to the
people who condemn him he's like to the
people who voted not to condemn me to my
students and my friends I want to show
to you the meaning I want you to
understand and it was really important
to him that those people understand
because he didn't want to sabotage the
educational project that they had been
involved in and that's what I felt at
that time so in other words in order for
me to infer why you would do this
because it's a rather odd thing to do at
one level and their understandable in
another I would have to surmise and
infer that you would in fact invested
certain teachings of yours to your
students with the personal
therefore calling it means you see one
thing no I actually no that's not quite
right so first of all I don't have any
teachings um so I didn't hadn't invested
in teach ethics absolutely okay
I can't imagine wanting to teach ethics
because if I'm aware of my own ethical
failings and you know there are many
they are many and varied and
unremarkable yeah the idea of getting up
and talking about ethical failings of
others and why you shouldn't fail
ethically you know I'm friends with sam
harris and he really doesn't believe
much in lying now he's not absolutely
fanatical about it he knows there's
certain cases where he has to lie but I
would never want because I'm trying to
be aware of truthfulness and fickleness
and all these sorts of things
you know status for example I have a
need for status it's not a standard need
for status in some ways in some ways
it's boring but I don't mind talking
about it
because I I can make contact within it I
don't feel diminished by inheriting a
human condition the thing that really
distorts me is that I feel like we're
all handed this white suit that we don't
want at Birth and then as we live our
lives all of the things that we do and
we spill our soup or you know we spend
time in the barn end up soiling this
white suit and people look at us and say
my god you know look at you
my question is well who ordered the
white suit to begin with wouldn't I
rather start with a baseline that says I
bet I'm a fairly standard person and if
lying is a problem and if hypocrisy is a
problem if injustice and bigotry are
problems wouldn't I want to give myself
a budget in all of those areas and the
key question is trying to live within
one's means I think that's absolutely
right so when you said like I have all
these flaws like that's why you want to
teach ethics because you want to
understand them I mean um
the thing about the white suit so I
think that's a really pervasive myth in
our society and it's maybe a bad a lot
of good legacies of Christianity bits
the kind of virtues of innocence idea
the idea that we all start out ethically
good right and that's related to the
status game point about how we get
something for free right but that and
the idea as well maybe you can sully it
maybe you can sort of and then and then
clean it up again and that can be your
ethical agency right but I don't think
that children have some kind of innate
virtue
I think virtue is something you have to
acquire like in you have to you have to
come to an understanding of what matters
but the point is society voiced the
white suit upon right right so you can't
that's theme so you you have to say I
reject this white suit I will fashion my
own yeah if you don't want to disappoint
people right now that the problem there
is that I believe that your privacy like
for example we see very few of our
colleagues naked yeah there was a there
was a professor that would was probably
the closest to being my official adviser
I didn't have a PhD advisor but the
person who signed my thesis as if he was
my PhD advisor had a Holman in in
Martha's Vineyard and we would we would
swim naked together you know
that was what one did he was the Sun
worshipper mm-hmm uh-huh
in a Hungarian Jew the the fact that we
don't see each other naked means that
we're stunned whenever we do catch a
glimpse of somebody out of context in
which they are in their most natural
state and this has to do with the fact
that we are handed these clothes and
told to wear it wear them at all times
and then our our simple underlying
reality is totally shocking so it seems
to me very sad that you would have to
give the lecture I'm not saying that you
you might want to give the lecture you
might enjoy the exhibition of it you
might enjoy the courage exercise of it
you might enjoy the intellectual puzzle
of it but the idea that there's a
compulsion so as not to ruin your
students has to do with the flaw of
having accepted the white suit to begin
with and therefore losing your privacy
um it's a really good point so I think
that can I do a victory dance I think
but I think and I see what you mean and
I think what you're helping me to see is
that I have somewhat
framed what I was doing slightly wrong
like I it's the point what the thought
isn't like well if people if I don't
give this talk then my students will
think I did something evil and then they
won't respect me anymore
and now and and so instead I need to
like um excuse myself right and I need
to show that actually I'm as white as
they thought I was and that's definitely
not like like for instance it's not at
all what Socrates does at that moment in
the apology actually what he says is
that um he's like you might think that
you know some really bad thing is half
that's but he goes on to say you might
think some really bad thing has happened
to me you might think this is terrible
that they're putting me to death which
is what everyone thinks about Socrates
oh look this Plato showed that you can't
have philosophy because look at this
terrible result and the whole point of
the apology is a Socrates like this
isn't a bad thing not no bad thing
happened to me yes they're putting me to
death but a good man can't be harmed
neither in life nor death and I'm not
you know I'm like it's bad for them cuz
they're doing something on just so it's
bad for their souls but it's not bad for
me don't like don't feel sorry for me
don't feel bad for right okay um and I
guess so I guess as much as and I like I
think you were right in picking up on
the kind of self excusing nature of the
way that I put it but like if you think
about what I told you as the content of
the talk right um it was more like as
much as anything it was an opportunity
like to say something truthful about
love that I had never I'd never had such
an opportunity because I had never
someone one of my one of my colleagues
came to the talk and he's like this was
not a compliment this reserved a
criticism he's like you talked as if you
were Moses come down from the mountain
like you like you had like as though you
had so much knowledge I guess though you
thought you were Socrates or something
you know and I'm like yeah that's what I
felt like I felt like I had all this
knowledge and it was wonderful and I had
to share it with my students and I so it
was sort of it was almost like there's a
there's two points of correction right
there's a one point of correction would
be to get to the white suit but the the
actual content of the talk was to go the
step four
they're like this was an educational
opportunity and and I think that I I let
myself not frame it that way
in telling the story maybe somewhat
under the pressure of the idea of
self-purification
but it's not a truthful way of telling
the story well but it but this is the
question about whether to use the avenue
of truth you see because at some level
there's an aspect of of grace and
meaning that is present here which is
the you know whether you know it or not
and I don't know that you know this that
at least in the male arousal takes place
on two different systems both of them
within the autonomic nervous system one
sympathetic one parasympathetic called
psychogenic and reflects a genic arousal
mmm-hmm and it's not under the conscious
control of the prefrontal cortex it's a
much more primitive system nature's not
going to trust the reproductive system
to the prefrontal cortex and a friend of
mine Leisha Lee just came out with a
company I think called rosebud AI that
generates faces of people who never were
and you can find that you know she I'm
sure she will release a tool at some
point in which she finds your phenotype
and can hone to a fare-thee-well and
create a person that you cannot tell has
never existed and put them in all sorts
of situations so that you can fall
hopelessly in love with that which is
not okay now because that's taking place
effectively your prefrontal cortex is
like your parent trying to get control
of a child has been asked that the
terrible question who wants ice cream
and the child is now out of control okay
you can't really talk about this because
this is happening everywhere in a
certain sense I mean we can talk about
it in the general but not in the
specific so for example you can say that
self gratification is natural and normal
and that the world engages on this
almost without exception
you cannot say I'm sorry I was late for
the meeting
spent the morning lost an onanism right
and as a result that kind of layer of
indirection including in this situation
using a language layer of indirection is
a necessary part of the distortion of
the truth that's needed for meaning
fitness and grace different from pure
truth and I think that you're caught in
the bad breath problem in this story
right in the self purification we come
from a tradition where those a ritual
bath known as a mikvah
and these purifying rituals are
necessary to do what you know we don't
have to unfortunately got tied to the
issue of menstruation and whether or not
women are intrinsically dirty through
the process of renewing themselves but
simply the concept of a mikvah as a
ritual and the fact that our brains have
a place to allow us to be reborn hmm
there's an incredibly powerful facility
that people focused on truth very often
they try to do things through the truth
channel it doesn't work as well as doing
it through the ritual and meaning
channels it's interesting that mcfuzz
are used for conversion - yeah right and
born as it you well and another thing if
you've ever read what prayers we say on
Yom Kippur the Day of Atonement it's
terrifying because you sort of start by
atoning for your sins and then you get
into we are sorry for pretending to
atone for our sins when actually we're
not really sorry at all you know just
like holy cow that's written in so I
think that the idea that we can step
away from being so concerned with the
truth and move over to you know ritual
and meaning and something else it's like
it's as though you can step outside of
thinking and do something else with your
mind than thinking like and my view is
there's only thinking there isn't some
other operation there are other things
that happen like there are other things
that happen too
brain right but there's only kind of one
thing you can do with your mind and
there is no way to not care about truth
even in your dreams don't care about
truth in no way if you asked when when
rabbi wall P sat in your chair we got to
the end and there was an issue about how
does a final theory of everything affect
our concepts of ourselves Yeah right and
I said to him you know at some point the
hard thing is to conceive of what we
mean by a theory of everything because
there's that which is left undone in the
theory of everything and it usually
would what I believe it means is that we
are no longer searching for mathematical
improvements at that point but searching
for something ineffable some kind of
gossamer that we can't touch without
disintegrating at our touch or you you
know this issue of what is the meaning
of life and to the extent that I've been
able to try to distill it into a
sentence that doesn't crumble on me I've
said that the meaning of life to me is
the struggle to impart meaning - meaning
and as soon the reason I constructed it
that way is that if you just say that
you're a hundred percent clear look even
on what that means then you're no longer
struggling and so as soon as the
struggle disappears the meaning
disappears on the other hand if you say
there is no meaning to life you know the
the Shakespeare quote about sound and
fury signifying nothing
then you've also lost the meaning of
life because you've sort of crapped out
of the game and so it's only the active
part of turning this thing over in your
mind that keeps us animated I think
there have to be completion points even
if they're provisional that is I don't
think it can just be struggle like
because the short version of your answer
is the meaning of life is struggle no
without qualification yeah it is the it
is it's a struggle to impart meaning -
right it's a particular aspect of
struggle okay but my point is the genus
is struggle right correct which is like
something kinetic right
emotion necessarily if I'm struggling to
pry the top off of a ketchup bottle
there can be a static moment where I'm
simply putting pressure and there's not
much kinetic there and metaphorically I
mean obviously it's not really about
ketchup right but like like even if
there isn't in order imagine you just
saw a frozen picture of you like this
with the bottle right even if your
muscles were tensed
you wouldn't know whether you were
trying to get the top on take it off or
just keep it the way that it was right
struggle is in a way diachronic and we
can see the struggle through a longer by
the way every time you say diachronic
the next time we meet we're going to
drink I love that this conversation is
going incredibly well um so I think that
look there's this problem something else
you said in your conversation with Rabbi
well P was that you hate when people say
that happiness is the meaning of life so
I'm gonna say that I think happiness is
I think it's true but I think the
obvious there's no other answer it's
completely trivial truth no one can
disagree with this one um
because so because of something I would
call the value deferral problem okay so
and I think this is like the number one
ethical insight of the ancient world
it's super simple okay which is that
like it's something like this like the
value of my life my life yeah can never
be somehow something outside of me
something to be found outside of me so
like I mean suppose like okay here's a
thing that Aristotle considers a bunch
of possibilities for like what a really
good life looks like yeah the most
interesting thing about the
possibilities that he considers is one
that he leaves out he'd so nowhere he oh
he has that the of the life of money
making life of honor the life of the
intellectual life the the political life
etc it goes on but one thing he does not
consider is like what about altruism
okay what are the altruistic life like
suppose that I say the entire point of
my life
right it's make you happy I'm an
altruist
that is that what it means well let me
give that as an int alright I write it
right if that is an instance
suppose you're an actress too though
right it's okay so you go and you make
someone else happy right you just double
the number of counterfactuals I'm
entertaining I'm gonna keep going yeah
okay here's here's here's what why
Arizona didn't consider the possibility
of that right as a good life is that as
an altruist sounds like deferring the
problem of the meaning of my life on to
you and I'm like well the point is like
the point is that Erik be happy right
and suppose you differ also right to
somebody else it's like we can't keep
deferring somewhere along line someone's
actually got to do the happying right
and I think it's got to be me who does
it for my life it's not my children it's
not my students no one can do the
meaning of my life for me and that's
just what sort of ancient you diamond
ISM is is the realization that the Hat
that the value of someone's life has to
come home to them and be available to
them in the form of something like an
experience something you know not that
pleasure but no one I mean no one none
people thought was pleasure but
something that is in a way transparent
to them and available to them as meaning
as an experience and that's what the
word happiness is supposed to capture at
least insofar as it's say a translation
of the Greek like a diamond eeeh
right so so like and I think the idea of
struggle is kind of another way to get
into a worrisome deferral problem right
like you're always struggling and the
thing never happens they don't know
where do we know if the meaning is the
struggle yeah but no there is so much
work to do and there's so many partial
you know to your point where you didn't
say the word milestone but I think what
you talked about his partial completions
on the roof right so there are so many
milestones and partial completions that
are part of the struggle I would never
wish to suggest that it's just pure has
Sisyphean pointless struggle well you
defined it as a struggle so you can
change your definition and you can say
that I'm sorry implicit within the
struggle is a progress movement part
completions okay I mean I guess I I
wouldn't hear that as implicit like that
is to me the arrival somewhere like it's
like there's going somewhere and then
there's arriving right I'm a huge fan of
arriving and this idea that the journey
is what's important never makes sense to
me right but I think your definition
suggests that that the definition that
the meaning of life is the struggle to
impart meaning meaning is a version of
the journey view in long but the idea
that life is one airline long airline
flight with no landings or takeoffs
doesn't really enter into that well so I
get that like you don't think that but
what I'm saying is you're saying that so
so there's like there's like how you
view life and then there's the way that
you have a particular weird with like
act academic support footnotes so
there's a footnote on that yeah okay but
I actually want you to bring the
footnote up it in the main text oh wow
by your definition and say that you know
the pursuit of meaning essentially
involves these two components that are
actually really hard to fit together and
this is one of those distinctions we're
gonna need to like back up right to be
able to cash that check but it involves
both the you know a kind of movement a
kind of struggle towards something like
and you know I'm putting meaning a
meaning or understanding or maybe
there's more than one a kind of endpoint
um and then and then there's something
like being at the endpoint right and
there has to be a what it is like to be
at the endpoint and that has to be part
of what the meaning of life is what
happened let me give you a little
completion story that actually made a
huge difference in my life you ever
heard somebody say when you complain
that you just keep having a problem and
somebody says well what's the only
common factor to the 7 problematic
relationships you just described you're
supposed to say it's me isn't it right
right okay so I was going around and
saying to a close friend of mine named
Michael Grossberg
I keep having the following bizarre
hierarchical relationship problems it's
clearly me he said no not in the sense
that you mean it I said what do you mean
he said look I know you very well
and you're imagining that you're doing
something really wrong he said in fact
think about a different problem you've
got someone with a compromised immune
system they're the only person who's
actually seeing the world of pathogens
correctly because they're actually not
defended against the pathogens everyone
with a non compromised immune system is
oblivious to what's actually going on in
their environment he says the problem
that you have is that you're the only
guy who isn't oblivious to the problems
in these hierarchical relationships
because for whatever reason you do not
have the immune system that the rest of
us carry implicitly so did that extent
if you want to say that that's what
you're doing wrong but that's a really
bad example because the pathogens are
real they're not imagined okay that
totally changed my life it completely
reframed something I thought I
effectively had a de facto proof of one
thing and somebody's better insight came
in and made my life much richer and I
stopped worrying about that particular
problem now I could move on to the next
problem that's an example of a milestone
of completion I never had to go back
it's a very durable insight okay
that is part of the struggle to impart
meaning to meeting to get to these
higher forms where you're not trapped in
the same problems that everyone else has
it gives you an ability to teach to
share to give paradigms and I don't
think that they're tied to personality
so one of the things that's really
important to me for example and I talk
about it a lot on this show I think or
in other interviews is the fact that in
mathematics we honor our Nazis that
there were Nazis who contributed major
insights and it doesn't mean that
they're not sons of bitches but the part
of them that contribute mathematical and
physical insight is not compromised by
their goddamn evil Nazism those
right okay
so the ability to divorce to some extent
the human
you don't have any choice in mathematics
if somebody finds something essential
and that person happens to be a
son-of-a-bitch you don't have the right
to edit that person out of history
because it's inconvenient for you that
that happened right so I think that the
the moral failings of the people who do
the teachings should be assumed by the
students now the key question is do
those moral failings compromise let's
say the the teachings themselves in some
cases they do particularly comes from a
point of sanctimony if the teacher has
not struggled as much as the student
then in fact the relationship maybe
would be more profitable if reversed but
I think it matters a lot so here the
theoretical practical divide is really
helping you out because I think that
mathematics is very squarely theoretical
and the more we move towards the
theoretical the easier it's going to be
to make that kind of divorce a lot of
people would find it harder with music
my mom is very torn about vogner it look
for me the very hardest case and it's
one that I personally struggled with is
Aristotle so I think that Aristotle's
views on like women and natural slavery
are deeply embedded in his ethical
theories so I don't think that they're
like some kind of little extra bit that
you can just ignore those they're ways
in which something is infected with the
problem and you have to refactor the
teaching it's it's and it's not just
that it's that it's like even what it's
even connected to what's good about the
teaching there were years when I didn't
teach it for this exact reason like
maybe it's just morally corrupt and we
shouldn't teach it I came to think
differently about it but my point is the
question of like how should we deal with
the kind of ethical infractions of
people who have something to teach us
I think has to be combined with the
question what kind of thing do they have
to teach us how theoretical is it how
practical is it are they they're
reliable or the unreliable narrator
that's another question right I mean in
philosophy the question of reliability
is almost given that you don't know as
literary device in other words are they
speaking to us in a way in which we can
rely upon their words or to their words
in fact tell us that they in
fact I have a hidden truth right and
like and like in some sense like with
Aristotle's like we know he's not
reliable
we know him yet and yet their stuff
there's insights from him that we I
think we don't have another source and
so it's like um so for me that was like
a deep a deep tension that's in a way
harder them in the Nazi mathematician
case but I I don't think that there's a
single answer here like that is I think
that the theoretical practical divide
makes a big difference and in a way the
Nazi mathematician case is too easy okay
should we tear down the arch of Titus
that celebrates the sacking of Jerusalem
I'm stood there for a while so um you
asked you asked rabbi won't be
discussion to you yeah I don't have a
view about it but I also like the
question that's a very different
question right because that's not a
question about there's some knowledge
and then there's the source of that
knowledge we have a different set of
questions about cultural artifacts and
their and their history and what they
mean and like I guess what like one
thing that to me is important in asking
myself that question is like about this
sort of question like it's why I raised
the Aristotle case it's a kind of faux
deliberation that I would be engaging in
because no one is ever going to come to
me and be like should we tear this down
I'm willing to start this campaign
because I'm really getting tired of
people saying that you cannot teach but
you so you think it should be torn down
I'm willing to entertain your the
extension of your ideas until you start
to recognize firstly here's what I'm
having a problem I'm an I'm an
incredible hypocrite okay and the reason
I've chosen hypocrisy as a life strategy
is is that it offered the greatest
benefits per unit of responsibility of
all major philosophies all right okay
I'm always troubled when people tell me
that hypocrisy is terrible
now I
to minimize my hypocrisy so you don't
think it's you wooden struggle to
minimize well the the it'd within me
struggles to maximize it because like
what a great deal right but the the
supervisory capacity within me is sort
of it's an embarrassment of riches by
embracing hypocrisy that you know the
world becomes your candy store so that
distinction between it I'm sorry
interrupt between the it and that like
that's one of those faux distinctions
that I don't think you have a right to
in the sense that I think you're one
person and you make decisions oh you
dear sweet child so it's like you
struggle with your own hypocrisy and you
try to minimize it because you think
there's something wrong with hypocrisy I
don't love my hypocrisy in one region of
my mind in other regions of my mind I
certainly enjoy my hypocrisy I love
steak dinners and if I actually think
about what you know what what veal is it
changes the enjoyment of veal because
veal is pretty sick thing to to really
take pleasure from to be blunt right and
so there's this issue you know when I
bring this up is in Cambridge
Massachusetts there's a store in North
Cambridge I think it says like
fresh-killed poultry and it's just there
on its advertising what it is and if
you're buying from that store you're
pretty much not going to have the the
shock when you actually think about what
it is that you're consuming because you
bought it with that kind of thought in
mind so there's this issue about you
know obviously when I when I what I'm
saying that I'm a hypocrite in that I've
embraced as a philosophy there's a
there's a playful aspect to it which is
that I'm recognizing that most people
don't see their own hypocrisy they're
structured to see it in others and not
in themselves it's a very easy teaching
to just walk around watching for your
own hypocrisy and then you know kind of
make yourself sick before pointing the
finger at other people what is very odd
to me is how few people are aware of how
deep their own hypocrisy is and then to
lead a naive rallying cry of you know I
can't believe this is this hypocrisy in
in other people it's shocking to not
have an idea of what baseline hypocrisy
is based on yourself seems a bit rich I
think you're the true crusader against
hypocrisy we in some weird way
but it's tends to be institutional
hypocrisy in other words the the the
thing that really bothers me if we had a
2x2 grid there's individual versus
individual conflicts there's institution
versus institutional what I really
detest is in stit is institutions
against individuals institutional
hypocrisy the jackboot of the
institution on the windpipe of the
individual is the thing that is so
offensive to me that I'm pretty
consistent that that's what I fight so I
always try what if the institution is
right and the individual is wrong well
then I don't view that as being a that's
not one of the cases it's not one of the
cases what really bothers me is the
institution using institutional power to
humiliate to destroy the reputation of
the challenging individual who's making
an excellent point on behalf of other
individuals right there's certain
institutional versus individual games
goliaths against David's and when I'm
when I'm up against that case I'm
particularly animated having turned down
opportunities to behave within the
institutional structure I'm pretty sure
I really care about this case can I just
go back to so something that I say you
hypocritical institutions are different
from hypocritical individuals yeah but
like you know you you brought up the
arch case right and so through the thing
that I really don't like is like when a
question is posed but it's really
masquerading as a point or something
else right so it's like I'm actually
totally willing to deliberate about
whether or not we should take this arch
down but that wasn't really why you
raised it right why don't I raise it do
you think um I think you raised it as a
potential point of inconsistency um but
I don't know when I think about the arch
I think it's an interesting question
whether or not to to the fact that if I
did an interesting question means that
you are not convinced that it that the
question is settled correct right that
was sort of my point about all the cases
I don't think there is one way to say I
understand I deal with a lot of people
who find that these things are settled
right then but but see that's my point
you wanted to know maybe whether I find
the question to be settled or not right
and so you asked me a question should we
tear down Sartre not and your design
and ask you man that question was maybe
to figure out whether I thought a
certain question was settled right but I
think that's an actually a deliberative
question like should we turn down the
arch or not right and so what I mean is
like and and and that's the distinction
I drew between practical and theoretical
but by doing that you're going to move
it closer to the like when you say that
something is a live question it's not a
neutral frame which is I think it's an
interesting question I'm not sure either
way if I said to you what do you think
about the violent overthrow of the
United States and you were to say I
think it's an interesting question
that's a very strong statement yes to
find it an interesting question right I
think though that you know this goes
deep into something like conversational
trust but I could find almost anything
to be an interesting question but I
would need it would be pretty important
to me that the person posed it to me as
a question rather than as a test right
because sometimes questions aren't
questions that there's something
parasitic about this you see you can't
have a society in which everybody finds
whether the the violent overthrow of the
United States is to be an interesting
question in general the substrate that
makes this country possible so that a
few people can find that an entertaining
question have to make sure that that
question is in fact you Loutre I mean I
with respect to that particular one I
haven't yet seen the interest that is
you you sold me on the interest of the
previous one on the grounds of the
discussion right on the face of it it
doesn't we haven't yet established the
the grounds that might make it
interesting with the destruction of
Monticello like I I if I found things
that you know had been built with slave
labor right you know that I can start to
create a great deal of destruction by
opening up a lot of interesting
questions there by moving the midpoint
of the discussion quite a bit farther
these are not in fact neutral this is
part of why I find philosophy troubling
because it doesn't recognize often that
the act of asking these questions is in
fact a non neutral action if you
remember the Dukakis question where
there was a question about Willie Horton
yet very vaguely okay I read the memory
hole it's pretty amazing so I think he
was asked a question about what should
happen if somebody raped his wife yes
yes that's right yes and in general the
correct answer is I'm not going to
answer that question and don't make me
tell you a second time
my wife is sitting right here right
thank you very much I will not be
entertaining that don't make that
mistake again sir
right because the point is I don't wish
to open it this up right now the
philosophers impulses that's an
interesting question very often not if
like sometimes you can tell that the
person asked it the test you mean not
you mean if it wasn't asked I'm just
saying that very often the philosophical
gambit is a pretend state in which we
are quite comfortable entertaining
anything you know oh yes let's imagine
that the Jain uses her steak knife to
kill Billy across the table at the
Philosopher's dinner right and then you
start talking about these all of these
sorts of things in general this is again
that there are no tough guys we all
should have personal boundaries and
limits in places where we wish to said I
would prefer that that question not be
asked because the question is itself is
a form of violence so you say oh the
philosopher has this pretend interest in
curiosity but I would say the non
philosopher has these pretend questions
that they put before us and and then if
we if we say back to them look there are
circumstances under which that could be
a real question if somebody were really
asking me of it it of me and there is no
question such that I could rule out in
advance that anyone could honestly ask
it of me in any conversation um that's
not the same thing as saying like I'm
buying into your gambit and I'm going to
answer your pretend question as though
it were a real question and if I were to
do that I would have to do it with
pretend interest but let's talk about a
situation in which a question that maybe
should not have been asked too much in
my opinion
must now be asked because of the
changing landscape so for example the
Tesla problem which is that you might
have thought trolley problems we're
bizarre and academic well now that you
have to commit it to code and you have
to say well what should i do how many
baby carriages should I write okay
that's an incredibly interesting
situation where we can no longer a four
to leave an expression unev alyou it
exactly right so there there can't
really be questions we can't ask cuz we
might be in the situation my point is is
that there can't be a question that we
can't ask under any circumstances but
that we may find that a question that
was better off being unasked now must be
like that that Pandora's box could
survive unopened for this many years but
circumstances have changed right right
so right and um and a lot of I mean in
that situation it might even be that I
think what what will probably end up
doing is trying to find a lot of ways to
avoid exactly answering it right
managing the situation in which the
question has been asked rather than
answering it I mean I guess right these
kind of like I thought we'd have
self-driving cars away before now and I
think we do right but we don't have them
because of these I thought we were going
to get stuck here that having to commit
things to code forces us to promote the
consciousness and to responsibility
things that we would prefer like I
believe that one of the reasons that we
tend to have more sex while drunk than
than sober at least the early stages of
relationship is because what we're
actually interested in is an excuse and
that we want to find an excuse which is
I panicked you know that's a great thing
to do behind the wheel I panicked
everybody understands a momentary
split-second decision to have a series
of documented meetings in which we
deliberated over this and then it plays
out in an actual intersection somewhere
you know in North Dakota and suddenly
you know two baby carriages are taken
out so that a collection of school
children are spared right that situation
is like well who made this decision and
then it becomes a very thorny issue that
we're not capable of it and we may
choose to exist in an ignorant state and
forgo the benefit of a technology
because we can't bear to take
responsibility deliberatively for what
we what must commit to do right right
and but there this question is exists at
a lot of different levels right and so
it's like one question is
you know so you're right that we can
hide behind the panic but like suppose
that I just had the time so many of
these TV shows you know like 24 or
whatever are about like cases worry
again there's time pressure but the
person has like a minute to think about
it and they make a decision right and
like I might have to make a decision and
I think you know it it at least has to
be possible for me not necessarily to
approve of the decision I make even to
be able to live with the decision I make
but to accept the fact that I made a
decision I think that has to be possible
so it has to be possible for me to
entertain the question but the question
of whether we can as a society
deliberate together about that question
yeah and come up with sort of like an
answer that we can then all live with
and in some sense be governed by that's
like a whole other level and there are
many levels in between right well the
question of should we deranged what it
is that we know about the world so that
we can live with the noble truth that
may be foundational to our society you
know if we came to understand cognitive
noble truth or noble lies sorry noble
lie right noble truths are easy yes
correct
thanks for no but like it's very
disturbing to those of us who believe in
evolutionary theory that people who
claim to believe in systems of selective
pressures are unable to accept the basic
premise which is that they operate on
systems with heredity variation in
differential success and the
differential success is the aspect by
which one group you know carries an
evolutionary advantage over another the
idea that there should be evolutionary
advantages and disadvantages relative to
different environments is toxic to many
of the lies that we've told ourselves to
create the foundation of our society and
so to be able to say well I absolutely I
would never question Darwin's theory of
selection however I also believe in all
of the lies that are necessary and this
is an unresolved conflict has to do with
the partitioning of the mind I don't see
how you could do it otherwise and the
deep partition mind doesn't seem to be a
healthy state I know that my friend sam
Harris you know has this idea that he
should have kind of a uniform
interoperable access to all aspects of
his mind but that seems like
this to me I mean it's one thing to
think like I should at any given time
have access to all of it it's another
thing to think that with respect to any
particular bit or I don't have access I
can be sort of okay with that and be
okay with the awareness of not having
access like you can't just straight-up
deceive yourself right you have to sort
of deceive yourself behind your back
that's not true I mean I can't say to
myself like you go to synagogue
sometimes okay don't you find yourself
straight-up deceiving yourself let me
give you an example what I mean by
strips you mean you can see whether I
would say no not but um but like suppose
that you were like look I'll pay you a
million dollars if you believe that I'm
wearing like a red suit right um I can't
form that belief it would I would be so
advantageous to me to believe it right
but like I can't do I self believe it no
it doesn't work it doesn't work like
that
right that's what I mean by I can't
deceive myself there's a kind of there's
a kind of fundamental will to truth that
is just built into thinking and that I
can't override manually so I could
certainly come to believe that you're
wearing a red suit through very funny
channels right I might even be able to
take a pill if I knew a certain pill
would induce in me that belief I could
decide to take the pill and then take
the pill right and that would be kind of
obscure way of coming to have the belief
so that's why I meant by you can't
straight forwardly right
you can indirectly I think and people do
very few layers of indirection I think
that's right but not with zero right
that's it oh I like this point a lot um
and and so I think that that like that
limit is like a certain kind of that's
maybe where Sam Harris is like there's a
certain kind or something that's right
about his position there is that there's
a certain kind of thing I couldn't
accept a relation I couldn't accept to
myself of opacity and when I you know
feel like the story that you told about
the hierarchy case right and the way in
which somebody sort of unraveled that
for you there
Mantic hierarchy right and brought it
brought to your own understanding what
was happening and gave you a it's like
it's like shedding a light on yourself
such that you now can can articulate it
in a way that like makes sense to you
right when we're not when we're not in
that position with respect to something
it bothers us and when we get into that
position that's a real and very
significant kind of progress interesting
let me ask you a different question
that's been bugging me a lot yeah I
think that the rauzein veil of ignorance
is there's something terribly wrong with
it and I see it as having an example of
a piece of philosophy that is got a lot
of purchase outside of philosophy
departments and I'm worried that it may
be deranging us as a society that this
idea that identity should somehow be
fungible and we should say ok we don't
know who we're gonna come back as and in
fact it means something very bizarre to
say that we would come back as as the
other is there something wrong with
Rawls in which if we predicate too much
and we we lean on that pillar too
heavily we may do ourselves a great
damage
it's an intuition yeah so um I think yes
actually I think I may be a little bit
I'm somewhat in agreement with you let
me tell you how I would put this problem
to myself the rauzein move is a species
of a genus of stepping back moves right
it's like look there are these facts
about you but you can imagine that they
were not the case just abstract them
away and now make your decision okay but
um I assume you can do that that is my
assume you have that kind of
metacognition available to you right and
it's like look look at Rawls and look at
all the people that Rawls influenced and
the rauzein tradition like there was
it's like there's a very characteristic
set of say
political and social and economic views
that go along with those people and like
did they really step did they abstract
from those sufficiently in in in
producing the theory like maybe not
right and so I think that there is the
at the very least there's that
assumption there that it is that it is
possible and it may be possible it just
may be that you can't do it so easily
maybe that you can't do it merely by
entertaining like a thought experiment
or something like that it may be
possible to really learn to abstract
away certain parts of your identity
through a lot of work right through a
lot of cognitive work and through like
experience and stuff that you do but the
idea that you could do it just by
entertaining a counterfactual I think is
not right I'm not sure exactly what the
implications are of that I mean that is
it seems to me that this problem is like
it's an instance of something more
general that I've criticized but um have
you ever seen John Belushi and Joe
Cocker singing feeling alright on
Saturday Night Live no it's one of the
great moments in television history John
Belushi becomes Joe Cocker and Joe
Cocker is so idiosyncratic that to have
Joe Cocker watching himself acted by
John Belushi they collaborate on the
song is disturbing and funny and
beautiful because Belushi is actually
amazing as Joe Cocker as a singer in
that moment I came to believe that John
Belushi could run a version of Joe
Cocker at least to first second and
third-order in emulation right do you
point talent right well this is the
thing which is I have people that I
could come back as and I have people
that I couldn't come back as to varying
orders of approximation and so that
aspect of non fungible identity to me
dooms the entire rauzein project in a
way that I can't explain to people who
are under its spell um I guess the
so maybe what I'm willing to agree to is
slightly more limited that is I'm
willing to agree with you that the idea
that one can subtract away the
commitments and concerns of identity and
in effect right what we're really
arguing about is sort of Rawls's the
sort of the conceit that we can separate
away comprehensive doctrines right Oh
imagine if I didn't believe in God or
something and like you know but that
might be really important to me that I
believe in God it is important to me
right so and so I'm like um so I sort of
agree that the sort of conceit that
identity is so thin and trivial that you
can separate it away and then do your
reasoning that's a real problem but the
thing I don't agree with is that um
there is some particular barrier of
identity namely like say the set of
people who you couldn't be born as right
where you couldn't over time spend
enough time with those people and talk
to them to the point where at the end of
that process you're like I could be born
as them right it's it's like now you
can't imagine it
we have the diachronic again for our
drinking game yes like you know and so
so the the the the real for me the real
objection like is that there is a
difference between what I can do merely
through the OP like through a mental
operation that we engage in alone right
and what I can do by learning from
people and I think I worked with
somebody who I can't run very well in
emulation I do a really basic Peter teal
impression but I can only go for about
20 or 30 seconds and then it becomes
very clear that it's just mannerisms
because the guys operating system is
wildly idiosyncratic there's one guy who
can do a better job of it named a Jay
Ryan who probably get to second order
and I'm kind of just blown away by it
because Peter's just too hard to model I
don't think that that's a convergent
process in general even when you spend a
lot of time with somebody let me let me
switch gears yeah you can have the last
word on that one if you want I don't
mean to cut you off the
two topics I want to get to after can I
say quickly I think that um I I want to
UM distinguish the question of whether
you could model them from whether you
could get yourself into a position where
you could imagine being born as them I
guess okay so yeah something that's a
okay good yeah I want to get into one
issue which is that this doesn't really
talk a lot about feeling and I guess I
worry that critical thinking is
something we talk a lot about and
critical feeling is something we neglect
okay groupthink
yes group feel no overthinking yes over
feeling though these every place that
you talk about something in terms of
thinking if you substitute the word
feeling and you realize that feeling is
a kind of enhanced cognition we somehow
don't feel comfortable so I want to talk
about something that happened as we sat
down in these chairs where I'm very
comfortable talking to you about
thinking and I'm not very comfortable
talking to you about feeling okay so you
were saying that you'd reviewed some
episodes of the show and I said did you
find them interesting and you quite
truthfully said you did and then I said
something like were they worth your
while because you'd also expressed an
idea that you prefer to read things
rather to listen because the you value
your time and the time is very expensive
in long-form podcast sorry can I correct
one thing it's not only that it's that I
process information much better when I'm
reading and so in terms of what I can
remember and think about etc given that
I heard it it's like less of it that's
true but it's also the case that
something is lost without seeing the
inflections the body language hearing
the warmth or the coldness of the tone
so it's an interesting point as to
whether or not the transcript is the
interview right what information are
there so the course what information do
I prefer to preserve yeah exactly right
yeah but then you sort of said that no
that wasn't really a great exercise for
you or something like that that hurt me
what are your reactions to that I think
that the show is quite a bit better and
particularly one or two of the episodes
that you listen to I think are
extraordinary and it made me feel that
you could not possibly have seen what it
is that I saw in the in those one or two
episodes because it would have been
worth
ten hours of your time because it was so
rare now I could be wrong so it's very
interesting that of course I have a
vested interest and so I'm budgeting
something for my own distortion I'm also
thinking about what the feedback I've
had how specific the feedback made me
question whether or not I viewed you as
a reliable receiver of the content of
the show had I over invested in my image
of you as the person capable of
processing what we're doing here and it
made me wonder whether or not I'm doing
something outside of the Academy which
the Academy sort of realizes is some
cheap version of intellectualism and
storytelling a narrative that would
never survive in a rigorous academic
context so I went through a bunch of
self-doubt accusation negative feeling
question and uncertainty about you
myself and the project that we were
going to sit down to create an episode
together this is a great question
so I guess let me report a bunch of
different things so there was the first
thing when you said you asked me like
how does that feel to me when you said
like that hurt me and immediately I felt
hurt like I felt like reflexive totally
not conscious empathetic response so I
didn't at the time when I first said it
it didn't hurt me to say that to you but
it often
I don't why should say both of us are
quite disagreeable as people and that's
that's my perception that both of us
feel comfortable contradicting something
if we it's an issue about the courage of
your convictions I think that you in
general are very high courage of your
convictions aren't willing to share but
also it's an issue of I had no
perception at all that it hurt you when
I said it and I'm often bad at picking
up on those signals and it makes it
easier to because I was masking it
because it was obviously a vulnerable
question so the last thing I wanted to
do was to signal to you that I could be
easily fair enough but perhaps also I
could have you know if I were somewhat
otherwise I would predict that or
something but I didn't at all cool okay
so um um I guess so that that was just
my instinctive response and now like you
know yeah I think that your your your
subsequent ruminations maybe the most
interesting bit in them is that the paid
about academia right so what's
interesting to me is that
the moment at which I have this response
it it it is a is attributed to me as an
academic right like it's so 90s show
yeah is about the kind of things that
take place in universities all over the
country that I'm alleging that has not
filtered out to some extent to the
general public like there's a tremendous
amount of pressure to survive in
academics causing people in my opinion
just as we say that constant cut well
let me say it differently concentration
camp survivors from World War two death
camp survivors will often say something
if they trust you which is don't
celebrate us because the ones who
survived weren't the good ones we did
what we had to do to survive it's the
ones who perished that you're really
thinking about it's a very tough thing
to say in general when I meet somebody
who's succeeded in academics they're
always under a cloud if they did it
under this era because the pressures are
simply too severe now it some people do
better than that you know if you're if
you're good enough you can have a
peacocks tail that you in fact are an
ethical academic but in general people
are going to have to take intellectual
and moral half-measures in order to
survive in this competitive of an
environment so I was trying to talk
about that in episode 19 not actually
attempting to single at an individual
there's the weirdness that simply
talking about a problem in a particular
case when people haven't understood that
problem will tend to privilege an
individual but but by the hundredth case
of it you start to realize though this
is a general feature pervading the
society good um so like maybe a couple
of different responses so I found that
um the the sort of first of all just the
scientific console new to me I didn't
know anything about this way in which
the kind of the propensity of a cell
towards becoming tumorous like that that
cuts against its ability like if you
want to if you want to cut down on that
you have to make it bad at repair and
that there's that that was so
interesting to me to learn with that
that is in weirdly the central insight
than the the narrative and the drama of
interpersonal warfare within the Academy
just what is death why is it baked in
right yeah um so but like so so so as I
say there are a lot of different things
and for me that was actually super
interesting and I went and looked and
read the abstract of the paper and your
awesome thing and um and but I guess the
thing is like I I did feel that the sort
of thrust of the episode was supposed to
be like this is how things can go wrong
and I get that on an interpersonal level
it is that but the way I hear the story
yeah there was this incredible
scientific discovery that happened
partly because of an academic context
and it happened and the truth got out
and like it's your brother and so you
love him and you're heartbroken about
stuff that happened to him but he's not
my brother and from my point of view
like look what academia did it got this
amazing tree yeah kidding Agnes
let's actually do this as a emotional
and cognitive okay who gets to leave
children people get to become professors
if you look at the professors who are
left by a great professor mm-hmm the
idea that the thought is what got out
there and and by virtue of the fact you
know in some sense that there was a
conflict to do this I called the horse
and rider problem which is yeah you
let's knock the rider off of the horse
and as long as we have the horse then
that's what matters this is a complete
misreading of history because the key
thing that we find is a Michael attea
for example great mathematician will
leave multiple fields medalists as
students people who are at the very top
of their game this whole thing is about
the Train the Train of transmission when
you actually effectively castrate or
give a hysterectomy to a professor so
they cannot reproduce what you're doing
is you're harming the ability to
propagate the specialness that allows
that that the machine tools of those
discoveries you're confusing the
important measure
the tool in the machine tool the machine
tool is the tool that makes tools mm-hmm
it's it
III just I think it's an incredible
opportunity and you know you also have
written on the subject of anger right
this is a question of functional anger
mmm-hmm I find that outrageous what you
just said and I don't think that I find
it outrageous because I'm flush with
chemicals I'm and I don't think it's
because it's my brother if you were to
talk to me about Douglas pressure
Douglas pressure was one of the people
who gave us green fluorescent protein or
GFP he was driving a shuttle bus in
Huntsville Alabama before I was
championing my brother I was championing
Douglas pressure because how could it be
that the person who should have been on
the Nobel Prize for GFP in full view of
the academic community was driving not
only a shuttle bus in Huntsville Alabama
but after being featured in the New York
Times with a full you know top
above-the-fold picture of Doug a year
later he was still driving a shuttle bus
and feel about it so and I mean this
with all academic rigor what the is
wrong with that thought process that
that's what you think so I think like
I'm not sure you're clear in your own
mind as to exactly which bit of this you
find offensive it seems to me that from
the way that you were just talking about
the Douglas pressure that a lot of it
for you is about credit and who gets
credit it's about reproduction so your
your problem is that Douglas pressure
didn't get to have stood as this
pressure didn't get to have students
this is this is just like an amazing
inability to understand what the game is
if you rather did get to have student
know he didn't well I mean no he didn't
he went on to teach didn't he have
students taught at an a weird
undergraduate institution with no
graduate program you're really not
getting it but did he choose to teach
there and didn't he see that teaching
his description of that teaching there
was that it was extremely valuable to
him yeah
it's a very sweet story and right now
for example I have a discord group and I
am teaching people with no formal
background how to see gauge Theory the
key point is that you don't understand
what a university is it's a very special
place and who gets to reproduce and who
doesn't is the story of our future I
mean this is about so we belong to this
Jewish tradition and I always use the
same phrase lador Vidor from generation
to generation what has gone wrong in the
Academy that it sees things in terms of
credit status and all these things it's
about the resources and the ability to
reproduce students in an incredibly
intensive relationship where there is a
transmission you see in my field in
mathematics the top mathematicians they
have not externalized what they know
into their papers it's a fraction of
what they know you still can't get at
these relationships from reading work
you actually have to go and you have to
sit with the people who produce the
papers because it's the machine tools I
mean it's weird to me that like in some
way we agree more than I thought I would
we I thought we would on that point
um I mean that look I think that
teaching is the fundamental activity of
a university they don't think so but you
so there's some other magic way that
this reproduces research is the
fundamental activity of the research
universities the problem with the
university is that it's a confusion and
if you think about the biathlon which is
what I always give us an example I was
first time I heard about the biathlon I
left cross-country skiing and riflery
what the hell are these two activities
doing in one sport well if you live in
Finland you know exactly why you would
want to combine those two activities
because you've got Russians on your
eastern border right and so in general
this is an activity that's important in
Norway and Sweden and Finland and
Russian places like that because you
shoot the enemy while on skis ok the
teaching University is an incredible
confusing object to many people because
of the Vannevar bush pact called the
endless frontier we agreed that we were
going to have the federal government's
investment in blue sky research only
done through the university's
effectively and that meant we took an
incredibly important facility and we
confused it with teaching
now there's an extent to which those are
symbiotic that they boost each other the
teaching and researcher sort of happy
complements to each other and there's a
way in which they conflict I don't
understand how you think this
reproduction so so so there's suppose um
you're gonna reproduce yourself in me
how do you do that without teaching me
well the kind of teaching that we
usually talk about when we talk about
teaching it tends to be very focused on
the undergraduate so when you said
didn't my brother get to leave students
you're talking about a relationship of
graduates and under you're talking about
a relationship to undergraduate students
because there is no graduate student
there for me that line is not as as as
heavy how many members of your
department on the faculty don't have
PhDs don't have PhD HD I believe all of
them have PhD so that's new in
philosophy that is like the older
generation there were a number the day
now you have the situation in which you
have a requirement in order to be able
to reproduce where you have done
research this kind of close teaching
this apprenticeship good and so like I
think that you can say so this this
helps clarify a situation so you can say
your brother was deprived of an
opportunity to do a certain kind of
teaching let's talk about Douglas
pressure
Douglas Pasha was fully deprived of
opportunity to any kind of teaching
right furthermore he wasn't able to do
any more of that kind of research he
couldn't get resources he in fact gave
over his work because his grant mana
right I'm ready King okay I don't I'm
not as interested in the person who's
good at administrative games who got to
stay in the game I'm more interested in
the Douglas pressures and getting the
Predators the hell out of the way
so that these guys can continue to work
in other words they need a starker
alright the Yiddish for a strong you
know muscle yeah so you need muscle to
make sure that the sweet people who
actually can do great work aren't preyed
upon you have sharp Minds and sharp
elbows and the key point somebody's got
to break the sharp bellows right that's
very important to me I mean I'm but look
there's there's a question about and
maybe you've seen many hundreds or
thousands of these cases I would say
thousands I would say tens right and
like into you know in listening to that
podcast that was listening to it for me
one case right and then I also have to
go with my own so you haven't seen much
of this I mean you're at the philosophy
department I know nothing about how you
guys do right what I will say is is that
in situations like let's take a
situation where there's no skullduggery
within academics but a career stops so
every scale wah couldn't be a more
important mathematician more or less
created group theory and Galois theory
the the day before he died in a duel
right does it matter that he died yes
hugely well why we have Galois Theory
have group Theory thank you very much
right we could have more we could have
much more and so the issue of just sort
of the casual indifference to saying
that the system works that the story and
the work could proceed is a stunning
fact to me like to me you know ray sips
a loquitur the thing speaks for itself
and the idea that that is a normal part
of academics is effectively the proof to
me that there's something wildly wrong I
mean I guess I just think that there's a
question like so part of that story was
a lot of like venality and pressures
that come from people wanting credit for
things and people wanting you know
caring about name and reputation and etc
and there's a question there I'm suppose
we got rid of that suppose we could
somehow change people's psyche so that
they didn't care about that
suppose we had the ability to leave
students
gained resources within the system
without needing to care about that let's
proceed from there
because I think there's gonna be more or
less almost the last thing so it comes
back to status which is where we began
with so my claim is is that status is
approximate and the ultimate is the
ability to transmit and create knowledge
and the key issue here is is that
lacking a PhD and lacking the ability to
compete for grants handily which are
status mediated means that your line
becomes self-extinguishing that's the
real issue yeah I do think that this
actually where it gets back to his
happiness right um that my life can't be
about whether my line is extinguished or
not my life has to be something the
meaning of which comes home to me and
like it's not that that's not integrated
into an activity in which I try to put
something forward but like the the point
of the pursuit of knowledge can't be to
be always handing down the tools to get
to hand down the tool some more right
would it keep different place for our
next disagreement you were taking the
point of view of Soma I of germ you of
the self and I have lineage so I think
we have a great opportunity to begin our
next conversation I just want to say I
find you utterly charming a huge workout
mentally it's a great pleasure you're
welcome to come back any time
and thank you so much for dropping by
thank you all right you've been through
the portal portal with a dr. agnes
colored from the university of chicago's
philosophy department please subscribe
to us on Apple stitcher Spotify wherever
you listen to podcasts and if we could
ask you to go over to YouTube and not
only subscribe and click the bell icon
to be notified whenever we drop our next
video episode will try to tighten up the
time between the audio and the video
be well everybody of the season
[Music]
[Music]