bored medians or together Tech where
we're working on her first project idea
cafe at least before we start that's
what we're working on who knows it
working off by the end of this
conversation feel like I don't remember
what we talked about last week I should
probably should have said that before we
went live as far as corporate structure
funding and form of transparency
introvert question I'll make a rule and
that sounds about right
I also have looked at that very quickly
the blog post I think was a blog post
the article that you had put in the
agenda for today and I think there is
some stuff there too to talk about even
though I haven't fully read it movie
pieces you might have to explain to me
if you can if you can if your brains
meet I meditated before this but I
couldn't sit still so my brain is also
my second cup of coffee mushrooms today
so I don't remember what I took on for
last week I think you just took on being
here right that was so yeah yeah yeah I
don't specifically remember maybe we
should write the action items next time
but maybe I still haven't heard from the
web developer she orange surgery and so
she contacted me and was like she's like
usually takes me a month to do these I
don't know why it's taking me so long
I'm like I don't know either
that's just how the universe works like
it'll be done when it to be done and
everything happens kind of in its own
time
I don't want to let it like what's the
word like I don't want to let it not
like not being communication because I'm
idle because of my social anxiety and
not wanting to fund her but at the same
time I don't want to bug her like I you
know I want to like if taking it off her
plate you say okay well we'll find
another way is the option but that
doesn't even feel right at the moment
because I'm like I don't know when I
would tell someone else to do with it
okay which is kind of like waiting for
it to be done so that I can upload the
blog and put more of the the new more
ideas like Hagia cafe and things that
are more connecting rather than just
information driven which is what the
website is basically like the history
platform and the political platform
which are all
important but they're not as like
game-changing for individuals as having
the ability to connect with people for a
conversation or feed ourselves and do
the things that are more about the
platform in the system than they are
about just information and sense making
collectively so yeah I think for last
week I took on finishing the video
series which I did I finished it I put
the descriptions I uploaded it it's set
to go live for the next you know up
until the 13th I started I didn't have
it done by the first which I knew I
wasn't going to so I decided to start
releasing them on my grandmother's
birthday because it's another
significant day for me which is December
4th and on that day I don't know if you
saw by a periscope I my second bracelet
like my necklace came off on my friend's
birthday and that this other my bracelet
came off on my grandmother's birthday
and it was the day that I ended up
smoking pot someone accidentally and it
was slow and I have the next sleep and
such so I was like yeah so policing it
that day seemed to be a powerful I think
it was was a good poem and yeah I've
gotten a few more subscribers on this
channel which is always what's the word
like unreasonably exciting for me
because my subscriber is like still
under a hundred but I just let myself
have that have that moment as long as
yeah I think it's that's good to enjoy
the moments yes exactly and so that is
the video series is being released I
think that once that's out being able to
and and I did the runtime for it I like
wrote down all of it it's um it's like
just under 35 minutes for all ten of
them together including the intro and
the conclusion and/or the intro and how
to how to get involved so I think that
that is a reasonable amount of time for
someone to sit and listen to me talk or
without actually when it's somewhat
succinct in in smaller doses can be
broken up so yeah I don't they I guess
we can talk about the leap that I had
that
phillipe that wasn't a leap believe it
was more believe yeah begin here what
you were what your inspiration was well
it was just like so the idea cafe
although I love it is is mine like it's
no I don't mean it's mine like I own it
I mean like the YouTube channels what my
I think my idea cafe would look like
right so it's like what my dashboard of
my conversations would look like and
there's me and when we're discussing but
what we want in a conversation but even
with you here that's two of us and so
extrapolating that to the rest of the
population clearly isn't great right
like it's like there's things that the
two of us don't know like the introvert
thing right but it's like I really want
introverts to know how awesome this is
that even though we're both introverts I
don't know how to get that right like I
don't know how to actually market them
and so when we'd kind of talked about
this last week like finding a bigger
group what I want is a large group to
collaborate with right I want my valued
or hundreds of people in order to say
hey what do you want in a collaboration
platform what is the most powerful thing
I think the communication tool is the
place to start but like we've had the
conversation the zoom like zoom meets
that function in a way that YouTube
doesn't because you don't have to be
live on YouTube right you don't have to
have the saying that's the piece that it
works for me that doesn't work for other
people is that vulnerability of being
live and recorded that people don't
necessarily participate in and we want
those people to participate because
they're the ones we want to create we
don't want to create it for this social
media gurus who were perfectly fine
being on camera and having their voice
out on Twitter or any Instagram and
getting followers at least you know and
I've wanted for everyone those people
included but also all the people who
don't feel comfortable putting
themselves out there that way so the
idea was basically collaborating on a
collaboration platform that having
putting out a call to game B people
specifically for them to bring their
projects with them like not do this
instead of yours but like how can we
what would a collaboration platform
looks like that helps Remzi with common
planet that helped you know Janelle with
her her one what would help like what in
you
there I think there's a few types of
projects that people like technology but
they're not doing it like we're doing it
open source it's not open source like
transparence and everyone can be
involved they'd like to know this does
her on her own right she's like I have
an idea and I made it I'm like that's
awesome I don't have that ability but
also it means that everyone has their
own little baby they're looking after
instead of one common baby that can
actually bring baby like can actually
bring people and marketing and all that
to all of the projects whether they're
game B or not C idea is to create a
collaboration platform that's
specifically designed for game B but
also designed for all of the game B
people's projects right like because
that is game like if you can Omni win
how help people with their mission on
the planet but they're here to do in a
way that works for them right that's
where creating something for just the
two of us and then extrapolating that to
the population isn't as greatest but
even getting those hundreds and for
thousands of people we need a bigger
small group to discuss what does that
look like so if there's let's say five
of us and extrapolating something that
works for the five of us the population
is much better than one or two of course
and so saying and I what I mean is the
idea Cafe is like my idea on a thousand
of meze collaborating like like it's
extrapolating that oh like this is gonna
work for everyone I can do YouTube so
they must be able to - forgetting that
it took me three years to get
comfortable being live sharing my ideas
and getting it wrong on camera other
people aren't there and so bringing more
people into a collaboration on the
collaboration platform including like
how do we make decisions how do we do
this who wants to join us for this if we
decide to do it in this time space or
who want or create another time space to
discuss that right how can we create
something that facilitates all of our
projects and then also not also just
that just like but with the idea of more
people joining right like not just the
five of us how do we create something
for the five of us how would we create
this so we can have a thousand keep up
with or even put in 10,000 people - 13
put in right right now with what we have
unzoom and such we could probably do
with 100 or 200 or 500 people throw time
since Roe it'd be a lot harder to
coordinate that with 10,000 people with
spreadsheets and and whatnot but having
those conversations of what that looks
like kind of gives us just like we're
already doing gives us the idea of what
we need to have the beta that we can all
improve on that can bring that's what I
was saying before there seems to be a
few a handful of type of projects that
people want to do in game be technology
projects on their own or in small groups
any other small group project but a lot
of them are like well let's meet in
person and do something locally like
start a community and I think those are
very powerful but also if every
different group is having that come like
that's not a new one that's not anyone
can join that's not but facilitating
those projects is saying hey even if
you're in Texas and I'm in DC and I want
to start a community and you want to
start a community how can we collaborate
on the information how can we
collaborate on what what laws are in
Texas what laws are in VC but also what
what the plumbing system is what the
electricity system and it's right like
it might not be the same one of course
but we could collaborate on that
research and so looking at where our
people in game be what do they think is
the next step which is what the idea
cafe is kind of do it dealing with and
then how do we have conversations about
facilitating not the actual project but
the underlining collaboration platform
that facilitates those projects does
that make sense
yeah yeah like yeah how would they how
can we make it efficient for each of
these individual groups to discuss and
also to have feedback from other people
and the other groups doing other stuff
so you know like you know I may not be
in the place yeah I could be in a lot of
the technology stuff I've thought about
but I haven't implemented kind of a time
swapped to where you know I might help
in my cases being a developer I might
develop on someone else write some code
for someone else's project and then they
would help me write some code for mine
right so we're not swapping money or
anything like that but also just with
ideas or documentation on these other
projects or just helping figure problems
yeah
I think that's that too that's kind of
Saturday Maureen with my brother was
like I wanted it to be right with people
bring their projects and we kind of
facilitate that process to the best we
can on camera with the ability but this
is even like how would we facilitate a
time swamp then right like it's not the
beta we would want to create it's at the
beta I want to create because I don't
have anything to really trade besides
having a conversation with people but I
can see the power in it right if that's
what everyone else wanted to create I
would be part of the conversations that
help create that it's like what is the
beta essence of having so that we all
don't have to fix the same problem over
and over again which is what I'm talking
about the video series the marketing
problem the funding problem the created
something amazing but how do you
actually keep it going get it out there
and how do they you know um help each
other when people are working on the
same project in repetition they're gonna
dissipate the energy right they're gonna
like some people gonna be on this this
platform some people are gonna be on
this platform that's not a problem if we
can facilitate the thing that you have
one platform and you're still like as an
individual I could be part of Janelle's
project and part of Renzi's project and
part but I have one central thing that I
have to look out I don't have to log on
to theirs and log on so there's a lot of
on stairs that's probably much more
complicated in technology but to have at
least the conversation like what would
that look like that's where a lot of
blockchain that I find powerful is going
is like instead of having your Facebook
account your Instagram account you own
your own and then somehow it goes up on
there but you're the one who owns that
you only need to look at this one and
interact with this one and it's somehow
still like a Zen Facebook doesn't own
you right when you it's like well
actually my friends are funneled into
this so no doesn't matter and that leads
well into the UM the new moats system
stuff that you were you were talked
about which I'm actually just gonna put
up on the screen for people and though I
meant to do it I meant to do both things
in our comments section of them
sometimes it does weird things
they're not gonna click on it
unfortunately they need to make it
clickable but if you want to go and look
it up and I'm sure if you google grey
locks and do both
yeah and for that I was really just
looking I was I was thinking about a
business idea and then I was thinking
very game a and like okay so to make
this defensible you know I need to it
was an AI solution for making
conversations go better so if I keep
that that learned AI system internal and
don't share it with anyone then it's you
know it gives me more leverage and game
a but it's counterproductive
overall and the very you know not game B
at all so I was just thinking to have
some sort of guidelines to help people
that are that are thinking of working in
the game B space what are some of these
kind of game a lessons that we need to
unlearn when we're talking about in my
case technology and our business so even
if it's not hard and fast rules or
anything like that it might just be like
a lower warning hey you're gonna want to
have intellectual property you're going
to want to have patents but those are
not inherently game B so that's just
kind of what I was what I was
brainstorming about when I wrote that
down and and that was that one article
was just one that had a good kind of
list of kind of some of the standard
motes that people put around their
businesses based on knowledge hoarding
that we would that probably you know
wouldn't be as effective in a game view
space yeah absolutely and I think those
motes like they make really good sense
in game a and because of that like we
want pieces of them in game B right like
to transition because it's like we don't
want to create something and have
Facebook steal it we don't want to
create something and then have have it
go away because everyone's you know
dissipate it all over the place and
that's where I think the centralization
of an idea and then the creation of it
helps with a lot of that because
it doesn't help with the interpersonal
piece though right a lot of it is our
feeling on but wait it's mine oh wait I
don't want to do all this work and have
someone else take take it I don't want
to do all this this you know which is
understandable and also the more we're
able to own that and step into right but
everything I can gain by having this via
open source everything I can gain by
having this not be patentable is I get
all of the stuff everyone else creates
it's not valuable and not and it's hard
to get into expression when it's your
first one right like when it's the first
one and you're like but wait someone can
still steal it someone can still make
this an issue and then the ret I don't
get the rest anyway right because
because people aren't coming on board
and you be giving their ideas but it's I
think doing it in a way that does feel
safe enough for you as the creator right
so if that needs to have some amount of
lack of transparency like it not the
open source code yet right that's kind
of what my brother's doing with with the
imbd for politicians he doesn't
necessarily see the vision I do in this
big open cooperative that everyone's a
part of but he's like he sees it
eventually it needs to be owned by the
people but it's his baby until then
right and I think if that helps people
create we want the creation more than we
want and so even if the underlining
pieces can be right that like eventually
it'll be there it's gonna be harder to
let it go at that stage right because
like wait but where's my millions at all
over here so I wish you might even get
right but it's like it's a different
space to like sell something to the
collective and negotiate with the
collective to give it up and just create
it with the collective and there is like
with what we're creating we're putting
time in we're putting our energy like
our our passion our intellect into this
and we might never see a dollar from it
right and there's cost to that but the
more we're willing to be in that space
that we might never we also might right
there might be a way for us to be able
to this to be our profession and to get
paid for it forever for what we did in
the beginning
but not be millionaires billionaires
right which I don't think is what
either of us are seeking and the more we
can just honestly own that feeling of
like it's mine and I want like it's like
I want to create something better for
Dane B and I'm a human being who needs
to feel like I'm safe and so I the only
reason I've been able to put mine up
there in this way that brought you in
that hopefully will bring other people
in is in my head without be able to
explain it I got to the fiber I was like
oh this is safer when it's transparent
this is safer it protects me protects
our thing Facebook can't do what we're
doing so they can't steal it another
person could steal it and make it make a
cooperative that's open source that's
this and but if it's truly what we're
creating we could just go onboard to
them like there isn't something
stealable until we make something that
maybe is only you know I mean it's it's
great but it's a thousand people on
Facebook does steal it it makes it with
a million people and it's something that
can make money and something it could be
done in game a but the off branches
can't be so if our thousands still stuck
with us because we offer them something
Facebook didn't which is they own their
data which is they have a vision of a
better future
they're still gonna stick here instead
of going at least enough of them but
then we'll bring in other people and
bring in other people if we're offering
them something that they don't have and
we absolutely can the issue is if the
idea isn't quite there and I don't mean
it's not like it's not intellectually or
emotionally there right like if you
can't see that piece of what is gained
by the whole and because there are
things Facebook and absolutely steel and
Google can absolutely steal or buy out
and if they can't buy it out they just
recreate it right like yeah and just say
no it's mine I'm gonna keep it because
they'll just recreate it and they have
the people and they have the money but
there are things we can create like the
idea Cafe itself right if they created a
video platform for people to be able to
come on and ask the question they could
be successful overnight and that would
be amazing but then we could use it to
create the co-operative right like we
can just like read Facebook and discord
and all of these spaces there's still
something else it's like this is our
first step we need to create to be able
to collaborate
operation platform and so there's like
the next step that they can't do there's
a step they can't do but I don't know
what your project is to be able to find
that piece of it right to be able to say
yes this is the the next piece that we
can do because like that needy and to
keep it blocked off right so that it's
safe also stops it from being made even
more awesome by the collective made even
better by like the hive mind and that
you know collective intelligence and
also stops like it protects it and costs
it a lot and we're able to get to
dissolve that in a safe way that feels
safe for the individual which is it like
hey that's our intellectual property now
right it's still yours it's like how do
we and that's part of having the
conversations is honoring that right we
want if we want people to bring their
ideas to the table and still feel safe
enough how do you maintain ownership of
your idea while bringing it to the
collective to be worked on right like
how do you kind of keep like my worry
and it's just an ego worry is that like
I get kicked off my own project right
that like somehow I'm not the right
personality to do this and so we get 20
people together and they're like but not
you right like there's no like okay
you've given what you have to give
you're not a coder you're not this
you're not welcome and there's a real
worry there at the same time if I was
instrumental in creating it to that
point I'll find something else to do
I'll work on the things that they're
creating to create something better for
myself you know maybe I'm like but it's
still worry it's still there I can't own
it and also um I wasn't able to put it
out there until that worry was was
lessened enough by the fact of like
right if someone steals the idea I get
to use the idea good awesome
I want the idea out there more than I
want ownership of the idea but there are
things that I'm like I can see the
bigger picture and you're gonna break it
if you do it this way and not that way
and there's pieces of that that I also
get to own it right that's what I bring
to the table is the bigger vision and I
know the project's not going to be as
good if I'm not a part of it like I have
something
offer and so they're gonna lose
something but you not being there and
they might choose that might be okay the
thing that happens and I'll have to deal
with it at the time yeah we yeah we
can't we have to start from game a
unfortunately so we can't you know
required force kind of you know absolute
game be principles as we make it safer
for people because one one of the fears
is that you know I'm gonna spend all my
time on this and then I'm not going to
have enough money to afford a place to
live or something right you know so I
put all this effort into it and and not
be able to survive and and you know yeah
and give all that that ability to
monetize it in a game a way but yeah but
I think as we work on our individual
sovereignty
then we're freed up from that so yeah so
it's very much kind of a transition
thing like I'm I think I'm comfortable
with all my code being open source so my
current project everything's open source
I know a part of it has to be because
it's a ranking algorithm and people have
to know have to be able to inspect the
algorithm to make sure that it's fair so
that part I has to be open source are
known will use it because you can trust
well there might be some uses for it but
it won't be nearly as useful if if
people don't know how it works so I had
to kind of come to terms with not having
any real defensible IP for the
intellectual property for that but yeah
but I mean if if I really you know had
someone paying me you know a a living
wage and said okay go work on this and
you know if you really it'd be even
easier to make it fully open and not
care if anyone does anything with it
because I don't have to worry about my
basic needs
yeah and I think those that is a human
need right to know you're gonna be
taking care of to know your kids are
gonna be taking care of to know you're
not going to start but have a roof over
your head I know I have that need and my
need is met by by governments but if my
government goes away or they choose that
I'm too much of a rebel for them to keep
supporting me and they find a way to
kick me off there's a real worry I can't
work like that's not actually a
possibility to go and find unless
someone's literally gonna pay me for
what I'm doing which is having a
conversation how we create a game being
cooperative like which isn't I don't
know how to get paid at this right now I
have a vision on honey unicorn in the
future which is good enough that I'm
willing to risk it and I know it'll be
potentially even better than what I can
envision right like what I envision for
people who are who are involved right
now right like people who are involved
in the beginning when there's the most
risk is politicians in Canada they make
a pension for life after they've served
one term it's not like you know what I
mean it's not millions of dollars but
it's enough that if you serve four years
I don't even know it maybe up serve
eight years but you get a certain amount
of money and crazy in a way where it's
that where like if you're on the board
of directors for a year you get your
base wage of thirty thousand dollars
plus ten thousand dollars every year
you're on you get an extra ten pesos for
life right and so but it has to be at a
sustainability level right like we have
to be a multi-million dollar company to
be able to stick sustain board of
directors to pay them ten thousand
dollars for life but if you're on the
board of directors for the first four
years because that's kind of probably
will move more open it up for there to
be it to be more democratic and people
can vote who's on there right we have to
figure out how to work as a function and
then make it make it more open that and
we can also build into it that wait
before we December went public we were
on it we were working on it for six
months in my case three four years that
needs to be paid for right so even if we
never make it on the first board of
directors that it's voted in that
there's some amount of like pension you
know right in order for anything to work
like it has to be a small enough number
the
masses are okay with it and a large
enough number that we feel it's worth it
right that like okay well even if this
isn't your baby even if crazy on
technology cooperativeness at your baby
but you see the vision of the tools that
can be created later to risk this so
that you can then do your baby later
right you'll have the tools to do your
baby and it's you know you're gonna have
you're doing this for four years you
have forty thousand dollars and ten
thousand is a very arbitrary number it
could be 15,000 20,000 a year right
we're putting more risk in at the
beginning but if we were like a million
dollars a year know I'm signing on for
that and we're never getting it right if
it's two thousand dollars a year well
you have to basically work your whole
life to get a slip above wage anyway so
that's not very
that's not enticing and so that's just a
idea right that's not what I'm saying is
what is happening but there might be
even the old model is we get a
percentage of this right we get 10% of
everything with this thing brings in and
it breaks it because then what is the
next person yet and what is the next
person get whereas if it's at a penny if
it's a pensionable amount if it's
something that if this is successful we
get this for life and we're working on
descaling the economy so that if we're
making fifty thousand it's worth more
and more and more because we want it to
worth more and more for everyone want to
pay employees a livable wage we want to
be able to have a board of directors
that is what's the word incentivized
enough that they can focus on this right
and put in the risk
we're just rescued an hour a week and
our you know the idea that maybe we'll
be kicked out maybe someone else will
steal the idea that's also the point
right like we're I mean I am putting my
heart and soul and but I'm not putting
my money on the line
right I'm not putting its my my savings
account that I can't afford to lose on
the line because that does not feel safe
to me I know safer if there's a hundred
of us putting a hundred dollars and now
we have ten thousand dollars to work
with right like that's the level I would
put it in I'm not putting it in ten
thousand dollars if I have it and that's
my last dollar and so same with my time
I'm not gonna like risk my body by like
everything to put everything into this
when it might not go anywhere the more I
can see it going somewhere the more
and I think that'll be the case around
the board right like if we all the
sudden had it if it if my 10 series
thing goes viral and we have 10,000
people watching this next week it brings
more energy to it right we see people
stepping up to do to do the work then
you're gonna be more willing to step up
and do the work to be more willing to
put money on the line you can see it
going somewhere then in the beginning
when it's in my head and in your head
right and Mike how do we how do we
create it I'm sorry not to mention I
realize you're not sure who drops so
just instruct me oh yeah yeah I think
that's all great I think yeah either
some sort of I mean yeah lots of ways to
solve that issue but we do need to at
some point figure out how to make sure
that people don't have to working on the
projects and on the board don't have to
struggle to you know have their needs
met and that might be you know solving
basic income for everyone in the whole
community at some point yeah let's do
that
yeah great that's just so bad no it's I
think making sure that the people who
have committed the most who have taken
the most stewardship on this right which
is us at the moment have our needs
methanol's so that we can focus more on
it right like there's definitely things
in my leg they invite someone come and
clean my house if I had a chauffeur if I
had those things sound like very
ridiculous things only the super-rich
need but the more I had someone offset
those spoons the more energy I would
have to give to this project but
nobody's gonna do that for me right now
and I don't have the money to do that
right now but the more I was able to
have like I honestly wouldn't want to
wage I would want that instead for me
right but yours would be like no I want
actual money like I want to be able to
not need that from there right whereas
anyway so like finding out like that
what's the hello chip or Nettie Anthony
I'm just gonna I ten that's your last
name properly I'm doing um was I saying
but the timeshare right if it's like
well I can put help brainstorm and find
the holes of your project if that's
helpful some people really don't want
that I'm more million and that doesn't
even mean someone needs to come clean my
house but if I can put that out there
someone might write so it might be like
yeah that's what I can offer and you're
doing something that's like that's a
completely different energy also someone
coming to clean my house because they
think I have something to give to the
world it's completely different than me
hiring someone and them being my servant
like it's it's they're just very
different I'm both way more grateful for
somebody to come cleaning my house for
free it's offset my labor and they're
like it's a position of equality right
not a position of power which is what I
want to create in the world is less less
hierarchy but that's just my kitchen so
did we want to continue down the the
agenda maybe talk about values which I
think when you put values there I think
that's the same thing I was thinking of
when I said principles for projects and
designs still always saying it although
I did that opposite with the moats and
the intellectual property protections
and stuff yeah I think it'd be good to
kind of start fleshing those out so that
we can express the ideas to other people
which you probably I imagine covered
quite a bit in your videos already I
covered why a technology cooperative is
the tool that will be amazing for us to
be able to make a better world hopefully
I hope I did that it was basically just
like text powerful it's risky but it's
more powerful and less risky and this
has never been done before we've never
had a thing that we own that is open
that is transparent that we can make
better we've had people be like I've
created this same use it oh it didn't
get used right that's not the same as
right but if it fails then we'd the next
one's better and the next one's better
we never put in more money and time than
we can afford to lose right we don't
devastate our personal lives and our
world to create this because it only
works if it's better than what's already
out there and I hope that's what I
explained the videos there's like I said
there's other ones to add on including
the values one because the values one is
essentially what I need to be in a
project for me to want to be on
with it and there are there values that
I come back to on every single project
and I don't know if they're the same for
you I don't know if they're the same for
other people but I'm like I'm kind of
not willing to work on something that
isn't isn't these values further for
within reason the transparency piece I
don't think people have to be
comfortable being live on YouTube right
like this is a whole other level of
transparency because we don't have the
people we want more people involved but
I do think we need live board meetings
that our members can watch right like I
do think that that level of transparency
were the people who are involved can see
what is being done on their behalf and
offer suggestions and do like there's a
cost and benefit that comes with
transparency and I think the benefit far
away's the cost but that means the board
of directors has to be comfortable being
on camera like that's part of being on
the board of directors just like it's
part of being a politician right you
have to be live we're making the
decisions for your country
that that is is a piece of that we want
to be creating tools to make it ever
more transparent and information so
transparency is one what does
transparency I guess let's go through
them what does transparency mean to you
and is it something that you think is
vital yeah I thought you transparency
quite a bit so all my codes open-source
and stuff like that I like like the
ideas of like I even heard someone in
one of the ministers in Taiwan has a
rule that anyone can come talk to them
but either it needs to be recorded and
as a video and put online or we need to
be able to take a transcript and then
you can you know there's a little bit of
negotiation over the transcript and
stuff like that so that sort of thing to
where all decisions are done in the open
I really like so yes that's that's one
of my values as well mm-hmm you know I
think it also like all of these are not
so that I can be the CEO and be in
charge it's so if I'm not the see right
like if I'm never if I get kicked off
the board like as my worry then you
don't read to me like if I'm the net
that one millionth person in the ten
millionth person in do I feel I have
value do I feel like
I'm as much understanding as I think
transparency does not in a way that yeah
that's definitely a design principle I
heard of my camera that the official
name for it but it's where you you
design a system but everyone who's
designing the system understands that
they're going to be assigned a random
position in the social hierarchy so if
is an economic system you might be a
poor person you might be a rich person
but it's just randomly assigned how
would you design the system not knowing
where are you going to be so people in
that case would into design a more fair
system because they don't know there was
if that was like in a philosophy class I
was in were they talked about like you
could just erase your memory and not
know who you're designing it for you the
king or you the peasant what is the
society look like and there was a Doctor
Who episode like that two of war two
warring factions and they took away
their memory to not know who was like
it'd be like the Palestinians their
Israelis you know the history but you
actually don't know which side you're on
when you're making the decisions right
those are gonna be a completely
different oh wait I don't yeah let's
make this more fair I love that concept
if only we could do it if only we could
erase people's memories to the point
where they didn't know who they were but
knew the history yeah so the other the
next value I have is democracy which is
a weird because it's like people look at
democracy like the sheep or sorry the
Wolves voting what to eat for dinner and
they're gonna eat the Sheep and my life
value is democracy or better right like
it doesn't mean democracy like we dumb
it down or meat like it's like um we use
I can't remember the word the thing
that's better than democracy or you all
talk you become a consensus consensus is
making as much as possible but there
comes a point when like right if we
can't come to consensus there has to be
we have to have forward momentum and so
having a conversation about something
forever until you isn't productive but
democracy or better is what I need there
to be ya wonder if it's a phrase for you
know participatory or something like
that yet where everyone you know has a
say of some sort in the
I'm sure there's a phrase that covers
all of those because yeah ideally you
know I'm developing a group
decision-making tool so my idea would be
that be the tool but it's not ready yet
even even and then it needs to be
validated but but yeah so that that
principle of everyone kind of being able
to participate in some form or fashion
in the decision-making process I think
is important yeah and bringing it back
to that other thing that we don't know
the name of like designing it so that
you don't know where you fit right you
don't know and so you might be which is
also important like in a meritocracy
it's like well I'm smart so we should we
should value smartness over it's like do
you know you're smart do you know what
like do you want that to me the end-all
be-all but that's the only thing that
matters because maybe you're not as
smart as you think you are I should tell
you if you think you're smart you're
probably not but that's yeah
anti-correlated just so if you think
you're the best in everything you're
probably but anyway did that yeah
designing it
designing persists Vittori
decision-making with the understanding
that you don't even know where you fit
in it right like that's the same with
him for designing a collaboration tool
we're designing it for the five of us
but with the idea there's thousands of
the five of us not just the five of us
it's like our personalities are whatever
it's about so democracy or better which
to me is like liquid democracy on the
board but again there could be something
way better than that but it's like how
do you make decisions with millions of
people you need a tiny group to kind of
actually have a conversation move it
forward yeah and so on the quadratic
voting that they have and liquid
democracy it's a lot of options out
there nowadays yeah and it would be that
it wouldn't be mop for my brain right it
wouldn't be like well because I like it
it's like use the democracy to decide on
democracy right like what's the good and
bad of each system and can we design one
with all that good and none of the bad
and if not which one is that right which
one is the best and diversity is a value
by hold not in a token diversity not in
a
although it's important to own hey there
aren't enough of these people being
represented how do we find them to ask
them because we want them here we want
their vision we want their there but
literally individual diversity like who
are you what do you need what do you
want is the diversity you bring with you
all of your diversity and if we design
it for you it works for everybody like
you and then if there's also people who
aren't like you so you need people who
are like you and not like you in every
single way and to honor that that like
we are not always going to agree on
something there's a value in what you
think that it's the same as me because
it feels good I love it and there's a
lot of value in the opposition and to
like that there is oh you like right now
with the left and the right the left one
so like move forward and the right ones
like old old school there's value in
both of those things the value is in
this value is in putting pinning them
against each other and one's right one's
wrong like what can we have an omni win
can we have it so you can have
old-school whatever communities and yet
we can still move forward and try new
things like how do we bridge that but
that's what I mean by diversity and
again I don't know if it's the best word
is it generally doesn't yeah I don't
know but I can't think of a better word
at the moment but yeah not just
diversity of culture or position but
also on you know each individual's
person's differences making the whole
kind of better a lot of studies showing
that you know more diverse of thought
groups you know have generally have
better outcomes so that's that's just a
wise thing to do and then we all have
people that we love that that we want to
be taken care of and whatever system we
develop regardless of how much perceived
value they provide so also you know
having space for that and also for you
know I always worry about getting
Alzheimer's so at some point I may not
provide any
you know I'd like to make amends value
we're just extremely able as to society
and so whenever there's my view on all
that works that like it's weird that we
we amplify children as these innocent
little vessels that like have so much to
give because of their innocence and yet
then as soon as we get older and lose
some of that we don't look at it in that
way of like hey you have something new
to contribute I know I didn't know that
I've lost some of my brain function I'm
like oh and gave me something different
and I can look at people in my life who
I know have Alzheimer's and like they
repeat the same thing over and over
again and it's like it gets annoying but
unlike right that's to deal with my
annoyance that's to do with like not
just valuing that I don't have that but
also there's something you have to give
like and that's part of my individual
values in the diversity is like
everyone's exactly who they're supposed
to be and we should also probably care
Alzheimer's like cuz I don't think you
go with that or like I value this right
like both of those things together like
if they exist we're supposed to exist
and if they don't want to exist in that
form let's figure out how to not yeah
although I guess I was thinking more
like catatonic state I mean I just use
Alzheimer's but you know I there there
are points to where I can envision
myself in the future being in a state
where I cannot provide value and I would
want to make sure that that I would
still be okay in that state yeah I
literally don't think it's possible for
a human being to be alive and breathing
and their heart beating and not be
providing value like we look at it the
opposite we're like well if you're not
if you're not speaking and you're not
contributing the way that we we hold as
high you're not contributing but just
being somebody that your family loves
just being someone that people need to
take care of is actually its own value
is actually something that you give the
issue is we can't have half our
population like that right we can't have
half our population you need to be taken
care of to the like every one of their
needs met but there is a value and a
love and and something that happens
there that is so valuable that that
gives people
something that isn't there when that
doesn't occur and so I don't think that
there is such a thing like even just
your presence right just you physically
being there still is still like except
for maybe and this is just because I'm
not there yet like you're literally in a
comatose state and you can't blink you
can't communicate you can't do anything
you can't feel pain or pleasure anything
maybe then
but even then you're still there
probably because your loved ones aren't
ready to say goodbye to you right so
they're at that state whatever that
there's value in everyone we're just
extremely ablest in society like then
that's what for me my person like the
diversity comes into play to be able to
ask people like how do you how do I help
you contribute right and how do we see
the value in your contribution and how
do we make sure people who don't see the
value in you when you're like that
aren't killing you because they don't
see the value in you're just a as the
Nazis called it what was the listen high
castle like useless eater it's like
there's literally no such thing as a
useless eater but like that that idea of
like oh we don't let people breed who
are less than we don't let and it's like
any form of ableism is kind of that like
it's like you're not able to work 40
hours you're not you're not a
contributor you're not able to speak
you're not a contributor when from my
experience those things aren't true and
the more as a society we can allow
people to contribute in their own unique
way the more we get their contribution
yes that's all true I would want to
still be careful that we do not require
a contribution in order to be a part of
it yeah yes yeah that's part the
contribution is not requiring a
contribution right like there are people
who will never be able to work in the
field they still get to eat because
they're still contributing even if we
don't see it is the issue right even if
you're just sitting around playing video
games you might not get fed if you can
physically work in a field and you're
not I don't know it depends if we have a
surplus of food right and we're not
making the decision it's not like we're
creating food and then doling it out
it's like the system makes the decision
that's just any whatever yeah if we
create a system we are contributing $10
that we can get to your food but you
can't contribute 10 hours of
we're gonna make exceptions for you
where's we're not gonna make any stops
over someone who could contribute ten
hours a week and just as choosing not to
we're probably not going to allow those
people into the system that we are in
there might be another system for them
that is created for them decide right
but robots make their food and it's a
hundred percent robots I don't know and
we all get robot yeah I I think it's
it's always hard to tell
why some people wouldn't do that I guess
I know of several people that are active
troublemakers and probably have a net
negative impact and by but I thinking
really close on the situation it is not
something that I a better word but blame
them for and I would still prefer that
those people have a basic sets of you
know be able to meet their needs without
a even the assumption that in somewhere
they're providing value I just would
like that to be completely disconnected
from the value that basic set of needs
not even based on the concept that we
assume that everyone has some sort of
value in this we don't measure it but
just the assumption that there are
living being and and the basic needs
should be provided I agree as far as we
can do that we should absolutely yes but
it's not easy to do that
so my last value that it's the only one
I'm willing to like Ben's odd and yet it
in no way am I willing to bet on it is
that the process needs to be enjoyable
that like what we are doing both has to
be like this is enjoyable to be eating
with you and having a conversation is
enjoyable that wasn't I wouldn't be
doing it and so it's not about every
moment of every like struggle and
challenge is also enjoyable but it needs
to be a chosen challenge and struggle
not a you know maybe you're gonna be
meeting with these four people who
despise every week congratulations you
get to grow maybe like that might be
what I choose to do if given the
opportunity but not if the rest of my
needs
and the rest of it isn't enjoyable and
so there's a peace and enjoyable is the
word for me because simple can be
enjoyable so can challenge right it's
it's up to the individual the finds in I
don't get to choose what's enjoyable for
you and you don't get to choose what's
enjoyable for me it's about again the
diversity so game of finding it making
in a way we're like if I don't want to
work with someone I don't have to work
with them and all of these values are
only to the ability that we can do them
with our technology so transparency this
is us being transparent because we can
do it but we're not going to type out
every word and make the data usable yet
right like that might be something
that's done way in the future I don't
know if they're going to come back and
do it with these ones but that is more
transparent right when you can actually
use the information we're talking about
and understand the point like we're not
even really taking agenda notes right
because it's not easy it's not enjoyable
for me so we're not doing it someone
else that will be enjoyable for and
there's that too like the diversity of
allowing and what's enjoyable for me if
everyone was me this wouldn't work if
everyone was you this wouldn't work
it's that what's enjoyable for me I get
to leave what's not enjoyable for me and
let somebody else do it
it works less well with one or two
people as we have a million people it's
like I guarantee you someone's like joy
is taking minutes notes and medians
generally not most people there's not
that person at a meeting but this is
someone needs to volunteer right if we
have an AI take the notes hey someone's
joy is creating the Ganga hey that does
that that definitely exists so they
never have to take minutes and it's like
but there are people out there who put
one there wasn't a stigma to enjoy
taking notes I Garrett it's like people
who are like a math sucks there's tons
of people who I loved I get this this is
how my brain works yeah so the word I
tend to use for that or similar concept
is satisfaction because that kind of
implies you can do a period of hard
working that is not enjoyable but you
get something you know the result is
viable in the end
and it can also you know ice cream is
satisfying to so-and-so yeah I've been I
was working with a group of people on
we've just called an exponential life
satisfaction and the goal of that group
was to find out how everyone how we can
facilitate everyone having more and more
satisfaction in their life and so that
and that kind of fits in with this
project you know with the idea cafe and
all the stuff and it all comes down to
how can we make life more enjoyable or
more satisfying so yeah so that's a
that's a big principle and I guess we
should probably say in all these
principles there are holes that people
can poke in every single one of them we
haven't solved any of them so the you
know the fears that people have on
having everything be enjoyable is that
there might be something that needs to
be done that no one wants to do or not
enough people not enough people to
fulfill that need although you know they
would point that out but I would say
people like fulfilling other people's
needs so even if it's not enjoyable task
some will like doing it just because no
one else is doing it and then they feel
but yeah but that that kind of thing
that that's the fear that people have
hearing that and then the democracy you
know the fear of that is you know are is
everyone going to you know is it going
to be the tyranny than the Jordi or or
other things like that or just people in
endemic are things making short-term
group decisions that then you know has
big so they all have everything I've
said and including the whole thing like
making it or people don't have to work
if they don't want to people are afraid
that for some people that may lead them
into depression because they don't have
someone kind of poking them saying oh
you need to work to feed and and then
they fall into this thing so there's all
those potential downfalls that we need
to figure out and mitigate against but
but but these are our goals and
if it might be helpful for people to
understand that we're not just assuming
that we can make it all work particular
and I told her what the word would be
but the idea that we small we start
small and grow right because we are not
figuring out game B and then flipping
the switch and we're not all playing
game B we're finding a small group of
people to collaborate on creating a
collaboration platform or creating the
idea cafe right so it's like we are
going to get to the stage where where we
have freeloaders sitting around and we
have to feed until we figure out how to
feed people on mass right like we don't
have the problem and so we've solved it
already almost that's part of starting
small and growing is like we don't even
need democracy until we have more people
than can sit on the board who have skin
in the game right who like have are
actually like pain members or
contributing members whatever it is it's
like oh I don't want to be on camera but
I want to have a say we don't have that
person yet really this is Bo until that
person is like hey I don't want to be on
camera but I want to be involved we
figure it out right like that's kind of
like where you are and figure out the
problems like look for the problem right
we want to have those conversations like
what do we do with people who don't want
to contribute those are interesting
conversations to have there satisfactory
conversations to have but we don't
actually need to solve them until it
occurs and so we're like big enough that
that happens and to own our own personal
 of like I don't want to contribute
if no one else is contributing
ok that's your right that's your
stuff that's good stuff to know that's
really important you throw in a word for
you I wonder rather than values or what
word did I use for this sort of thing I
was saying like principals or something
I wonder if it would be good to call
them more like aspirations because we
don't we don't know how we're gonna
implement all this yet it's just
throwing that out there
aspirations cool so I guess we're
getting close to the end of our time
maybe we should how do you feel about
what I said for the delete that isn't
quite a leap cuz never quite worked it
out I was
like type up something the basic idea is
to reach out to the game be people to
see if there's this small group of
people who want to collaborate on
creating a collaboration platform both
for gave me in particular and for their
individual projects like bring yourself
to the table which is you all of your
projects all of your ideas and like how
do we work with those with those people
and we can do this or separate from this
yeah I think that that's a good idea I
don't know like I have mixed feelings on
how effective will be I might be helpful
if we phrase it towards not even like
you know you're using the term platform
and for some people that'll mean
technology and for other people they'll
see that it doesn't necessarily have to
be technology so maybe just even just
saying a group you know that's first
yeah I don't know I just think of some
way to say that because you know they
tend to push back a lot when we say
we're writing any sort of technology
that we get the people on board who want
to do that though right
it's like like the ideas is free this is
kind of what I'm raising it in a way of
like hey we're all individuals with our
own projects that we're passionate about
and how we create al-nouman solutions is
creating all new insertions for us and
our projects right and so coming
together and figuring out how we can
support each other in that and create
the thing that brings the people the
funding just like brainstorming together
right like if we can create a project
that brings people in funding to to the
common planet and whatever genetic one
is that I come up with the name of and
like that solves it like and the tool
cafes and you know to libraries and 3d
printing libraries and whatever people
are involved in then we've sold it for
everyone right if we solve it just for
idea cafe or just for Gabey we kind of
haven't and it's not necessary to create
something that the 500 people in game B
or the thousand people in Granby create
and so having a conversation of like
what tools do we mean I mean I do kind
of want to phrase that the for creating
technology because everyone like even if
you want to create a community physical
community with with plumbing and you
know all that stuff so you're still
looking to collaborate with other
communities and that's technology that's
a platform I don't know how to
communicate that with though because
whenever I've tried to take a
the technology then people want to come
and feed the Kenyans and I'm like that's
not that's not solving world hunger that
you know what I mean like it's like they
want to do a baby project which is great
because it's their baby project but it's
like bringing your baby project and
let's figure out how you would actually
get that off though how could we create
the technology that helps you get them
off the ground
what does Facebook look like if it's
created for collaboration and you know
like then what's the beta that you would
want to use with you and your project I
want to be involved in so you can be
involved in all these projects and then
how do we keep making that better and
how do we fund it together is it with
grants is it with crowdfunding right
like having the conversations that
aren't just the two of us is that
there's more people there's more people
willing to do the work and willing to do
or not because it's not satisfactory to
them right but having that conversation
of like how do we get the thing made it
could just be figuring out a
crowdfunding putting a crowdfunding
platform together crazy and however many
tens of thousands of dollars and then
paying someone in the group or not in
the group to make it right that doesn't
work with two people because I don't
know how to crowd funds like I don't
know how to just create a crowdfunding
campaign that's gonna be successful I
guarantee you if we have five people in
the game bSpace someone there we can put
together a baby video like a beta video
you know I may be his but like the the
one that's much better than what I can
do I mean Eric can already do it Ernesto
can do it then creating like we put on a
crowdfunding campaign and it sucks okay
we learn and we grow we figure out what
we did wrong and like what do we do next
time we have and guaranteed it even if
it sucks completely we're gonna have new
people on board to have to have a
conversation with and so yeah I don't
know what I even asked what I'm saying
I'm gonna do but no that's no but that's
good I like the direction yeah yeah so
just because then I can put out that hey
we're already meeting at this time let's
bring it up or to have conversation here
live because I know listen oh we're
wanting to do that which might be a
barrier for some people but then they
need to come and tell us that's a
barrier for them or we could have a
different time that works for both of us
to do it on zoom' right do it somewhere
where it
non-public it's gonna draw in different
people right I'm fine using this time I
I think that that is you know that is
the the genesis of what we were talking
here is that same thing we want to
accelerate everyone being able to work
together to support each other in these
projects these can be project pyramids
and then um do I like these aspirations
we just went through I think our very
power like I said there what I wanted
something but I think calling them
aspirations just like Omega rules and
aspiration right like we're trying to
live it let's all write up like a little
bit of what each of them is and that
we're trying to live it and trying to
improve on it I don't want someone to
come be like we need a fascist platform
like that we need decision making to
make sense right like as we grow and the
idea is to do like a five-minute video
explaining what we kind of just talked
about and have ernesto filter it down
and then release that to game b and say
hey this is kind of a thing can you find
a smaller group of people to figure out
what we need to have a bigger group of
people work together and then create
that together right with with the unzoom
on whatever because we want to be
allowed many conversations and a lot of
feedback from a larger group of members
and then create it basically create
collaboration platform with
collaboration as big as we can under the
people who want to do it it's
satisfactory for and with the idea we're
always looking to include more people
like you and me are brainstorming how to
include more people right now and then
five people get together and have a
conversation on how to be include dozens
of people and then we go dozens people
they have you know never makes sense to
grow in that way because if we can have
a conversation with five people on
probably include a million people I'm
going to a million but that's not
coordinated all under what we currently
have right yeah yeah yeah but that's
good idea alright so I'm gonna work on
that over the next uh week okay gonna
work on I'm gonna try to get the video
to Ernesto and figure out what that
looks like what's up and city went since
the leap of like how do I actually
explain this
maybe I'll ready watch this because that
sometimes helps when I've been
explaining it not on paper
I'm is there anything you're taking on
in the next week no I'll be here next
Friday awesome
I think that's totally found absolutely
and also next one I'll put on the agenda
we need to discuss taking a break over
Christmas right like what day we go up
to and then when we're back after
because I don't think I'm gonna be I
think I'm gonna take two weeks off of
all of the videos and she's gonna be
hard Thursday's already hard for me
because I have the day off like what do
I do with my time I'm like anything
anything you can do with your time I
don't have a video to attend to move can
be or my own life forward yeah you need
you need some unstructured time I need a
structure by unstructured talking yes I
feel good by on your unplanned time
exactly alright I will see you now see
yep