howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show this is the Jim rut show
I'm your host Jim rut bass guest is
Robin Hanson Robin is an associate
professor of economics at George Mason
University in Fairfax Virginia welcome
Robin great to be here could you give us
just a few words about your economics
department G mu and particularly how it
might be different from other economics
departments well I'm a professor of
economics here at George Mason and our
department is a little unusual
we're in some sense a weak alliance of
contrarians which has some interesting
features because new contrarians really
have an intrinsic alliances is a good
question we tend to be less focused on
high method and more on a you know a
range of interesting questions and so we
also tend to be more publicly engaged in
having blogs and books that are widely
read and that sort of thing well that
sounds real good and certainly you know
you and I have known each other at least
a little bit for a few years and your
range of interests is quite astounding
but when I was looking at your research
interests
I've gone oh my goodness how we're gonna
cook this down to 90 minutes I usually
have to apologize for that which I kind
of still should although there's this
recent book out called range by David
Epstein which is celebrating those of us
who have excessively wide interest in
backgrounds frankly fits me to a tee I
have never done the same job for more
than 18 months in my whole life right
I'm a radical changer of focuses and
that says more about someone like you or
me than it does by 20 year old okay I
think that's probably right anyway let's
hop in last night my wife and I watched
on Black Mirror the episode Rachael Jack
and Ashley - you recently tweeted about
that and I think you mentioned that
they'd actually chatted with you a
little bit about it and you weren't
entirely happy with the result I've had
no contact with Black Mirror peoples at
all so as far as I know they I have no
indication they are aware of me at all
or any of my writings on the subject so
I have this book called the age of M
which is a serious attempt to analyze
what happens when you do brain
emulations and about a third of the
black mayor episodes have included
branding relations which i think is you
know saying that the concept is potent
interesting but when they use brain
emulations in their stories they don't
do it at all in a realistic way that is
brain emulations would radically change
most everything it would be this
enormous disruption of society on the
scale of say the Industrial Revolution
or even the farming revolution but they
usually have an emulation there just for
one little thing that is the world is
mostly familiar except one thing is
different because there's an EM and
that's this doesn't make much sense so
in that particular episode there's a
singer and in order to get more fans
engaged with her they make a brain
emulation of her that they sell to our
fans and you as a fan can talk to an
emulation of the singer and chat with it
and it can help you you know do your
hair and your clothing and you know be
friends which if emulations were
possible isn't a crazy thing to do it's
just crazy to have a world where that's
the only thing they do because basically
atoms could replace everybody on all the
jobs once Em's are cheap enough to do
that well they're cheap enough to do
everything yep I read the age of em when
it came out and was quite taken with it
and when you agree to be a guest I went
back and reviewed it went through at
high speed but reminded myself of a
number of interesting things and I must
say as someone who's known a number of
futurists and have read a number of
futurists scenarios it is probably the
richest most integrated futurist
scenario I've ever seen as you know
Robin indicated his assumptions at the
broadest level is that we developed this
technology to upload a human into to
upload humans and turn them into robots
essentially and it very quickly becomes
the basis of our whole civilization
maybe you can speak relatively briefly
about the various things that that are
big that are happening that you see
after this sure now I like to say that
it's like science fiction except there's
no plot and there's no characters and it
all makes sense a lot of people have
told me over the years a lot of
Technology people especially it's that
while it's possible to envision future
technologies it's just not possible to
see their social consequences and if you
read a fair number of futurists you
might tend to agree with that because
futurists often seem to have pretty
vague and
in substantial forecasts so I wanted to
show in this book that you really could
say a lot about a concrete scenario if
you worked it out carefully this
scenario is where you can scan a
individual human brain and make a
computer model of that and run that on a
computer and that model has the same
input-output behavior that is it acts
the same in the same situation you could
hook it up with artificial eyes ears
hands and mouth and then it could talk
back to you you could do jobs etc so
once you have emulations and they're
cheap then they are cheaper than human
workers and they can do pretty much
anything a human can do because they are
emulations of humans and so first of all
all the humans lose their jobs and the
m's
take the jobs but a lot more things
happen so the MS can be made in
factories as fast as you can crank them
out which is very different from the
human population so the population of
Em's can explode and the population gets
so large that it drives down wages to
near subsistence levels which is the
level at which human wages have
typically been in most of human history
and for most animals in history that's
also the kind of life they live and so
Em's have to work most of the time in a
very competitive economy but because the
number of Em's can grow so fast the
economy can grow much faster the ability
to grow humans is a big limit on the
current growth rate of the economy so I
estimate roughly that this new Emme
economy could double roughly every month
rather than the doubling every 15 years
we have at the moment these M's 2 big
features of them is they can make copies
of themselves and they can change their
speeds so since they're running on a
computer if you and in there a very
parallel process if you give them more
processors they can run that process
faster so subjectively they can run
faster or slower than human speed if you
pay more to go faster and so my best
estimate is they run roughly a thousand
times human speed the typical M does
that's a speed at which in the one month
doubling time of the economy they
experience a subjective century and
roughly after that point they need to
retire because their minds will become
too fragile to be competitive with
younger workers and because it's easy to
make copies of thems than most M's are
copies of the few hundred most
productive humans so even though there
might be 10 billion humans available to
be scanned to become emulations and
compete in the m world the m world
really wants the few bests because it
can make as many copies as the ones that
the few best very very interesting and
within the constraint of your assumption
I was amazed that the detail you went
into you talked about politics you
talked about sex you talked about
religion you talked about the
architecture of the cities you even went
into an amazingly detailed argument
about the subjective experience of
gravity based on the size of the robot
so as I was I said when I introduced it
if someone's interested in an amazingly
integrated cross-checked scenario based
on at one key assumption this is a great
book to read however I will say that
personally I'm skeptical of the core
assumption which is that emulations will
be the first AGI let me give you a
couple arguments and then the love to
hear what you have to say let's get into
it yeah let's do it
first you know your ballpark estimate
for Em's was about a hundred years and
you laid out I thought some reasonably
good analysis and why that was not
unreasonable yes I would say my estimate
is shorter than that for other
approaches but I'll confess my
methodology is more seat-of-the-pants
and less analytic than yours but if I
had to put a flag down I'd say 20 to 80
years with a somewhat skewed mean of 50
and if we got there in 50 before your
M's got there in 100 I think there would
be no point in doing m's or very little
and here's why m's aren't very good
right they're only a bit better than
humans and one of the things I like to
say about humans and I usually just say
it because it sounded good which is
humans are to the first order the
stupidest possible general intelligence
right my nature is seldom profligate in
evolution and only does what she needs
to do to get an advantage or species
that's course is all teleological talk
which we know is not true but
nonetheless you get the point that
humans aren't that smart well in the
last five years I spent a good amount of
my time on cognitive science the
cognitive neuroscience and now I know
humans aren't that smart you know for
instance the you know one the more
obvious ones is so-called working memory
size 7 plus or minus 2 that allows us to
relatively easily remember phone numbers
turns out that's basically for audio
information
writing is actually processed in our
audio system we actually have another
set of short term very short term
memories for images and there's even the
less they're three or four and it turns
out those two constraints have I would
argue giant impact on our cognitive
ability particularly around the ability
to process language and even to read we
can just barely read we're constantly
shuffling things in and out of our
short-term memory and when you actually
test people on their reading
comprehension it's pretty bad when one
thinks about what would a ability to
read beef even just our plain human
languages for an entity that had a
working memory size of a hundred that
it's just staggering to keep in mind you
know the seven is an average the village
idiot has five Einstein has nine plus or
minus right approximately so hundreds
just like qualitatively beyond anything
we've ever been able to see before
and the ability to see linkages between
works with linkages between ideas I
think would be huge some of our other
cognitive limitations are memory
fidelity right our memories are famously
bad and it's getting scary how strong
the evidence is on how bad first-person
testimony is in court cases and memories
get commingled they erode with age etc
another when we're doing higher-level
thinking call it Hanuman's system to
type thinking and are processing it
through our conscious framework we're
almost perfectly single threaded we can
pay attention to exactly one thing at a
time and that it all clear to me that
you'd build that into a software AI now
there's our vision you know we know our
vision is very synthesized what we're
really seeing is a very small spot that
moves around jumps around very rapidly
in our brain somehow by means we don't
yet know synthesized is something that
seems like the full frame but it's
missing things all the time and those
are just a few so my argument would be
that if software approach a eyes get
there before the MS even from a very
early stage they'll be better and
they'll take off faster secondly for the
question of how to get there it strikes
me that software approach
or software hardware approaches fit in
better with our financial and business
ecosystems I would assert love to hear
your thoughts on this one that MSR
mostly all or nothing yes we might be
able to hack out the perceptual system
but we're already doing pretty good with
deep learning on perception but to get a
you know full bore M we have to figure
out how to do it for a full bore human
and not lose much all or nothing czar
famously hard to finance and in my my
hat as a early stage investor I often
say I don't generally bet on jumping up
a cliff while software approaches are
much more potentially incremental for
instance if we were to crack one of the
biggest problems I see that's you know
within sight which is language
comprehension just language
comprehension itself with a bigger
working memory size would be
unbelievably valuable right in all kinds
of ways from understanding research
reports and looking for integrations
perhaps most valuable to you know
writing novel writing screenplays
writing text books etc and so there'll
be lots of money and lots of
organizations focused on these early
wins on this a more ramped approach
rather than the all-or-nothing approach
and the last one and I look very
carefully actually when I was flipping
through the book on this last one is the
humans only communicate with our pretty
crappy languages and m's look like they
would also mostly communicate with human
languages you'd have about two
paragraphs on M's possibly being able to
exchange higher level data structures
but that really wasn't filled out at all
on the other hand some of the a I
projects including one I'm I've been
associated with on-and-off called
OpenCog from the very beginning expects
there to be very large and complex
knowledge structures that could be
shared between a is so we could have
much higher bandwidth between our AGI
elements that uses highly connected
graphs of probabilistic logic
expressions which are tiny amount of
data actually and hence have a high
information density
and they're explicitly understandable so
i do.i those are my spread of argues I
think you've given us a lot to talk
about here I'm not sure anything else
but it'll be fun if we even just go
through these absolutely all right so
there's this number of separate
questions here one issue is how far can
other things get before em show up and
the separate issue is when both of them
are around which wins the competition or
which wins where and those are somewhat
separate issues that are related with
respect to the first question a key
issue is just how hard is AGI and how
hard are emulations so if you think as
many people do that there's some you
know essential five line theory and once
you find that theory then you've got it
and you can do basically everything
relatively easy then you're just
wondering when we're gonna find that
theory but if you think of you know AGI
is just a name for a huge pool of tools
and a huge pile of capabilities that the
only way to achieve it is to slowly add
to the pile then the question is well
how big is the pile and how fast are we
going so I tend to be skeptical about
the one big revolution that's gonna
change everything we really haven't seen
that in the last 70 years say of
computer progress computer progress has
been lumpy sometimes but the degree of
lumpiness and computer progress is
comparable to other fields and in fact
we see a relatively universal pattern of
the lumpiness of research in terms of
citations actually and so I would say
this straight forward prediction for the
future is a continued rate of progress
at the rate we've seen over the last 70
years and at that rate it should take a
really long time so 50 years would be
pretty ambitious you think you said 400
was kind of the center of your guess you
still feel comfortable that I would say
one statistic III uses is that I'd ask
people in the last 20 years how far have
we come in your subfield of AI as a
percentage of how far we need to go to
get to my level abilities and and the
median response I got was about five to
ten percent with no noticeable
accelerations so if you project that
forward you've got two to four centuries
yeah okay
in principle of em's took longer than
that then that's how far you get but
still the question is I agree that m's
are all or nothing and therefore less
likely to produce a burst
investment to try to produce it of
course Adi really isn't gonna produce a
burst of investment to produce AGI it's
mostly going to be investment along the
path of particular products and services
that will be useful well before AGI and
similarly for him most of the work is
gonna be on the technology that will
eventually lead to Emma's but not
because it will lead to ms it'll be for
other purposes although it's worth
noting that many people in especially in
science fiction focus on the benefit of
MMS as immortality and the benefit of
Em's from that point of view as a
product is you could become an emulation
and then you'd be a more you know I
think that's actually an interesting
argument which one I probably have been
considered enough and we know humans are
vain and we also know how much of human
history has been driven by in my view
false promises of immortality in the
afterlife so it is it is possible I will
acknowledge that that's actually a good
response with respect to and the
investment ecosystem that if they get
close enough then there might be a spur
of investment around the immortality
marketplace right so if this high level
of the my two kinds of arguments would
be to say look AGI is just really hard
and so it's gonna take a long time where
there isn't gonna be this moment where
we suddenly figure it out and then it's
all done it's just a long slog MSR also
in some sense a long slog but in some
sense MSR more just scaling up things we
kind of know how to do it's less
fundamental new understandings you need
four M's than just increasing scale so
you have to have bigger scale scans you
have to have bigger cheaper computers
and you have to have more brain cell
models you know one actually what item I
when I was pondering instant I think you
addressed it in passing on how much
detail a little bit is one of the
questions about how doable M is is that
what level the details matter
right yeah if the details matter at
neuron types plus synapses plus synapse
size plus connectome then it's at one
level of difficulty if it also includes
details of the epigenetics of each
neuron if it also includes state
information within the synapses etc it
might be a very much bigger and more
difficult problem we believe that
it's not the worst possible case because
the brain is a signal processing system
an in general signal processing system
design produces designs where there are
some degrees of freedom that represent
and move the signals and then there are
other freedom that don't and then they
usually try to go out of your way to
have some degree of separation between
those degrees of freedom that is no the
wire is an electronic device the wire
itself conducts the message and then the
insulator keeps that somewhat
independent of other degrees of freedom
and that's in general how you do a
signal processing system and so the
brain is such a system so the brain must
at some level have been designed to have
some key degrees of freedom that
represents the signals and other degrees
of freedom ie all the other
infrastructure of the cells to be
somewhat separated from that which makes
you think that you have to find the
degrees of freedom the matter which
isn't gonna be everything but it could
be a lot it could be though my nature
unfortunately is not an engineer
she's an evolution machine and and as we
know does all kinds of crazy weird
things that are highly dependent upon
each other between levels and things so
I would expect us to find some degree of
separation there if you look at the
organization body say just organs
themselves also follow this principle
but you know there are different
subsystems inside of organism and those
different subsystems have different
purposes and in order to best design
each subsystem usually you try to make
the subsystems we saw independent of
other subsystems and they roughly are
indeed roughly but if you change small
things in the metabolomic a ballistic
graph it all fails right so there's a
lot more cross linkage than a decent
engineer would do but I take your point
there certainly some how about the Third
Point that suppose the to arrive at
similar times let's talk about the
competition a little bit alright so
imagine that m's come when AI hasn't
taken over everything
maybe I isn't better at everything and
so then the key question is now they can
compete on equal terms in terms of
hardware and investment and in
capitalist attention and it's more now
the question of which kind of
architecture is better suited for which
kind of problems and so this comes to
your architectural criticisms you know
you could say well look
our architectures aren't perfect they
are have flaws but then you can start to
improve them so obviously humans have
improved their working memory say by you
know having external memory records
videos audio recordings things like that
and of course that's also a more
accurate memory so the real question is
these different architectural systems
and approaches which have the advantages
of flexibility or evolved ability or
change ability and what other advantages
do they have so that some wins somewhere
in some things another so as long as
Em's win in some substantial fraction of
job tasks they don't have to win
everywhere then something like the age
of them happens that is in the jobs
where the MS are best then the age of M
dis scenario happens in those job tasks
and then there's a whole other world of
tasks that are done by other kinds of
automation and the age of M isn't
talking so much about that but you
should imagine it that this implicit
huge background of hardware and software
that's doing other tasks would exist in
that world and wouldn't change that
world enormously the description would
be roughly the same so it comes down to
then and as many people think that in
fact M sort of brain organization kind
of software just loses it everything and
that's the argument that many people
have said it's just so hopeless and
that's that's an argument that combines
two claims one is that the brain
organization isn't as an approach to
software is just hopeless and there's
just no good way to improve it or modify
it to be competitive with a claim that
it's very hard to modify that it's it's
stuck whereas other kinds of software is
more robust to modification easier to
improve easier to generalize yeah I
think that's in general would support
that argument though I just thought of
something that actually may support your
side a little bit which is another area
there is increasing investment in is in
neural man-machine interfaces
yeah I'm pretty skeptical about that
mattering much here okay
each task will be done in some kind of
hardware in a brain hardware or in
artificial hardware the neural interface
basically increases the bandwidth
between tasks being done in different
places so it allows more fine-grain
interleaving but it doesn't really save
the MS unless there's something a task
that the MS are best at so there has to
be something there best at
that you can you know integrate that
more at a fine-grain time and space
scale with tasks done on artificial
hardware the higher the bandwidth you
have between that well let me throw a
real-world example on where a loosely
coupled man-machine interface beats
machine and that's chess right we all
hear about how good the chess programs
are these days they are amazing but I've
also read that there are tournaments now
where you take a very good grandmaster
doesn't even have to be the best but a
very good one with a state of the art
chess playing program designed to be
guided by a human and the combination of
the two is considerably stronger than
the best pure computer chess programs
that's what I heard ten years ago I
understand today that's no longer true
ah too bad today the machines are just
beating the human machine teams yet
truthfully I had not heard whether for
instance the man-machine teams could
beat the Alfa chess 0 or something right
interestingly that actually argues
towards how rapidly you know regular
software evolves versus anything else
anyway this has been a good conversation
Ok Go Ahead
I have a theory I tried an account I
tried to come up with what the essential
difference between the software we
usually write including a lot of machine
learning software and the software in
our brains I think you need an account
of the fundamental source of that
difference in order to make a
intelligent estimate about which wins
we're in a no longer competition so I
propose that the key difference is that
in the eons that evolution was evolving
and improving the brain it never found
some key abstractions that we have in
software that we build our computers
around in particular it mixes up
hardware and software it mixes up
processing and memory it mixes up
addresses and content it mixes learning
and doing all these things that we
usually in software try go out of our
way to separate to distinguish the brain
doesn't it seems to basically mix them
all up so in its search for improvements
it was searching for variations that
were constrained to mix these things up
and that first distinction between
hardware and software is perhaps the
most important so today when you sit
down in front of
computer to write software you have
limited processing but you have
unlimited memory basically and that
means that you can start with a blank
screen and start to write a new piece of
code and then only connect this new
piece of code to the old code you have
when you see an advantage from that but
you usually slow to do that and then
cautious about that because you know the
more you connect to old stuff the harder
it will be to change an update that's
the standard issue of modularity so we
use modularity as an enormous power to
write software and we also do this in
machine learning because we can because
we have so much extra memory that that's
cheap and easy but the brain couldn't do
that that's the key point over the eons
when the brain had an existing brain
design and then it was evolving and
trying to add a new functionality or
feature or capability it couldn't start
with a blank screen because hardware and
software was mixed up it would have to
add a new section to the brain to do
that and the brain was pretty volume
constrained and so what either have to
delete some old section in order to add
a new section or it would find a way to
reorganized old things to allow the new
thing to fit in more easily so it would
focus a lot on reorganization and
especially abstraction which is the key
way that you can take multiple things
and make a smaller shorter version of
them that allows more room to doing
other things so the key idea here is
that relative does software familiar
with the brain is this marvel of
integration and abstraction but it isn't
very modular
you know that's obvious when you look at
the wiring diagram and the software
rewrite is much more modular therefore
we don't pay as much of attention there
to organization reorganization and
abstraction because it's not worth the
bother when we can so easily just start
with a new blank screen but because we
have the standard habit and software
software rots faster than brain software
and this is the overwhelming observation
of software in the real world is that
even though we have decades of people
ready software to do so many things
typically a software system rots with
time it becomes harder to modify harder
to usefully change harder to understand
and eventually people just toss it and
they start with a new blank screen and
make whole new systems at enormous
expense
but we apparently haven't found ways to
inherit most old code that does similar
things instead we mostly throw it away
and start with something new because our
systems rot so that gives you a
perspective on the advantages and
disadvantages of Em's relative to other
software suggesting that on small tech
so you know one big a disadvantage of
the brain is in order to have the brain
do anything you pretty much have to
devote a whole brain to the task the
brain is a big thing it's expensive and
so most of the advantages we've gotten
from software over the last 70 years are
mainly to do small things what's much
less software and hardware than the
whole brain which is an enormous savings
and we should expect that to continue so
for tasks that can be done by a small
piece of hardware and a small piece of
software that will just not be done by
an M or human like mine but as you move
up the hierarchy of tasks to more
general tasks that require wider scope
and more things be integrated in our
experience we actually find it hard
that's the problem of AGI generality we
find it quite hard to make systems that
are general and broad and that can
integrate a wide range of things well
and still be modifiable and easily
updated and that's usually the
limitation and that's where human mind
seems to Excel human mind seemed of
these dis marble of integration where
they can pay attention to a wide range
of things and integrate them well and
not rot and so that suggests this future
where there's you know like in a company
an abstraction hierarchy of control and
there's people at top who have very wide
scope and attention who look at you know
long term things and people at the
bottom would look at very small scope
and very short term local considerations
and those local considerations will
obviously be done by automation and that
will be the first thing automate but
near the top of the control hierarchy
those things seem much more naturally to
be done by humans or human-like Minds
and I would predict that Emmas have a
long future there so even again software
AG eyes which may have a much higher
high end than em you think there will be
a place for Em's in their unique ability
to do very broad integration and
abstraction yes so that you know for an
economist the question is not how smart
is a thing it's sort of how
cost-effective is a thing right so you
know in some sense if you put a hundred
people together they're smarter than one
for
person and they're more capable but they
cost hundred times as much you know so
when you say AG I could be smarter while
I say well smarter than how many humans
and at what cost right right etc and so
when we're thinking about this cost
trade-off then I say near the high end
of the up you know generality
flexibility range of considerations
spectrum of tasks that it looks to me
like the MS can win there for a long
time especially considering that once ms
are possible we can modify that software
it doesn't have to stay the way it
initially did so then the question
becomes how fast can that improve
relative to how fast can other things
improve and you'd say well look we've
been able to improve other things much
faster but I'd say well yes but that's
on very narrow tasks very narrow scopes
you haven't really pressed into the hard
problem of how to be general and broad
yeah that's an interesting point you
know how rigid will they have to be or
how opaque is the other question and it
is true that the deep learning neural
models are almost as opaque is the human
brain right indeed and they're much more
modular than people give them credit for
in the sense that anyone saying neural
nets say that does chess is this big
opaque mess that does everything in
chess at once but it only does chess you
know in the deep learning world people
solve new problems with a blank slate
basically they start with a blank net
and they you know learn a particular
area with a particular data set they are
not making systems that do everything
all at once yeah it's actually by the
way why I do not believe that the
current deep learning neural net
architecture is likely by itself to get
us to AGI I know there are a lot of
people out there these days who do but
frankly I think it's like going into an
orchard where everybody was picking
fruit from the ground with a six-foot
ladder and now you can pick a lot of
fruit but eventually you've picked it
all all you can get with the six-foot
ladder
we're gonna need other approaches that
integrate probably multiple neural Nets
and have the ability to generate new
neural Nets on the fly under the control
of a higher level abstraction perhaps
more symbolic more probabilistic system
and then we'll have a highly complicated
you know system they'll probably by the
time it gets to have the capability of
human brain will probably be almost as
complicated but the question will be to
what
is it modular and can it out evolve
because in like in the business world
where I come from the rate of evolution
it's pretty much everything over the
long haul if you can make your product
better than your doubling time is in
values three years the other guy's five
years before long you've eaten its lunch
the same would be true in a race between
software-driven AGI versus ms if we
could improve our software driven human
level say equal to M faster than the
dominance of Em's could be pretty short
and the key point to notice is that
until we have MS the human stuff isn't
improving very fast at all so it's
definitely been the observation over the
last decades that you know human workers
are not improving as fast as artificial
software we we almost never see
something that was being done by
software being switched to being done by
humans whereas we see a lot of cases for
something that was being done by humans
to switch to being done by artificial
hardware and software so if that trend
were to continue then it's just obvious
that the humans lose when Em's are
possible that game changes because now
the human minds who are now ms can take
advantage of the improvements in
hardware think it didn't take advantage
of scale economies and you know
factories etc to make many of them and
make them more cost-effective and they
can even take advantage of their brains
being modified by efforts to reorganize
them and redesign them and to improve
them and that is of course interesting
that there's no reason you couldn't
spend up 10 million M's to work on the
problem of improving em so it's again a
the singularity phoom type argument
though probably flower but the key
robust prediction is the growth rate
goes up what regardless of whether it's
a gir M the rate of change in the
economy becomes much faster and that if
it wasn't for Em's then we would much
more despair of humans being able to
keep track and keep control over all
that change whereas when M s are
possible then they can be very fast and
they can keep up with change you know I
think that's a very good optimistic
point about the M world is it's probably
less scary than the pure software AGI
world will be able to reason about it
from analogy to ourself at least in the
initial phases and probably it wouldn't
accelerate as fast subjectively in the
sense that from the point of view of the
fastest MS the world wouldn't be
changing as fast because they could
speed up with it yes well I'm also from
the human perspective not as fast as and
if indeed fast takeoff AGI is real it's
getting another long point to argue and
I'm unclear on my view on that even but
there are certainly as you know
scenarios were software AG eyes reflect
upon themselves and you know the one
point one human AGI becomes one point
for human becomes to human becomes nine
human it comes a million human and you
know six hours I actually spent several
years arguing that point with my Xcode
blogger le I'd you you'd call Sookie and
so I feel somewhat confident in saying
the key assumption behind that is some
level of simplicity in the essential
innovations that would be possible that
is there and some level there are some
simple ideas that when you find them
they give you these big improvements and
maybe let you find other simple ideas
that basically there is these big lumps
of innovation to be found so to the
extent that innovation typically isn't
that lumpy then I'm much more skeptical
about that because the the past we've
seen a distribution of lumpiness but
most innovation has been relatively
small lumps a few big ones and because
of that we've seen relatively steady
progress and I think that allows us to
predict those kinds of rates of progress
forward I love the quality of your
analysis it's just so deep and again I
recommend the age of em to anybody who
wants to see a beautifully constructed
scenario about something quite far into
the future that if you accept the one
premise makes a lot of sense now many
people are scared by it I mean and in
some sense rightly so that is if you
thought of the history of say from
animals to foraging humans to farming
humans to industrial humans each of
those transitions was enormous and each
of those transitions to somebody before
the transition should have been scary if
they had understood the basics of it
because a lot would change in their
world and some things would be lost some
things they value were lost in each of
those transmissions and so you should
expect the same thing of the next
transition enormous change in most
aspects of society and therefore some
key things you treasure will be lost and
that's not crazy that's completely
reasonable but then that's pretty much
what you should expect
in the long run future if you say I'd
like the world I'm in and I don't want
anymore big changes you've got a really
big problem in front of you because so
far we've had big changes and how are
you going to prevent them and that
accelerating rate I mean that's been the
trend since you know the modern age
started in 1625 on February 16th at 11
p.m. right it's been accelerating ever
since and at a pretty high rate actually
I would say we have seen acceleration
over time but in lumps so within each of
these eras say the animal error the the
foraging or of the farming or the
industrial error change has been
relatively steady we has not been
accelerating overall so even say over
the last century I would say change has
not been accelerating over the last
century if you look at overall rates of
change but of course change today versus
a thousand years ago is much higher
because of the Industrial Revolution and
then during the farming era from say
5000 BC until a few hundred years ago
change was relatively steady any much
lower rate but it was faster than 100
thousand years ago because the farming
the foraging era was an even slower so
I'd say roughly we see steady rates of
change until we see a small number of
these very big increases in the rates of
change and a i-rms could very well be
the sort of thing that triggers a big
burst and rate of change
oh that's interesting let's divert here
a little bit and talk about the idea
that a race of change are not
accelerating because I would say the
common pop view is that they are not to
say that that is correct and I suppose
I'd also want to know what's your metric
and are we talking first derivatives or
second derivatives that are or
velocities that are stationary
so the key point obviously is that our
society is enormous there's lots of
different parts and in any one time some
parts are changing faster than others so
it's always possible to look and find
parts that are changing very rapidly but
are they representative and so our best
way to look at overall society averaging
over all the different kinds of changes
is economic measures because they
basically average out how much more can
you get of what you want so economic
growth basically is the ability of us
all to get more of what we want and when
growth happens it's because we can do
more
and that's averaging over all the
different things we want and so some
things we want improve much faster and
other things slower and the way we
average those is how important is each
one from the point of view of getting
what we want and so economic growth has
been relatively steady in fact you can
have a growth has arguably declined a
bit in the advanced countries over the
last you know 40 years and that's called
stagnation or decline and then people
have talked about that although
worldwide because the poorer nations are
growing faster worldwide growth isn't
slowed down but it's not sped up either
and that's in terms of essentially
productivity I presume productivity is
producing the things we want so it's
basically the ability to get more of all
we want it's gonna yeah and per capita
I'd like to say just have to adjust by
population size to get a real sense of
advancement in some sense more
population is one of the things we want
so you shouldn't neglect that either so
if we choose to have more population who
get less that's still getting more what
we wanted was to have more population to
get less but the long-term trend I would
say is Marlar G in terms of the total
productive that product the kind of
asset a per capita self through most of
the foraging world through most of the
farming world per capita wealth did not
change much the most of change was in
the total number of people which is what
the old standard theory predicts that is
if we can grow people faster than the
economy grows we will and so then most
growth will be eaten up by population
change as opposed to per capita income
change and it's only in the last few
hundred years what we've been able to
grow the economy faster than the
population such that now the per capita
rate has gone up and gone up a lot and
you know the last 400 years something
like that
okay well this is great I really think
this is a very very interesting
conversation let's move on to our next
topic which seems to be becoming a semi
feature here on the Jim Rutte show which
is the Fermi paradox for those listeners
who aren't familiar with us this goes
back to Los Alamos where they made the
atomic bomb during World War two where
the story is told that a group of very
smart folks were sitting around a lunch
table talking about how many intelligent
races there were in the universe and it
must be a bunch because we have these
many stars these many galaxies it must
make some assumptions about planets etc
and Enrico Fermi walked over and said
okay guys that all sounds good but where
are they right so where are these other
intelligences in space and so far we've
been looking for 60 years or so and have
seen no confirmed signals for anything
that we would say is the sign of either
an existing or previous intelligent race
in the universe other than ourselves and
in general the argument falls into two
categories one that there aren't any
that for whatever reason we're the only
first race at least in the universe to
have reached the level of general
intelligence and then the other fork is
they're out there but they either are
intentionally not showing themselves or
we don't have the tools to detect them
and so with that I'm gonna throw it back
to you Robin and tell me what you think
about the Fermi paradox well so this is
a really big question and that's an
important question and when I first
started writing about it
20 years ago I thought neglected and in
many areas what I'd often do is take the
data we have and try to be a little more
careful theoretically to ask what does
this data predict or what are the
implications of this data what can we
infer from this data and so on this
cosmic scale the key data point is we
don't see anything out there that isn't
dead everything we've ever seen anywhere
on except on earth is dead and so the
question is how to explain that and so
now we have to confront that to some
sort of theories and one of the theories
we have to compare that to is our own
theory over our own origin so we're not
dead where did we come from and so we
have a story a set of stories that try
to explain where we came from
and they have to do with a path that we
came along our ancestors came along the
very first kinds of life appeared and
new kinds of life appeared more advanced
kinds of life eventually humans
eventually humans grew to this level and
that theory of our past is a set of
theories that mostly explains
improvement through some sort of
evolutionary or competition which is the
sort of theory that predicts increasing
capabilities and increasing range and
scope of environments and when you apply
the
sorts of theories to creatures like us
at this stage we tend to predict more of
the same that is the most
straightforward prediction of our future
is that we will continue to become more
technically capable that our economy
will continue to grow and that we will
therefore be able to survive in a wider
range of environments we will take a
wider range of energy sources we will
use a larger set of material and
therefore we will continue to grow and
this straight forward projection many
people see is that that means we take
over a larger section of the solar
system and eventually take over larger
sections of the galaxy etc and those
sorts of straightforward predictions of
our future run into the conflict that if
other places out there it would follow
that same sort of trajectory they would
eventually be visible and we would see
them but we don't yeah that's the
essence of the paradox right then the
key question is well how do we interpret
all this so the way I've tried to
interpret it under the phrase the great
filter is to say we can see this theory
of a trajectory of going through these
various steps as a theory of a path you
go along but these paths can have
filters along the way that is we can
imagine that at some point a process
that goes along this path doesn't
continuous stops so for example we can
imagine say humans blowing themselves up
and doing it so thoroughly that we
prevent the rise of something like us a
few thousands of years later it's
actually pretty hard to do that we an
ordinary nuclear war doesn't quite do it
but the point is you can imagine
something that's thorough enough to keep
it from going on or you can imagine say
that evolution would have searched for
billions of years in the space of
possible species but never come up with
a species quite like humans with with
our combination of intelligence and tool
abilities and things like that and so if
we think of this path but it's not
guaranteed that the system goes along to
the next step in the path then we can
think of this path as a process with
filters and then each step has a filter
which is what's the chance that it goes
on to the next step and then we can
think of the great filter as the sum of
all those filters up to the point where
something would be visible on the cosmic
scale and then the claim is well there
is a great filter
we look out in the universe and clearly
nothing has become really big invisible
and so that means starting from any
random spot it's really hard to go along
that path to get to that end point its
enormous ly hard it's astronomically
hard literally so if we can see say 10
to the 22 planet is roughly out there
and none of them are visible produced a
visible civilization then the total
filter is more than a factor of 10 to
the 22 and that's a puzzle yeah I like
the filter metaphor you can take the
hundreds of arguments about the paradox
and put them into the probably in terms
of early filter versus late filter also
absolutely so this this is the key point
from our point of view is we realize
well we're only partly along this filter
we're not actually at the moment capable
of being visible at a cosmic scale
although we envision that in the future
we would become that so there's a filter
ahead of us and a filter behind us and
the biggest question for us is how far
along the filter will become and you
know the key point is if it's 10 to the
22 and say we're 10 to the 20 along the
way but we still have 10 to the 2 to go
that means we only have a 1% chance of
reaching that final point which is bad
news
it means most likely we fail and we fail
pretty thoroughly in the sense that you
can imagine various disasters but if
they only temporarily knock some parts
of us down but not all of us thoroughly
down then we wouldn't take that long for
those parts to regrow and regroup and
continue on so that means if there's
only a 1% chance of getting there
there's a 99% chance of something in our
future so thoroughly knocking us down
that we can't get back up again that's a
very interesting way to look at of
course it does ignore one of the
branches of the arguments on The Late
filters which is that our societies out
there but either live in a way that are
not detectable to us for instance they
don't use broadcast forms of
electromagnetism they may use lasers or
thought something for long-range
communication or some of the other late
filter arguments are that they turned
inward and chose for whatever reason to
not go out into the world and maybe have
built very powerful social inhibitions
against it or the singularity always
happens and you are always eaten by our
eyes and Eden BIA it doesn't work in the
sense that you often explain why the AI
doesn't grow and become visible I mean
if we saw something visible in the
universe could well be a eyes that had
eaten their original species but they
would still be visible and that would
still be a puzzle if they didn't become
visible so now you have to say ask
yourself okay
given any one civilization like ours
what are the various chances it goes
down these different paths of say
choosing for some reason not to grow or
creating a totalitarian limit that
prevents anybody from growing or not
having any interest in growing and the
fraction of the filter you can explain
with that has to be how reliable is this
process so if 99% of the time a
civilization like ours went to this
point where it locked itself down and
didn't do anything then that could
explain up to a factor of ten to the two
of the filter head not the whole 10 of
the 22 so aim only mildly reliable
tendency of this sort can only explain a
modest fraction in the filter though for
at the 10 bit of 20 of that one
explanation could explain the rest
though I suppose if we were to look at
it probabilistically such a lock down
you'd also have to look on what's its
longevity right if we look at social
evolution we've never seen any lockdown
that lasted longer than what was the
middle ages dark ages 1,500 years or
something right so we could say we lock
someone locks it down what's the chances
of it
lasting for cosmic time spans which
might be pretty damn low at almost any
mutation rate life on Earth has been
locked on earth for the whole time but
that's not because any one part of it
set up a law that said no the rest of
you can't do that it just no parts of
the life on Earth could really do it so
here now we're imagining a future where
we have the technical capability to
expand into the rest of the galaxy and
then some part of the society makes a
rule and then a policy that prevents
other parts from doing that and that's
the kind of star you have to be thinking
even you know the vast majority of the
civilization not be interested in going
out doesn't do it as long as there's any
small part that does and is able to then
the puzzle is why hasn't that part
happened so if you were to place your
bet on the cosmic opinion Marketplace on
Furby paradox where do you come down
well if you look at the entire filter
clearly the parts that we understand the
least are the earliest
long ago or their date is very weak so
that's the easiest place to put big
filter factors that don't contradict our
evidence is way back at the very
beginning and so that's a convenient
place to put it because then that's in
the past and that makes our future less
problematic so it's not a terrible
scenario there it's it's not terribly
depressing to say well looks like the
most likely place to filter isn't though
is in the distant past and therefore
that's probably where it is and
therefore our futures ok the main
problem is you just shouldn't be too
confident of that that's just a little
too fast and easy you should worry that
yeah but part of the filter might be in
the future and any small fraction of the
filter in the future is a big problem
for your descendants and our
civilization so you should still worry
about it and try to do what you can to
prevent it even if perhaps the most
likely scenario is that it's all in the
past in the very distant past and of
course if it turns out it's not in the
past that it means it's in the future
right and we will get some data on how
much is in the past relatively soon as
we start to be able to scan distant
planets for their atmospheric
constituents and things that ilk if we
see any kind of life anywhere in the
universe that's not at the zero dead
stage that gives us data about those are
released up to the filter and they live
at limits how big those early steps can
be and so the more advanced life we find
the closer to us we find the lower that
initial filter can be and therefore the
higher the later filter kind of has to
be which is bad news so it will be bad
news to see advanced life away from
Earth especially the more plausible it
is that it had an independent origin one
plausible story though is that life was
very unlikely to evolve but it evolved
in the initial cluster of stars that was
the nursery for our star so our star
didn't arise by itself it arose at a
nursery with several hundred stars all
together in the same molecule er cloud
because that's typically how these
things happen and so if that mucker
cloud was a dense cloud where stuff
traveled between different parts of the
cloud then it's plausible that even
after our Sun formed and life forms soon
there other parts that clown got the
life together and so the best place to
see it in our galaxy for other life is
the other siblings of our star and they
would be actually relatively easy to
identify because they would have the
same mix of elements as our star in
terms of the various kinds of elements
that would have been in the
so we can find our few hundred siblings
of our star out there and if they have
life around them that speaks to the rest
of the filter after that point but not
so much to the very first step
yeah it doesn't quite answer the
cosmological question right maybe it got
lucky within the cluster on the early
filter well I suppose if they
independently all develop their own life
question was it independent or is it
through some propagation of some early
substrate right but if they were from
our siblings that's almost certainly
that there was propagation between us
but other stars out there that doesn't
have a common origin then it's much more
possible that it was farther back in the
chain of course that depends where the
filter occurs or even when I mean if it
turns out it was 4.5 billion years ago
then some form of contagion amongst the
might makes sense but if it was three
and a half billion years ago the
distances were getting mighty big at
that point it might be much less likely
though it could have been some
precursors that were shared yeah there
was enough of the advance hydrocarbons
left over from the previous set of
supernovas for instance so the
highest-level thing to realize is just
there are reasons to be worried that is
you look in this dark night sky and
everything looks dead and that should
worry you a bit it should say something
up there kills things or prevents them
ever from becoming alive in the first
place there's something really fierce
and dark and dangerous out there and of
course one of those scenarios is called
the dark forest scenario where though
you know there is a regular eruption of
life but there's some top predator that
goes it eats them every time they show
themselves that's a great entertaining
scenario and it's worth thinking through
but over the years I just can't make it
work I just can't figure out how there's
a plausible scenario where there's a
dark power that's hiding and kills off
anything that shows up without that dark
power become visible itself it's
interesting when I was a 12 year old or
14 year old nerd I of course ran the
Drake Equation said but the more I have
looked at it in the last 10 years I've
really looked at the literature I've
become more and more
a little bit more weights quite a lot
more weights on early filters for
instance as you mentioned our working
assumption is that we have a
evolutionary ratchet that improves over
time and giving enough time ought to
produce pretty amazing results
however the mathematics of evolution
require an error rate below X not to
succumb to what's known as the error
catastrophe and we look at how
information could be duplicated in an
early warm pool soup before we have
something like our DNA architecture with
it's pretty heavy error checking and
error repair capability you run the
numbers and you go the evolutionary
power of that pre error corrected
information is pretty damn low so how
did a low power ratchet without error
correction it was it able to generate
our high fidelity information ecosystem
around DNA and all of its duplication
error detection and error correction
components that has become my favorite
early filter no doubt there's a lot of
earlier stages even before the sort of
life were familiar with than just large
pools of biochemicals selecting each
other and you know selecting out some
forms and emphasizing other forms even
if that's not a life it there could be a
lot of processes there by which there's
a slow gradual accumulation of some
kinds relative to others the point would
be though if the error rate and the
duplications of information between
generations was you know above the error
catastrophe level the rate of evolution
seems mighty slow and that we probably
have not had enough time so question is
how quickly and by in what probability
we go from that low power evolutionary
machine with non error corrected data to
the high power evolutionary machine with
error corrected DNA data and seems like
a possible early filtering I then go and
say if we do have a strong early filter
and you know that's one to my mind that
seems plausible then that has some very
interesting moral implications you know
this is something I would never believe
when I was a 14 year old nerdy kid right
which is that we might actually be the
first general intelligence in the
or at least in the galaxy and one could
argue that has some immense moral
implications the biggest of implications
come from being the only as opposed to
the first for just the first but others
are coming
well we kill ourselves off the others
will be there if we're the only and
likely to be only we'll now a lot more
rides on our shoulders and I would say
that until we know if we think we're the
only thirteen point X billion years have
gone by and if we're the only at that
point it's not a bad place to start as a
betting proposition that we'll be the
only at least for some reasonably very
long period time and so we have a huge
moral obligation to preserve this
amazing thing life in the universe and
maybe we can state the mission of
humanity is to bring the universe to
life at least until we have some
evidence that there is other advanced
life in the universe or life in the
universe and then we get the hard
question of ok how exactly can we do
that how exactly can we ensure this big
growth you know some people's first
reaction is well we need to make new
independent variations like a colony in
all Mars or something although it's
probably a lot easier to make
independent colonies deep under the
Earth's surface than putting them on
Mars and so maybe we should be making a
lot more independent colonies under the
earth service but they aren't that
independent since that if there's a war
or something we know where they are then
they'll kind of be recruited in the war
and so there's a sense in which as long
as we're part of this big integrated
society we are all one big variation
that'll have to continue because we can
all find all the parts of us and then
the question is well if we're all one
thing should we try to go faster or
slower so some people say if we go too
fast we're gonna run into these problems
and we better off to slow down so we can
unresearched and understand these
problems better and another point of
view is that there's just problems that
show someone independent rates and the
faster we can run past all these
obstacles that better off we'll be and
you know these are hard questions and of
course there's another all possibility
for reading life to the universe is not
to spread intelligent life but to
essentially do a human engineered
panspermia create a massive payload of
viruses bacteria precursor chemicals etc
and dispatch them to stars that based on
analysis of the atmosphere of the
planets look like maybe reasonable
precursors and
that you know a billion times over the
next million years that might be we come
up to as our moral answer to our duty if
it turns out were the only and as far as
we know they all be for all time my bet
would they mean that that's where it's
doing but as you can see there's a lot
of social inertia or feeling on the
other side that is they feel like if
there's life out there we send something
out that kills it and this is a murder
that we're destroying the other life out
there but you know under the scenario
where there's murder it's a pretty
optimistic scenario I eat there's a
bunch of things out there to kill I you
there's lots of life the more pest
America scenarios that there's almost
nothing there so there's very few things
you could kill which means then you'd be
basically ensuring more variation which
would be good I guess it's somewhat
related to the Medi dispute where some
people want to send signals to aliens in
the hope that those aliens could come
help us and be nice and other people go
we'll wait a minute
what if they're not nice the exactly
where do you think on that one where's
your position on Medi almost surely we
would be one of the youngest weakest
most primitive civilizations around if
civilizations are communicating on a
cosmic scale they would almost all be
much older than we are so it's the
question of do you really want to stick
your neck out being the youngest most
naive weakest member of this community
we have a lot to gain but we have a lot
to lose or hates by being the weakest
you know my sense is when you're the new
kid in a company you're usually best to
keep your mouth shut for a while see
what's going on if you have the ability
to go you know make a speaker if you
would like a few hundred light years
away somewhere else and make it be loud
and then watch what happens to it that
would be the safest approach yeah that
might that was I would be tolerably in
favor of that one big loud speaker or
hundred light years away and with no way
to trace it to us well I like it but
making sure there's no way to trace it
to us would be really hard cuz you don't
know all the different detection
capabilities to have it also made her an
outfit the nearest 200 light years maybe
close it off too close then just kill
everything within 300 light years
exactly anyway there's been wonderful
conversation let's move on to our next
topic this is actually what caused me to
reach out to you and ask you to be a
guest on the show which is I very
recently read the elephant in the brain
and was quite taken with it and that's a
book that you co-wrote with a guy named
Kevin similar yeah he's a great great
co-author and the book is much easier to
read and you know more accessible
because of my co-author you can compare
it to Age of M and you can see the
difference for me this is an attempt
near the end of my career to summarize a
key point that I wish I had known at the
beginning and that hopefully new
generations of social scientists won't
make the same mistakes I and others and
my generation did because we didn't know
the one key fact to this book and so the
key story is that in social science and
in policy we typically analyze something
like education or medicine or even
marriage from the point of view that we
basically know what people are trying to
do their basic goal or motive with
respect to this thing and then that
there's a lot of complications and how
to get that and that policy can help you
figure out how to get this thing that
obviously is the thing you're trying to
get so an education we'd say the thing
you're trying to get is to learn more
material faster and then education
policy is all about how to reorganize
schools or school funding or ratings
such that we can induce more material to
be learned faster or you would say
medicine is obviously about taking sick
people and getting them well and medical
policy and medical reform and medical
funding and institutions are all about
figuring out better ways to get more
people well or faster at a lower cost
and this is what we do over and over
again through our society what we in
each area of life we have this easy
assumption of what something is for and
then we build on that to analyze how we
can do it better and the claim of the
book is that through an awful lot of
these areas the standard key assumption
is just wrong schools are not about
learning more material faster medicine
is not about making sick people well
that is at some level it's kind of about
that it has some degree of functioning
that we're but that's not really the key
strongest motor that's driving these
institutions and behaviors and so if you
miss the key thing that something is for
you're just gonna be misdirected right
from the start so
we have a long history in education
research of finding many powerful ways
to help people learn more material
faster we actually know a lot about that
and we've found many ways that existing
schools could in fact teach more
material faster more effectively lower
cost etc and we've consistently not
adopted these reforms and that's got to
be pretty frustrating for education
researchers and reformers who've known
for many decades how we could do things
better same in medicine we know lots of
ways that medicine could be more
effective people are not very interested
in these ways and again that's got a
frustrate medical reformers and social
scientists and the PIA claim of the book
is well the big mistake everybody's been
making is assuming you know what these
things are for
so our book starts out trying to make it
plausible that you would just be wrong a
lot about why you want to do things that
you're not aware of your motives so our
book has been classified as psychology
and it had psychology referees and
psychology reviewers and these
psychologists have all said yes this is
a standard thing we know in psychology
people are quite often unaware of their
motives for doing things but they've
said we already knew that so who cares
but in all these other policy areas like
education to medicine etc these people
don't know this and so our book is
addressed to them trying to say you've
been missing the point this thing these
psychologists all know hasn't
transferred into your social science and
policy worlds and you aren't
appreciating that in fact you're making
mistaken assumptions about the key
driving motives in these areas so we
want our book to be read by social
science and policy world but
unfortunately because it's been
classified as psychology they don't see
that it's something they need to read or
respond to them yeah I did notice that
actually most of the piece parts from
which you built the theory were things
other people had discovered and I think
you actually said that in the
introduction that you had gone through a
large amount of research and found
things that were known but what was I
found new was it you integrated it to
show that this is a very consistent
pattern and you also teased out at least
some requite good arguments I thought
for why it actually makes sense
humans brains to evolve themselves this
ways and in a lot of it comes around
things like arms races one of the ones I
liked a lot was the social brain eyes
hypothesis or that you know what
actually drove the rapid mega growth of
the human brain was the ability to be
Machiavellian within our within our own
small groups or as Traverse put it we
deceive ourselves the better to deceive
others right and so I thought that was
really where you guys delivered where
you pulled together these various peace
part and then also found the pieces that
explained all the peace parts together
we're doing some degree of synthesis but
again I think a lot of people this area
correctly would say well they kind of
already understood that synthesis even
if we're doing it especially good job
say of explaining it to a wide audience
what's new I would say is that we are
trying to tell people in these other
policy areas that they have neglected
this key insight and so there is this
basic problem in our academic
intellectual world that we assume that
once something it's known by the experts
in that area it's known by everybody and
included by everybody in their analysis
and that's just not true there are great
many things that are known in one
subfield that are completely neglected
in lots of other areas where it's
relevant
yeah that's clearly been true I have
done a little dive into the move from
educational psychology to education
departments at universities it's like 50
year lag it's pretty amazing our thing
may also suffer a lag because there's
also lags for things people don't want
to hear so in the in on the history of
innovation and intellectual progress
things that people want to hear at least
that don't conflict with something they
want to believe are easier to assimilate
and spread the things that people just
don't want to hear that go against what
they want to believe yeah one of those
that came up again and again as I say in
your applied chapters was that so much
of human behavior can be thought of in
terms of signaling as opposed to
substance right so the key general idea
is that when we are trying to attribute
motives to our behavior we are mostly
acting as a PR person or press agent for
ourselves that is instead of knowing
what we actually doing we're more like
the president's press secretary who is
trying to make up good explanations for
doing in order to present a good face to
the world
so we're looking for explanations that
defend us well against potential
accusations and the explanations we come
us do achieve that function they're just
not really designed to be accurate
representations of the real motives that
are driving us because the real motives
tend to be less pretty and more socially
dysfunctional and more open to the
accusation that we're violating social
norms of being selfish and self-serving
which we are and therefore we look for
more pro-social good looking motives to
attribute to ourselves certainly seems
to be the case the section on medicine
was particularly interesting cuz you
maybe talk about that a little bit sure
so that's for many of our readers
perhaps the most surprising chapter in
each chapter in the last two thirds of
the book the ten different areas what we
do is we say here's the topic we're
talking about and here is the standard
motive most people would point to and
then here are a bunch of puzzles with
that things that don't fit so well with
the standard motive and then we finish
with an explanation a motive that fits
better with many of the details of that
area so as if we said before the usual
story about medicine is that hey you can
get sick but there's these experts out
there who could help get you well these
experts are expensive and they are hard
to judge who's good but hey we need a
system to help you get their expertise
to help you go well and this basic story
is a story we usually tell and it
doesn't fit that well with a number of
actual details of this area and perhaps
the most prominent one is the fact that
there's very little correlation between
people who get more medicine and people
who get healthier we have not only
geographic variation where we look at
some regions or hospital areas and see
the ones that spend more on medicine are
not healthier even after we control for
some other things we also have a number
of randomized experiments where people
randomly given more access to medicines
such as through a cheaper price and they
weren't healthier that's a big puzzle
from the point of view that the whole
point of medicine is to spend a lot of
money to get healthy but we have a
number of other puzzles in this area
that people say are not very interested
in ways to improve their health vs a
sleep or a nutrition or air quality or
exercise compared to medicine they're
really obsessed with medicine even
though we see very little connection
between medicine and health and much
larger connections between health and
these other areas and they're cheaper
right getting an extra hours sleep cost
a hell of a lot less than you know some
expensive course of mental health
intervention right people are also
remarkably uninterested in information
about the quality of medicine they just
won't bother to pay for it they won't
look at it they just want to take a
simple strategy of trusting their doctor
or surgeon and not thinking about how do
you explain those behaviors in terms of
your theory an analogy is Valentine's
chocolates we have a tradition here on
Valentine's Day of giving your lover
chocolates and the idea is that you show
that you love them with the chocolates
now when you do that you don't ask how
hungry they are when you decide how many
chocolates to get the point isn't how
hungry they are though point is how much
do you need to spend to distinguish
yourself from somebody who doesn't care
as much as you you need to spend a lot
and when you ask what quality chocolates
should I get you're not that interested
in what you privately think is the
highest quality chocolate and you're not
that interested as a recipient of the
chocolate in what you privately think is
the quality of the chocolate you're
interested in commonly perceived signals
what do most people think is the high
quality chocolate and if on Valentine's
Day you don't have a lover to give you
chocolate but you'd like people to
believe that somebody out there cared
for you you might buy yourself some
chocolate and leave it on the desk at
work okay how does that work on an
individual basis I could see how it
might work with respect to a parent
purchasing medical interventions for a
child but let's take the case we talked
about in passing of a person who could
choose either to sleep one hour a night
or spend $200 a week talking to their
shrink there is nobody there trying to
impress really so first to make the
point most medical spending is done via
third parties nations buy medicine for
their citizens companies buy medicine
for their employees heads of family buy
medicine for the rest of their family
but they pay they don't buy as an
interesting distinction between the
payor and the buyer right it's always
good to find a business where you can de
couple the paying and the
buying college textbooks being a perfect
example by the way but in this case the
actual decision to pull the trigger
right to say I'm gonna go to see a
shrink weekly rather than sleep an hour
is an actual decision made by an
individual agent with the price greatly
reduced because other people paying for
it as you say so these other people fund
the bill they say don't worry about it
when you feel like you have a problem
just go to the doctor and it'll be paid
for by this other source and that other
source is part of the process to show
they care so they are definitely
achieving the benefit of reassuring
people that they care about them through
that spending even though they're not
choosing each individual doctor visit
than the individual person when they
have a problem they have a choice of
whether to go or not but often they're
getting pushed so you may know couples
where one member of the couple pushes
the other to get a check-up to get
something checked out etc there's a lot
of that in family areas where individual
people show they care about other people
by pushing them to go get care and then
you as the person who is the subject to
these other people subsidizing you and
pushing you you often want to be a good
sport if we cooperate and let those
people show they care about you by
taking care of you and you will have to
feel that so and so the signaling is
that at the macro level you could argue
that society together says we're going
to show we care by allocating 17 percent
of the GDP to medicine but an adult
typically makes their own decision on
what medical treatments to go after
people do initiate whether they have any
particular doctor visit or whether they
buy any particular medicine that's had
their choice but it's mainly funded by
other people who have enabled that who
said don't worry about the cost to just
go and in addition we push people and
people seem to want to get and get
credit for being caring by pushing other
people to go so now you as somebody who
has people around you pushing to go to
the doctor
you show them that you care about them
by letting them show they care about you
by accommodating them and going when
they push and spending the money that
they have allocated for you to spend
which then shows them and everybody
around that you are loved and cared for
by somebody who is willing to pay for
this and you have a rough estimate on
what percentage
of medical care let's say in the United
States you might consider to be above
and beyond medical usefulness that are
generated by these signaling behaviors
most likely more than half that's a big
damn number bigger than almost anything
else in the economy right so the advice
to you is if you only wanted to get your
health higher but you didn't care about
these other signaling benefits then I'd
say cut out half of your medicine and of
course you might say which half and I'd
say well there are some simple ways to
do that so in the health insurance
experiments we've seen where people had
randomly assigned more medicine we see
they weren't any healthier when they
were given the lower price so that
method says that you should look at the
price and say if I had to pay for this
out of my pocket if I had to pay full
price for this would I be willing to pay
for and then if you wouldn't don't
bother to get it because that's the kind
of medicine that in this experiments
wasn't useful another way to do it is
there are these various studies out
there the Cochrane reports is one where
they take different treatments and they
rate them according the strength of
evidence that they are useful and
cost-effective so you can just drop
lower half of the ratings that would be
another way to drop half of your
medicine so I'd say you can safely be
about as healthy with spending a lot
less money and time and trouble by just
dropping the lower half of Medicine
according to either of these two ways to
rate it very interesting let's go on to
another one
politics people are especially sensitive
about politics it's actually emotional
and they've got a lot invested this well
actually some people are so in all the
different ten areas we discuss people
vary a lot about how central those
things are to their identity so for many
of you medicine is not central to your
identity and you were fine with what I
just said in the last few minutes and
for other view medicine was central to
your identity and you're very skeptical
use really important to you to believe
that medicine is effective
similarly in politics some of you don't
care much about politics you're kind of
cynical or skeptical about it and what
I'm about to say will sound fine and
others of you will be much more
skeptical because politics is really
important to you so the usual story
about politics is that you get involved
with politics you read about it you talk
about it because you are helping you are
a Dudley do-right
you are making contributions to your
society by thinking carefully about the
better political positions the better
politicians etc and then making good
choices that will benefit all of us good
for you that's the usual story people
want to give to explain their political
behavior and that story just doesn't fit
with a lot of details about people's
political behavior for one thing you are
just way too emotional and very
uninformed about most political opinions
you have people seem quite free to have
political opinions they haven't
researched much at all and they seem
very confident of them even though these
things are usually pretty complicated
and there's a number of other puzzles
that just don't fit with the usual story
so if for example you really cared about
producing good political outcomes you
would want say to pick politicians who
were good operatives who knew how to
work the machine behind the scenes they
could craft bills and negotiate deals
and you'd want somebody who was good at
all of that and you wouldn't care so
much about what public positions they
took and you wouldn't necessarily want
them to take extreme positions that
would limit their ability to make deals
you'd want them to be good at making
deals but in fact people seem to care
mostly about the positions politicians
take and they don't care much about
whether they're good at actually making
things happen
they want politicians who share their
positions and of course politicians are
happy to supply that but it calls into
question the idea that what you really
want to do is produce more effective
policy and there's a number of other
puzzles we go into we say the better
explanation here is that what you want
to do is show your support for your
political allies there's your team and
you want to say yay US team and I'm with
you and most of what people do actually
does a pretty good job with that people
are very effective at that and that's in
some sense much more plausible about
something you would actually care about
in the sense that the people around you
do look at you and interpret you in
terms of a political lens they ask whose
side are you on and are you loyal and
that affects whether they want to relate
to you so people seem to care a lot
about whether their spouses and lovers
share their political views about
whether people at school do whether
people on the job do this matters a lot
to people and it's a strong selection
effect on people whether they you know
have the political
use that the people around them like so
that's all very plausible but of course
it means that our political system isn't
designed or necessarily doing a very
good job of producing good policies it's
allowing a lot of people to take sides
and to show loyalty to their sides now
this is an area I've done a little bit
of thinking in and I would say call my
perspective a more institutional one and
that the behaviors you say you see in
fact in my own writings on this I just
refer to the two teams as team red and
team blue to make them seem as much like
football teams as anything else because
that's certainly how the behaviors come
about my argument though is that isn't
necessarily driven by human nature or
culture but rather by the institutional
design of our political system in the
case the United States we have one of
the strongest set of constitutional and
traditional settings to produce a to
team dynamic we have a single member
election districts with
first-past-the-post usually plurality
wins and then we also have a
congressional system where control is by
one party typically in one house which
argue strongly for very strong
coalition's are at very strong parties
to win a majority so that they control
the house of Congress and I look at that
and I've looked at another institutional
design which I think could address that
and produce a very different result
which is liquid democracy also known as
delegate of democracy where there aren't
any teams essentially each voter
allocates their vote people who
represent them and in my version of
liquid democracy that vote is divided up
and does something like 25 issue areas
like defense and economy health care
education and so let's say I'm Mary
voter and I give my education vote to my
sister who's a teacher and to my uncle
who's a retired lieutenant for defense
the retired lieutenant colonel in the
Air Force etc and I've taken my vote and
pushed it to people who probably are
more knowledgeable than I am in the
domain
no where does that get aggregated into a
team rather each issue that gets floated
by a person and an initiation of
legislations gets voted on by these
proxies without any intermediary
and so we don't have the institutional
dynamic that we see in our system so in
our book in all of these areas we are
first just trying to look at broad
averages of human behavior across a wide
range of space and times for example in
medicine there are some different things
about the United States versus the rest
of the world but we're not focused on
that we're not trying to explain why is
the United States different we're trying
to say why is medicine everywhere at all
times has certain common characteristics
so I'd say the same about politics were
mainly trying to look at the common
features of politics across a wide range
of contexts and for example in your
church in your firm in your family there
is politics we talk about office
politics for example and these other
political arenas have a lot of the
similar sorts of features and effects
and so it's less trying to focus on the
United States today and in the year 2019
or even all democracies there is going
to be variations based on institutions
as you say and lots of other context but
our first priority is just try to look
at the very basic overall patterns and
so we're usually immersed in a variety
of context and our politics varies by
context and we often try to some degree
to integrate them at a lower cost so for
example in your firm there's gonna be
different factions and you'll be aligned
with some faction and then in a meeting
you might try to promote your faction in
that meeting and that would be politics
often the main thing you're trying to do
is make sure other people in your
faction know that you are still with
them and supporting their faction now in
many firms that the main division is
between you know the top and the bottom
and then you might be trying to say I'm
not rebelling against the top I'm with
the top I'm loyal and that would be the
main thing you were trying to show it'll
be less one faction against another then
there's the dominant powers and you're
trying to show your submission to them
and so they you know the simile in your
church that might be factions or there
might be one dominant coalition and your
family but we still have politics and
all these contexts in the sense that we
take positions we express opinions on
what would be good policies
who should be in charge and again in a
lot of these contexts we see much more
interested in the public appearance of
being loyal to some size than we care
about actually making good choices that
makes a lot of sense anything else you
want to add about the book before we
move on to our last topic well the the
key message of our book for people who
want to do institution design ever
improving the world is to say the
problem is a little harder than you
might have thought but there's a better
prospect that if you solve this harder
problem you'll actually get some
traction so today for example if you try
to solve the education problem in the
form of how can we get more students to
learn more material faster you'll find
that we actually have a lot of solutions
that we can identify them but nobody
cares but if school is really about
showing that you are smart and
conscientious and conformist and things
like that then you might have a better
chance if you found a solution that let
people show those things more
effectively than they would be actually
interested although they're going to
want to continue to pretend to want to
show that they are learning the material
so because we are hypocritical because
in each of these areas we have one thing
we say we're trying to do it another
thing we actually are trying to do
reforms will also have to be
hypocritical in that they will have to
continue to let us pretend that we are
trying to achieve the thing we were
pretending to achieve but actually give
us more of the things we really want so
that we will actually be interested in
adopting so that's the different
perspective that I'm hoping to pass on
to social scientists and policymakers
from my lifetime of experience which is
if you reform the question that way
you'll have a better chance of actually
producing reforms that people want okay
that makes a heck of a lot of sense
actually though it does bring something
pretty close to citizen into the design
of our institutions the fact that
there's a nominal reason learn something
and then there's a real reason so that
you're expired right right and it makes
a plausible reason why you can't be
fully honest about why you are proposing
something and so it means that you can
easily if other people are doing this
you can accuse them of hypocrisy which
is a terrible accusation usually in
people try to deny it to they can accuse
you of Apocrypha because
if this is what you're doing you
actually are being hypocritical in some
sense because ordinary people are
critical and you're trying to
accommodate them unfortunately that
seems to give rise to a defense
mechanism within the system for
inefficiency right if to actually
address the reality immediately produces
a reaction of the other side of
hypocrisy it then becomes difficult to
nudge the system towards reality or so
the first thing to realize is all of
these different systems are chock-full
of enormous waste from the point of view
of the thing we say we're trying to
achieve there's a vast potential for
doing better and I've asked
unacknowledged and on you know used
potential so it's far easier to figure
out how to produce policies that would
make things better than it is to get
people to be interested in adopting them
so the more fundamental problem in the
world isn't how can we have a better
world but is how can we make anybody
care about having a better world yeah I
seem to be this split is the reality of
what they say they want is different
from how they'll actually behave and
unfortunately if you move to try to move
the system towards how they'll actually
behave you're immediately subject to the
charge of hypocrisy because you have
deviated from the stated social norm
which is what happens if you admit your
actual reason for making this proposal
so and then he kept coming on another
level of strategy right which is here's
the reason but we have a differ here's
the proposal but here's the reason which
isn't the real reason right right now
most people who are involved in politics
and policy and social science know that
in fact this is what actually typically
happens most people who are making
policy proposals do have hidden agendas
and aren't willing to be fully honest
about why they're making those proposals
they know that's true about pretty much
everybody and which they know that is
true about the other side they focus on
the other side and they know that those
other people are hypocrites which all
the more emboldened them to be outraged
and indignant about the other side well
so always good to know how a system
works but I must say I don't take a
tremendous amount of optimism about our
current political process away from this
knowledge so well but what it means is
enormous potential is there for
improvement if the system was really
well optimized it would mean we couldn't
do much better when the system is really
broken it means there's huge potential
for
that is true but one of the best jobs I
ever took was a really messed up company
people said why'd you do that I said
it's actually a lot easier to fix a
messed up company that is to build a
good one or to improve a good one in
order to improve a good one all right
well let's move on to our last topic
this has been such a great conversation
and that is a article you put on your
blog not too long ago about publishing
tax returns that wasn't just a
relatively small thought I had it wasn't
central to my thinking but I basically
said why not publish tax returns as a
way to make it easier to enforce tax law
so if you're worried that people are
cheating on their taxes more visible the
taxes are then the more other people who
say saw their neighbor and how much tax
they are paying and could look at the
items would then be able to check that
against what they saw and maybe call
 when something didn't look
right so in some sense there's a
trade-off there between privacy how much
you're going to allow each person to
keep their taxes private and our
enforcement of tax law what about other
implications I read that and saw you had
a relatively narrow argument but it
immediately got me thinking you know
what about things like for instance how
much charity people would do if their
tax return to Republic and especially
going back your idea of signaling right
if our tax returns Republic we might
behave in different ways sure now it
does come to this basic question of to
what extent do you see social pressure
and social visibility is good overall
humans clearly evolved a system by which
we have social disability and social
pressure in order to induce better
behavior but this is the whole concept
of social norms long ago we didn't have
formal systems of law what we had is
norms and the rules were if you saw
somebody breaking a norm breaking a rule
then you were supposed to tell everybody
other people about it report on it then
you were supposed to talk to them and
coordinate with them about what to do
about it which included threats of
punishment punishment and escalations to
continue to do something to get it to
stop that is our ancient human heritage
to have norms that we enforce in that
way it's only in the last few ten
thousand years that we've had formal
systems of law that did anything else
than that and mostly formal systems Larr
trying to more strongly and accurately
enforce these norms that we developed
before so if you approve of this general
norm based system then you like the idea
that you could make the behavior more
visible which would then make other
people be able to shame you or
disapprove if that you were violating a
norm and then exert more pressure on you
to behave better now how many people
have come to the opinion lately that
norm enforcement is bad that we should
not be having norms and force that we
should instead create a system where
people can do things privately in a ways
that are not visible and that that's a
better world where other people are not
getting involved in their business and
so if true that means that norms have
gone really wrong somehow somehow once
upon time norms were effective and
useful and now norms are just broken and
of course often people want to make a
norm about that that is they create and
enforce a norm that you shouldn't have
other norms or that certain norms are
inappropriate that's part of the modern
world discussion is when it would be
okay to have norms a lot of research has
been done including some mathematical
simulations by some folks that are Santa
Fe Institute indicate that it's really
hard to have norm survive without
enforcement absolutely so you're not
gonna have norms be followed if they
aren't enforced and so the key question
is do you want norms being followed
there have been norms and societies in
the past that people have disapproved of
those particular norms for example
they've been norms against homosexuality
and those norms were enforced and people
today have come to the opinion that
those were bad norms and it was bad to
enforce them and then they jump from
that to the idea that it would be bad to
enforce all norms it's related to the
issue of blackmail actually which is a
fun topic that I've talked on the blog a
couple times in the last year because
arguably blackmail is a way to enforce
norms that is if there's a thing that if
it were known you wouldn't like it to be
known because people would treat yours
blackmail induces the threat of making
that be known and punishes you for
behaving in ways that that's right would
be effective
so in some sense when you allow
blackmail will allow people to enforce
the norms against whatever behavior you
would do that would you wouldn't like to
be known and then many people think well
that's bad that's
blackmail because it's bad to enforce
those norms such as for example
homosexuality in the past gotcha
though we then we get to an issue that
if we have nihilism about norms or
nihilism about enforcement we've
essentially said we've abandoned all of
our norms right so some people say well
now that we have law we don't need norms
anymore although then they have norms
about which laws we should have and of
course norms about which laws should be
enforced so for example the recent me to
discussion is about the norm against
behavior not only behavior the someone
which is illegal but they want the norm
to be enforced that more sorts of
behavior like that should be illegal and
even when it's not illegal it should be
disapproved and that's an attempt to use
norms to enforce concept of good
behavior and bad behavior and it make
sense if we agree that that is bad
behavior which I certainly would agree
so a specially important thing is that
we've seemed to have weakened our norms
for supporting law you know in the past
there usually were strong norms in any
given geographic area that if you saw
illegal behavior you should report it
and you should assist in reporting and
preventing and inducing the formal law
enforcement apparatus to come to play
and more recently we often have
communities where in the local
communities norms there's no particular
thing you're supposed to do when you see
illegal behavior it's up to the police
to find it and catch it but you're not
supposed to help there's no obligation
you have to help and in fact often you
feel you have an obligation to not else
because you see the police for example
as an outside occupying force that are
not supporting a community so when you
don't have a norm of supporting law laws
of course much weaker and much less
effective and so then you might not have
norms or laws presumably you'll have a
much less strong society right your
coherence as a society will be
substantially weakened but again from
the usual broadest perspective we say
you know norms and then law were an
important tools that societies had for
discouraging bad behavior and producing
better behavior but from some
perspectives they say well that may have
been what's been true but it isn't true
now and therefore they say norms are now
just things better off not enforced and
even many of them think laws are things
better off not enforce there's even
intention of people who think a stronger
law enforcement is a bad idea because we
have so many bad laws than enforcing the
laws that and you know if that's true
that means we have a pretty desperate
sound situations that we no longer have
norms or laws available to us as a way
to enforce good behavior because there's
a lot of bad behavior that's possible
and that might well grow if it isn't
scourge yeah from any evolutionary game
theory perspective we know that systems
are easily available by freeriders and
by other kinds of malicious strategies
again and again and work by guys like
Sam Boles and herb dentists on some of
these simple social exchange games show
that without the ability to enforce
norms there's a large tendency for
people to retreat to a series of far
from optimal strategies so I've been
especially interested lately in ways to
reform criminal law enforcement and
punishment exactly because if you assume
that on average criminal law is a good
idea then on average would be good to be
more effective at enforcing that and
arguably our current system is pretty
awkward and inefficient
doing those sorts of things and unfair
in many ways but that is all based on
the idea that it's better to have
criminal law than not to have it and the
same is true for norm enforcement
blackmail is good if the typical norms
that would be enforced by blackmail are
good but not otherwise what are some of
the ideas in the criminal justice area
well I've got this package that it's
kind of radical but I'm even thinking
writing a book on it to combine a bounty
insured fine system to basically
privatize the punishment and enforcement
of crime but still have the same social
choice of what is a crime and whether
anyone act as a crime so the bound of
the proposals will leave in place
whatever systems we have for deciding
which acts are crimes and how how severe
any one act is as a crime in terms of a
type of fact and then whether there's an
accusation about any one person having
committed one of these acts leave alone
the process for deciding whether that
accusation is correct okay so for
instance we let's say we still are of a
law against armed robbery we've won a
pretty strong sanction on it we put a
bounty on people who apprehend armed
robbers so we put two numbers on each
crime so same
armed robbery of a certain source we
could bury armed robbery say whether it
was you know violent or nonviolent with
the gun or not you could vary the
punishment for different versions of
armed robbery but for whichever version
you're talking about with society would
put two numbers on that crime it would
put a bounty I how hard should people
try to catch it and will put a fine
which is how much should it be punished
when it's caught and those would be the
two key numbers that would the society
would decide about each crime and now
there'd be a private system by which say
a bounty hunter would go look for
evidence to accuse any one person and
then go to court and try to convince a
court of that and then if they convince
the court they will receive a certain
bounty and then that person will suffer
a certain fine now in the past we've
tended not to use fines for big crimes
because most people can't pay really big
fines so the innovation here is to make
it more like our system for automobile
insurance so today you're not allowed to
drive on the road unless you have
insurance that covers for an accident
and so the idea would be to do that for
everything
crime insurance for everything or even
lawsuit insurance for everything you
must have an insurer who backs you to a
large amount say the 90th percentile of
awards such that if you are found guilty
of that they will pay this amount on
your behalf and if we can do that now
you and your insurer internalize the
issues of how to punish how to monitor
how much freedoms you should have and
even how much to help with crime
detection you and your insurer make
those choices and the rest of us don't
have to get involved so today in our
system of crime because it's the
centrally run system we all have to get
involved in deciding which kind of
traffic stops are justified which kind
of prison treatment is cruel and unusual
what weather torture is okay whether you
the government should be able to get
your emails under certain subpoenas etc
we all have to make all of these central
choices in a centrally bureaucratic way
which is not very well attuned to
individual variation so now under this
alternative system once you've got an
insurance company that agrees to pay for
your crimes you and your insurance
company decide what happens to you if
you're guilty
something you can agree to torture you
can agree to prison you can agree to
exile you can also agree ahead of time
to limit your freedoms you can agree to
curfew you can agree to ankle bracelets
you can agree to places you're not
allowed to go you can agree to letting
people read your emails you choose your
freedoms and your punishment and that of
course will affect your insurance
premiums the insurance company will
offer you a lower premiums on your crime
insurance if you are willing to accept
fewer freedoms or more limits on your
behavior or stronger punishments should
you be caught but that's up to you now
the rest of us don't have to get
involved so it's an insurance mandate
kind of an ACA for crime insurance just
like we do for cars now exactly and so
and like some people are proposing to do
for guns at the moment so you know
people who don't like guns in the moment
are saying hey you should have to get
gun insurance if you bike well that's
another damn good idea well Robin this
has been amazing even better than I
thought it would be but I think the time
has come for us to wrap up and any final
words any final thoughts it's been fun
chatting with you and I'm happy to have
been able to talk about all these
different subjects with you
very good look forward to talking to you
in the future
[Music]