howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
listeners have asked us to provide
pointers some of the resources we talked
about on the show we now have links to
books and articles referenced in recent
podcasts that are available on our
website
we also offer full transcripts go to gym
rut show calm that gym rut show calm
today's guest is Melanie Mitchell
professor computer science at Portland
State University and external faculty at
the Santa Fe Institute hey Jim it's
great to be here yeah it's great to have
you here we go back aways absolutely
many years and they'd indeed Melanie is
the author of several books I often
recommend her book complexity a guided
tour as a really good introduction to
complexity science and also I have some
you know really nice history with
Melanie's books one of them was quite
historically important to me when I
first started stumbling into not even
knowing that it really existed
complexity science the very first book I
read was John Holland's book on genetic
algorithms the second was to Kaufman's
origins of order but the third was
Melody's book on genetic algorithm so I
don't remember the name of it we had an
introduction to genetic algorithm yeah
exactly yeah and I really liked that in
fact it was the one that made this whole
genetic algorithms thing clear to me so
that when I retired from business in
2001 I literally went down the hall and
started writing hybrid genetic algorithm
neural nets and frankly a lot of it
stolen you know at least the genetic
algorithm part stolen right out of your
book so a very important part actually
of my intellectual trajectory so thank
you for that that's great to hear
Melanie's also created and taught
introductory level online courses on
complexity science a little googling
showed me that none of them seem to be
active at the moment did I miss
something do you have any of your
courses up yeah there they're on
complexity explorer org
and they're always available but they're
in session one of them is about to end
its session okay yeah what they all said
something like not in session or not of
a
or this or that but we'll get the link
from Melanie and put it on the episode
page so as usual people want to follow
up on any link or reference on our
episode page we'll have a link to one or
more of the courses that's available and
those things have gotten just amazingly
good feedback anyway today we're gonna
talk mostly though I'm sure we'll talk
about other things along the way
her new book artificial intelligence a
guide for thinking humans the reader
should find it very accessible I don't
believe there was a single mathematical
formula in the whole book
thus Melanie obviously learned Hawking's
law every equation halves the sale of
the book and that's multiplicative well
on the other hand that does not mean the
book is lightweight she addresses many
of the most important issues in AI today
and to give some very nice examples
explaining you know some of the basics
of neural nets and even some of the more
advanced topics like convolutional
neural nets and recurrent Nets in a way
that I think people will find deeper
than you usually find in such intro
books but yet not in a way that's kind
of technologically off-putting so a good
recommendation for people looking for an
introduction to where the world is with
respect to AI today thanks for that
great introduction you could send me
some Bitcoin at the following address
right there really was a really good
book okay let's jump in you know one of
the points you make early on the book is
that much of the media and truthfully
I've even found this with some very good
academics outside of computer science
departments think that deep learning is
artificial intelligence and that is all
there is to AI did you start out by
telling us how that isn't true and maybe
a little bit of the history of symbolic
and sub symbolic AI sure so at the very
beginning of AI the research field maybe
back in the 40s and 1950s people did not
use learning as a method to create AI at
least not for the most part they used
symbolic AI in which people manually
programmed and rules for intelligent
behavior that turned out to not work
very well because intelligent behavior
is way too complex to be
shirred in a simple set of rules that
cooked up by a computer programmer so in
the 90s starting the 80s and 90s people
started using more statistical
approaches where the idea was to learn
from data computer programs learned from
getting lots and lots of examples and
there are many different ways to do that
but only in the last decade or so has
the method of deep neural networks taken
over and it's been so successful that
it's kind of taken over the entire field
and everybody is using it in some form
or another
and a lot of the media and as you say
people outside of the field equate deep
neural networks with a I equate machine
learning with a I equate deep neural
networks with machine learning and yet
all of those things are kind of
subfields of a much broader set of
techniques which you might call
artificial intelligence yep and you know
and you talk about hybrid systems and in
reality and a lot of the real
interesting things going on out there in
the world are our hybrids you know there
are partially maybe substantially deep
learning but they have other attributes
as well for instance self-driving cars
do you have other things that you could
point to that are examples of hybrid
systems yeah most I would say that most
of the systems that are used
commercially are hybrid one well-known
example is the programs by google
deepmind that learned to play go and
chess so alpha go is the famous go
playing program alpha zero is a program
that learns to play chess and other
games and those involve both deep neural
networks and more conventional technique
called tree search which is a more
symbolic kind of technique so those two
systems combined together really are
what give those systems of power okay
good the other thing you address and for
those of people who listen to the show
we recently had Gary Marcus on the show
and he talked about the same thing is
the hype
problem in AI that people over prom
and under-deliver and it seems to be
going on today but it wouldn't be the
first time there's been a history of AI
Springs and AI winners could you maybe
give us a little bit of the history of
the AI hype cycle
sure AI hype has been around for as long
as AI has been around and it comes not
only from the media but from AI
researchers themselves who either are
hyping because they're trying to get
more funding or because they actually
believe that we're very close to big
breakthroughs in mimicking human
intelligence or possibly both but
there's been this kind of recurrent
cycle where there's been a lot of
optimism and people making big
predictions about what's coming very
soon say self-driving cars which maybe
we'll talk about a little bit later but
then there's a big disappointment when
the predictions don't come true where
people overestimated where the field was
and so you go from these so-called AI
Springs in which there's huge optimism
lots of funding thrown at researchers
and lots of startup companies venture
capital to AI winter where a lot of the
funding dries up people are become more
pessimistic realize that it was harder
than we thought and that cycle then
keeps going it's kind of a boom and bust
cycle in AI and when I got my PhD in
1990 we were in the middle of an AI
winter and I was even advised not to use
the term artificial intelligence on my
job applications which now is kind of
the opposite everybody's using the word
artificial intelligence even if they're
not really doing it yeah it cost you
$100,000 a year to leave it off your
resume right exactly
yeah I remember those cycles in fact
when I was a young entrepreneur in the
early 80s a lot of my college friends
from MIT had gotten involved in the Lisp
machine era of AI which was you know
hugely funded companies going public etc
and a bunch of them tried to recruit me
to come in to those companies and I went
and talked to him and listened to him
you know being it by that point kind of
a relatively experienced corporate IT
guy working on some advanced problems
but nonetheless working with actual
corporate IT people I made the
assessment uh any industry based around
the Lisp computer language is just to
cognitively loaded to be realistic for
corporate America and you know I
concluded at that time and irrevocably
that that whole list machine symbolics
Corp and all that stuff was just not
gonna work and I was right then it kind
of spiraled down and to you know that AI
winter that you were talking about there
in the early 90s yeah well I have to say
that I as a pre graduate student I
learned to program in Lisp on Oh
symbolic slist machine and that's by far
the best machine the best user interface
and the best programming language I've
ever used but I understand that it
wasn't going to scale up in corporate
America but for research purposes it was
great yeah probably one of my friends
was involved in the the things that you
like as I said him you need an IQ of 130
basically to be good at programming Lisp
and I can tell you that IQ 130s are
fairly thin on the ground in corporate
America unfortunately the other hand IQ
130s kind of your baseline PhD science
and engineering kind of person so it's a
good fit that in that world
huh well we can talk about IQs i q-- as
a measure of intelligence when we talk
about what is intelligence later on yes
I know a controversial topic you know
obviously it's that's a way to
reductionist a way to think about it
nonetheless I do push back a little bit
about people say there's nothing useful
in IQ you know it's not everything but
it's also not nothing but we can talk
about that later if you like
okay and certainly it seems like today
we are well into the hype cycle I've
never seen a hype cycle quite like this
when an AI and of course maybe it's
different this time
what do you think well that's a good
question as you say it seems to be the
peak of a new hype cycle where deep
learning has been extraordinarily
successful and there's a
huge amount of money being put into
start-up companies using deep learning
and even by big companies like Google
Facebook Apple IBM etc putting a huge
amount of money into AI and deep deep
learning in particular but I think
people are just beginning to really see
some of the limitations self-driving
cars is a very good example you know
people assumed that we would have
self-driving cars widely deployed by now
and even 2020 which is just a couple
weeks away has been sort of the year
that people have predicted that we're
gonna see millions of self-driving cars
on the road that you know human drivers
are going to be a thing of the past and
so on but it seeming more and more like
that's way over estimating how soon
we're gonna see that kind of technology
so there's been a lot of predictions of
a new AI winter and I wouldn't be at all
surprised if that happens yeah I could
say in my other role as occasional
private equity investor in early-stage
companies I'm starting to see the
ridiculous you know two years ago it was
blockchain and and such that was you
know tacked on to every business plan
whether it needed it or not you know now
you can see a you know beer brewery all
right we're gonna use AI okay right
you'll be making beer successfully for a
thousand years without it and I doubt
you needed it lots for small scale micro
breweries so that's generally it's a
sign that we're getting late in the in
the hype cycle where people are just
relentlessly stapling ai to almost any
other kind of business plan yeah AI
blockchain and quantum computing those
are kind of the three buzzwords we got
the mother of all buzzwords right yeah
we want to extract money out of naive
investors let's string those to get
their semi plausible sounding story oh
my goodness
interesting another area of a lot of
confusion in the general public around
AI is around strong or AGI versus narrow
AI and you know a lot of this you know
kind of big talk about AI you know going
back even as far back as the 1956
Dartmouth conference we're sorta
about strong AI or artificial general
intelligence or human-level AI what can
you say about that versus the AI we
actually have today all throughout the
history of AI every AI program that's
ever been created has been narrow in the
sense that it's able to do essentially
one thing like we have machines that can
play chess at a Grandmaster level but
they can't do anything else they can't
play checkers we have machines that can
do speech recognition now actually
amazingly well but they actually don't
understand any of the speech that
they're recognizing and they can't say
analyze that speech for its sentiment
whether it's positive or negative you
have other programs that can do analyze
speech for sentiment but they can't do
anything else so it we're in a world of
narrow AI that's gotten better and
better at narrow tasks but really the
beginning at the beginning the goal was
general ai ai that can do the sort of
range of general tasks that humans can
do course is debatable how general
humans are but that's you know that's
kind of the ultimate goal and people
talk about AGI artificial general
intelligence or human level intelligence
or as you say strong AI all these terms
refer to a goal rather than to anything
close to what we have today yep that
certainly seem to be correct to me and
yet you and I both know an awful lot of
people including me who got involved
with AI at one time or other it was all
about the hope for this human-level AI
someday I think most people who got into
the field at least up until recently
that was their goal they got in because
they were really excited about
recreating human-like intelligence
because they were interested in
intelligence in the phenomena of
intelligence and understanding it but it
seems that our own intelligence is
actually invisible to us you know we do
so many things so easily like this
conversation were carrying out you and
just chatting and talking and we have no
idea sort of how our brains are doing
that and it turns out that it's much
harder than we thought
than people ever thought to recreate
that in machines so that's been a
recurring theme in AI that people are
figuring out more and more how complex
intelligence really is in a way that's
almost invisible to our conscious
processing yeah one of your chapter of
titles I believe was easy things are
hard right right that's something that's
been you know pointed out many times you
know I think you may have also mentioned
this one specifically neither of us
could multiply 250 digit numbers very
quickly and yet a dollar-fifty
calculator does it without any problem
at all and yet the biggest computers in
the world smartest a eyes can't pass the
Steve Wozniak test which is to you know
drop a robot into a random American
kitchen and have it figure out how to
make coffee
exactly exactly that's a well-known
paradox in AI indeed and yet there are
some people who think that we're
knocking at the door you quoted Schoen
leg a very smart guy from deepmind who
recently said he thought we'd be at the
human level of AI in the mid 2020s
yeah he since walked that back a bit as
you can imagine but he's not the only
one you know Mark Zuckerberg the founder
of Facebook believed that within the
next five years we'd have something like
human AI and he was gonna have his
company invent that I think the founders
of Google also were very optimistic and
they hired Ray Kurzweil maybe the most
famous AI optimist to make you know
general AI happen at Google so there's a
pretty big difference of opinion even in
the tech community about how close we
are to having something like that yeah
it may be it's like you know fusion
based electricity it's 20 years in the
future and always will be that's what
people say and I think the reason for
that is that we don't understand how
complicated our own intelligence is
because or so
conscious of most of it most of the
intelligence but they you know the sort
of things that allow us to be generally
intelligent to happen below the level of
our consciousness absolutely in fact my
day jobs that agree I have one is the
scientific study of consciousness and
the more I learn about it the more I
realized how amazingly minor the actual
conscious frame is itself I used to
think it was doing one or two percent of
the work but it's a lot less than that
actually that's interesting yep the
actual bitrate being processed in
consciousness is on the order of 60 bits
a second that's 60 bits a second and and
yet we know that until probably still to
this day it's true that the actual
processing at the bit level in the human
brain is larger than any computer on
earth will pass that number soon but
think about that sixty bits per second
versus the most powerful computer on
earth the thing that lives between your
ears so that shows you how much is
happening you know down in the lower
parts of the brain where we really still
don't have that much insight yeah that's
why I thought it was a musing when and
Rui who's a former Stanford professor
and very big name in AI he came out with
this prediction that anything that
people can do in a second or less
machines will be able to do as well like
within the next few years and I was
thinking well he really has no clue what
people are doing in that second or less
they're doing a lot yeah the one you
alluded to earlier which is still a
great mystery is how is it that humans
produce speech right you know making
your tongue wag is fairly well
understood but how is it that we choose
the words we do I mean it all happens
completely unconsciously we have no
insight into our sentence creation
mechanisms this black box machinery from
the conscious mind and there's what
that's something we do in one second all
the time yeah and that machines can't do
very well at all let's jump ahead a
little bit cuz you mentioned it and
that's self-driving cars and you point
out that one of the things that bedevils
many of these kinds of high stakes high
value problems is the long tail
problem once you tell us about that and
then more generally what you think is
going on with self-driving cars because
you were right even big companies like
Ford was saying 2020 was the year you
could go down to the Ford dealer and buy
a you know level five self-driving car
we obviously isn't gonna happen yeah so
so the way that these cars are created
the sort of self-driving cars as they
use at least in their vision systems
they use deep learning which involves
learning from millions of labeled
examples like you know some human has
labeled a video that a car might see
when it's something like that when it's
driving they've labeled every object in
it and the car learns like this is a
trash can this is a stoplight this is a
stop sign this is you know this is a
pedestrian this is a dog and it learns
all those objects but the longtail
problem says that there's lots of things
in the world that are very unusual but
there's so many things that are unusual
that something unusual is likely to come
up so there's this idea of us think of a
statistical distribution where there's
lots of normal usual things that you
would see but many many very unusual
things that are in the tail of that
distribution so I gave some examples
like you know you're you're sitting at a
stoplight for five minutes it's a red
light it doesn't change okay that hardly
ever happens but it happens occasionally
or there's a snowman in the middle of
the road where you're driving should you
run into it you know there's all these
crazy stuff in the world that can happen
and machines don't learn about it so the
question is what do they do when they're
in a situation that they haven't been
trained for well we humans have this
thing that we call common sense we have
it you know you can argue the degree to
which different people have common sense
but we all have this ability to take
something we've learned and apply it
appropriately for the most part in new
situations and self-driving car
really lack that common sense so they
can do really well in most situations
but there will be situations that occur
for every self-driving car that it can't
deal with so we don't have level 5
autonomy which is where we can just sit
in the back and drink wine and you know
read read the newspaper while the car
drives us because something weird might
happen that it can't deal with yeah I
gotta say that I find anything less than
level 5 uninteresting and probably
annoying and dangerous yeah that's the
problem I mean this is the big trade-off
in self-driving cars is that level 5
means the car does everything in all
circumstances level 3 or 4 whatever we
have now with things like Tesla or the
weibo and all these different
self-driving sort of prototypes is more
that the car can usually manage but
occasionally the human needs to step in
well humans are very bad at paying
attention as we know and people don't
pay attention and they don't step in
when they're needed because you know
stuff happens very fast and so we've
seen a lot of accidents that involve
that very thing where a self-driving car
runs into a situation it can't deal with
and the human isn't paying attention so
it is very dangerous and interestingly
Google with their way mode like even
before it was way mo they came to that
view and at the time it seemed radical
they said we're gonna build a car with
no steering wheel because we we our
analysis our cognitive scientists have
told us that the handoff between
computer and human is never going to
work and it's a degree they stick to
their guns on that they may now be
caught on ok they're right about that
but then there's also the longtail
problem on the other side yeah I think
the way that it's gonna be dealt with is
by redefining what it means to be
self-driving so that we'll have
self-driving cars but only in very
restricted circumstances in parts of the
city where everything is completely
mapped out and you know there's may be
restrictions on what where pedestrians
can go
and it won't be available in certain
kinds of weather so it's going to be
restricted so that the infrastructure
that we humans build will kind of meet
self-driving cars halfway so they won't
have to deal with the longtail problem
because we'll try and prevent any weird
things from happening but they won't be
able to run in all circumstances yeah
the weather is one that's all I wondered
about you know having lived most of my
life in places with real four seasons of
weather and having dealt with the fact
that you can barely see out the window
because of ice and fog and hardcore
sleet coming down and all this sort of
stuff you'd have to have a hell of a lot
of extra processing redundancy and
sensors to be able to safely drive a car
in kind of adverse a real winter weather
the kind you might find in the mountains
back east yeah absolutely
humans aren't that good at it either as
we know humans get into lots of
accidents and some of the self-driving
car people have argued well self-driving
cars aren't perfect they're going to get
into accidents but maybe they'll reduce
the overall number of accidents yeah
that could be well be the case I make
that point which is if the goal was that
self-driving cars had to be perfect
they'd never get there but all they have
to do is be better than humans well I
think that's maybe not true that that
humans will not accept self-driving cars
that are going to be fallible that are
maybe just a bit better than humans that
kill people you know because they get it
they do the wrong thing and I don't know
whether that's fair or not but I think
people sort of hold the higher standard
to the technologies than they do to
other humans that's probably true and
and even just at the human stick Gail
the humans aren't that bad you know Gary
Marcus and I actually looked this up
while we were online on our call a month
or two ago and it turns out that the
current fatality rate in the United
States is about one fatality per hundred
million like the actual numbers like 80
million miles driven and 80 million
miles driven is only about what all the
self-driving car tests in the world so
far have added up to so there's no real
statistical signal at all
if there's a statistical signal at all
its that is the opposite is there's
still a lot more dangerous than humans
humans aren't that bad actually they're
not that good but they're not that bad
okay but but I'll push back a little bit
because looking at fatalities is one
thing you know we have a lot of stuff
technology and cars to prevent
fatalities like airbags and seatbelts
and all that but there's a lot of
accidents that happen with with humans
that aren't fatal and so humans do get
into accidents much more often than that
and maybe the number of accidents would
decrease with self-driving cars that's a
good point so we'll you know clearly
somebody I'm sure that people like way
Moe and uber etc have done this they you
know a figure of Merit what is the
economic utility of what level of
wonderfulness in a self-driving car
versus a human but then we still have to
get to you know the question that you
also raised which is maybe we demand a
higher standard from automation before
we're willing to try it yeah and one of
the reasons is that we understand I
think it's a matter of understanding and
kind of you know I understand why people
get into accidents you know they're not
paying attention you kind of see
situations where you know somebody acted
unpredictably or something like that
because I'm a human you know and I can
kind of model other humans but it's
harder to understand some of the
accidents that self-driving cars get
into like for instance when the car the
uber car it didn't stop for that
pedestrian that it killed in Arizona or
the Tesla's you know the auto pilot that
have been running into stopped fire
engines and police cars seen a bunch of
those examples and it's very the kind of
mistakes they make are pretty different
than the kind of mistakes humans make
and that might be a reason that people
will trust them less just because I
would say they're less predictable than
humans released less explainable yeah I
think this is really important for our
audience I think one of the things that
makes particularly the neural style you
know the sub symbolic deep learning
style potentially problematic in that
way is that the
at least so far pretty opaque black
boxes and it's really difficult to get
any explanation of why they did what
they did
unlike symbolic systems could you talk
about that distinction a little bit sure
right so so deep neural networks are
these very complicated programs they're
software for the most part that involve
millions of simulated neurons with even
more millions of simulated connections
between those neurons and it's just a
bunch of equations and numbers very hard
for a human even the person who
programmed that network to figure out
what the network actually learned and
why it's making its decisions you know
looking at a long long list of numbers
is not an explanation of why this car
they ran into this firetruck
so this this idea that neural networks
in particular machine learning more
generally is hard to explain decisions
that it made has become a big issue in
the field and there's so kind of a sub
industry of people trying to make them
more explainable or transparent so how
can you trust these systems when you
can't explain why they're working so
it's a little bit hard to say that we're
going to trust them in all situations
that's where the older symbolic systems
had an advantage they may have been
brittle in certain situations we'll come
back to the brittleness of neural nets
too but because they were you know
written out in essentially logic
statements one could more or less figure
out why they did what they did
yeah that's exactly right and you can
think of humans as kind of a combination
where we have obviously we are neural
networks in some sense we have hundreds
of millions of neurons and trillions of
connections between the neurons and
that's what's in our brain but we also
have language on top of that which is a
symbolic system which allows us to
explain our decisions we're not always
explaining them sort of truthfully or
with veracity but it's an approximation
and
it makes us kind of trust other humans
because we should kind of know how they
think but these machines just are black
boxes and it's really hard to get inside
their heads if you will was in your book
or whether were something else I read
somewhere else but apparently there's
some other countries not the u.s.
because we're usually laggards and such
things for some countries that are
considering legislation to require plain
English explanations of results from AI
systems that have human implications say
for instance being turned down for a
loan or approved for a mortgage or
something like that yeah that was in my
book I talked about the European Union's
GDP our legislation which part of it has
the right to an explanation you know if
your life has been impacted by an
algorithm in some way by an outlaw than
making the decision you have the right
to an explanation but that kind of gets
into a murky philosophical territory of
what counts as an explanation you know I
could say I could give you my soft the
the source code to this network and all
the data and say well that's the
explanation well obviously that doesn't
tell me much you know maybe all the
information is somehow in there but it
doesn't tell me much so how do you
decide what counts as a reasonable
explanation yeah and it's not clear that
we're going to be able to build
explainable systems that have the same
kind of success in terms of accuracy as
these deep neural networks that give you
a real world example I sometimes do a
little bit of Facebook advertising for
my podcast episodes frankly more to
learn demographic information who's
interested in it than to drive a huge
amount of traffic but it's interesting
that I've had episodes completely
innocent science only episodes turned
down by the Facebook advertising machine
by what after I raised unholy hell they
finally admitted was a completely
arbitrary black box signal which they
couldn't explain and they had to reverse
by human intervention
that's strange yeah I know well shows
how we still need humans in the loop
it's frightening how much we're kind of
in many cases giving autonomy to these
algorithms to make decisions about
humans like are you allowed to get on
this plane no well why well because the
algorithm says no and not only is it you
know I said I was just utterly pissed
off that you know that no one could
explain because particularly the one
particular episode that kept getting
returned turned down again and again was
the most pure science non-political
non-controversial episode of them all
nobody could explain it but the other
thing that makes this even more
potentially problematic than you talk
about this a lot you give some beautiful
examples is you know while old expert
systems had their own kind of
brittleness you know the neural nets are
surprisingly brittle and can be easily
fooled as well you show some great
examples where using adversarial
software that intentionally generates
trick images neural nets that were
trained to pick out classify images you
know a panda versus a houseplant versus
a steam kettle you can give it pictures
that kind of look like static and they
all said ostrich I thought tablet really
interesting yeah maybe we're talking a
little bit about how at least at the
present point in time neural nets can be
adversely defeated in perverse kinds of
ways right
so people have shown many ways in which
you can fool neural networks the even
the best deep neural networks that
people are using today commercially that
you can if if you're sort of clever
enough and know something about the way
these neural networks work you can
create images either images that look
exactly like the original image just to
humans nothing's changed but you've
secretly changed very slightly a few of
the pixels and now the network thinks as
you said it's an ostrich rather than a
school bus or else you can generate
these very noisy looking images
don't look like anything to a human but
the network thinks it's some object it's
very very confident that it's some
object
so those are called adversarial examples
and they've been shown not only in
vision but also it's for speech
recognition you know you can fool like
your Alexa or your Siri system to think
that some white noise is actually a
command to it or you can fool language
processing programs to miss read
sentences to miss translate them in a
way that you have targeted you know it's
there's all kinds of ways in which you
can manipulate these networks and it
really shows that they are not
perceiving their inputs in the same way
that we humans perceive them that they
haven't learned the concepts that we
meant to teach them that they've learned
something else that allows us to
statistically correlate inputs with
outputs and do very well at it except
they can be fooled in these very not in
human-like ways and that's the cause a
lot of concern in the community there's
a big area of sort of adversarial
learning now that people study and try
and build defenses against these these
attacks but it's it's turns out to be
quite hard yeah you allude to it in
passing but I've come to think quite
strongly that the reason that we see
this brittleness in these neural nets is
because they're almost exclusively
feed-forward
in meaning that signals start at one end
and passed through to the other end with
no or very minimal back channel yet we
know in things like the human visual
perception system there's a massive
amount of feedback and I think you
quoted and other people said similar
things maybe 10x as much feedback as
feed-forward and further in a lot of AI
research will they introduce a little
bit of recurrency tends to be very
short-range you know a storage loop you
know one one loop while in the human
brain some of the feedback is from very
high levels to very low levels and it
strikes me that until we start including
much more real long range recurrency
into neural networks it's going to be
essentially impossible solve that
problem I think that's probably true the
problem is that Neurosci
just don't really understand the role of
all those feedback connections in the
brain and if you try and include that
kind of thing in neural networks they
become much harder to Train it's one of
those things that's going to require
some advances in neuroscience to really
get a better handle on what all those
feedback connections are doing and how
we learn there their weights and to try
and apply some of that to artificial
neural nets yeah and you mentioned you
know the we think at least that we don't
have algorithms to solve those weights
and I would argue that we're kind of
like the person that lost their card
keys and are but they're looking under
the street lamp because that's where the
light is even though that's not where
they lost their keys and and that the
equivalent of the street lamp is the
obsession with gradient descent type
algorithms for tuning weights they work
really good when they work but there's a
lot of things like highly long-range
recurrent architectures or they don't
work at all
and yet we do have other methods and you
alluded to them just again just in
passing one of my favorites probably
because it's what I personally worked
with the most is evolutionary solutions
to neural weights that will work on
arbitrary architectures it doesn't
really matter and can actually be used
to discover not just waits but
architectures too and there's been a
growing still tiny but growing amount of
work that shows for in many problem
domains or in some problem domains of
some say many yet evolution works as
good or maybe better than gradient
descent and yet it clearly works in
domains where gradient descent can't get
any traction at all you have any
thoughts on whether evolutionary
approaches might be able to open up
these kind of macro architectural
questions well as someone who wrote a
book about genetic algorithms I'm really
excited to see some renewed interest in
this field you know it people have been
looking at genetic algorithms in some
form or another since you know almost
the beginning of the AI age but they
never really worked that well on you
know on a wide set of problems and
people kind of decided that oh
evolutionary methods don't work
so there was not that much support for
them not that much interest but I've
seen in the last like few years some
renewed interest in that area and some
renewed successes that kind of come like
the success of deep learning because of
the amount of computing that's available
to us now so it may be that you know
evolutionary methods were a good idea
all along but just never had the amount
of computing that was needed I was
recently at the neural information
processing systems conference which is
like the biggest machine learning
conference international machine
learning conference and there were
several keynote lectures that mentioned
that ideas from evolution and ideas from
artificial life should be looked at
again in the context of AI and machine
learning so I think there's there's it's
it's gonna come back and I think that
that's maybe one of the next frontiers
yep I with you it seems to me that it
will allow us to explore architectures
that the gradient descent feed-forward
people just can't get to and that'll be
a good thing and I'd really think you're
right that it a lot of its could be
about the fact that people gonna wake up
one day and go holy moly highly parallel
stuff has gotten really really cheap you
know clock speeds on ships aren't much
faster than they were 10 years ago but
the number of course per dollar
continues to grow at Moore's Law and if
there's anything in in computer science
that's embarrassingly parallel its
evolutionary algorithms right yeah
exactly and you know companies like
Google and uber are taking this very
seriously and kind of looking at
evolutionary methods now so that's
that's kind of exciting yeah Hooper's
had Jeff clean up but at their place for
quite a while and you know he's funny he
says oh I don't use the word evolution
but you know that he still understands
that's an important part of his toolkit
oh yeah and another guy Ken Stanley is
out there who does use the word
evolution
and has been working on evolutionary
algorithms applied to neural nets for
the last thirty years so I think that
you know it there's some there's some
interesting stuff in that area good I'm
gonna go see look at the nips for
seedings this year and pick out some of
those evolutionary papers and see what's
happening yeah this is something I've
been waiting for for a long time and
well I can get in my own little way I
fool around with it at the margin and
it's surprising how often you can
actually solve a problem I used to you
know back in 2001 2002 and I first
started talking about him I would say
that you know evolutionary neural nets
are the weakest possible method but also
the most general they could solve almost
anything though not necessarily very
well or very rapidly and you know with
better techniques you know like the
Stanley stuff from originally UT I guess
he's down in Florida now this is
academic home and the availability of
massive truly massive amounts of
parallel computation its time may come
time in the same way that the you know
deep learning there really wasn't that
much magic in the algorithms that what
really made the difference was people
realize you could implement gradient
descent on very cheap parallel
architecture in this case GPUs and also
somebody tried what seemed like an
eternity ridiculous transfer function R
Lu and it turned out to work great and
it turned out to be particularly
efficient on GPUs so sometimes those
kinds of fortuitous fairly simple
technological underpinnings can really
change the fortunes of a whole technical
approach yeah I don't know if you follow
broad Brooks on Twitter but he you know
he's a super well known AI robotics
researcher and just like a week ago he
had this long Twitter thread where he
talked about how he's betting on
evolutionary computation as the next big
thing in AI so that was pretty pretty
interesting that is its thing actually I
don't know if I follow him or no I don't
think so yep I'm gonna follow him you'll
see his threat where he says you if you
want to revolutionize AI and make a lot
of money try evolutionary computation
cool my bet what might be get me
enough to go back to work yeah there you
go of all things I love evolutionary AI
is it but I'm too old and too rich and
too lazy so leave it to the kids today
oh yeah that very interesting passage in
your book where you played the deliverer
of other people's arguments about why
AGI might never happen that somehow
thinking was something that only humans
could do you want you know bring forth
some of those arguments and then your
views about them so I quoted some of
Alan Turing's arguments in his original
paper on the Turing test where he is
basically you know lists a bunch of
arguments against machines thinking but
then I talked about sort of more recent
discussions about it where the idea that
could a machine actually be thinking
versus is it just simulating thought
whether that's an actual good question
or really an error in categories so I
asked my mother I kind of quoted a
conversation with my mom in the book
where I talked to her and she's really
adamant that machines can't think even
in principle because brains are for
faking and machines are for doing
mechanical things so ergo machines
cannot think so it's really it's it's a
kind of a deep-seated philosophical
almost religious view about thinking and
I think that that in a way that comes
from the notion there's something more
to thinking than just something
mechanical like our neurons getting
input and firing and that there's
something more to it in the brain you
know it's it's really a complex systems
issue where to my mind it's an issue of
emergence that we have all these very
relatively simple non thinking
components namely neurons and
connections and so on and out of that
emerges this complex phenomena that we
call thinking that is not easily
reducible to the sum of its parts so
that's you know maybe I don't know if
that's exactly what you want want me to
get at but that's was a lot of what I
was trying to get across in that chapter
yep I think that's really good any other
thing I think you get alluded to it and
passing but something I've kept my eye
on pretty heavily is it I suspect that
one level some of the critique might
have been right in that all the focus
just on what's happening in the head may
have left out some of the important
parts of cognition and the idea of
embodied cognition and socially embedded
cognition may actually be important for
us to understand what human type
cognition is really all about yeah
that's a really important discussion so
most of a I throughout its entire
history has kind of seen intelligence as
metaphorically the brain in the VAT that
you have this thing this machine a
computer whatever it is that doesn't
have a body is not at you know
interacting in a social group or in a
culture or anything like that but it's
thinking and it's rational and it's
perfect and it's infallible and all that
stuff that's kind of the idea of super
intelligence that you're gonna have some
machine that's gonna be you know it's
never gonna need to sleep it's never
going to stop paying attention because
it's bored and all that stuff but
another view is that intelligence is at
least in humans and all the animals that
we know of its embodied that we it
relies very much on the body that you
have and the way that body interacts
with the environment and all these
things like needing to sleep getting
bored
having emotions are actually big part of
intelligence and the sole social aspect
is very big too so I think that view is
it's been around also for forever but
it's getting some new traction as we see
really the kind of limitations of the
brain in the bat view of AI yeah one of
the guys I really liked following for a
long time is Antonio Damasio
kind of his core book as the feeling of
what happens and he's a
both neuroscience but also where the
body and the mind
meet kind of scientist and he makes a
lot of really strong arguments that it's
particularly around consciousness
without the body there really is no
consciousness without the sense of the
body and I think we're finding perhaps
that that's more and more true the
deeper we dig certainly encourage people
to look in those directions yeah but I
think some people in AI would argue it's
with you and say well we don't need
consciousness a machine doesn't need
consciousness to be intelligent I would
agree with that by the way okay yeah
yeah I agree with that and here's my
view on that one no because that this
happens to be exactly the work I do is
that almost certainly consciousness is
not necessary for intelligence or even
super intelligence which is probably a
good thing right because many of the you
know dire scenarios about you know the
computers taken over you seem to have
accidentally brought in the concept of
machine consciousness in addition to
machine intelligence however I suspect
that mod nature discovered a very clever
hack and that consciousness happens to
solve one of the deepest problems that
AI researchers run into again and again
and again which is the combinatoric
explosion yeah my model says the
consciousness is essentially a fairly
simple machine that forces decisions
more or less arbitrarily but they're not
arbitrary then they've been - and these
this machinery of consciousness has been
tuned over 200 million years at least to
be able to produce quite decent results
in the real world but it does it by
basically brutally chopping with an axe
all the possibilities that are computer
programs get themselves tied up into in
the shoelaces with and that's really
what consciousness is for interesting
you know I don't know if I agree with
you that you could have intelligence
without consciousness but I think
consciousness also is one of those words
that people mean different things by
yeah that's one of the worst parts of
that of the consciousness science it's
you have to spend two days figuring out
what each person you're talking to
actually means by consciousness I mean
you find some people to think only
humans have consciousness and if they've
ever had a dog they obviously don't mean
same thing I do we're taught where I say
not only does the dog have consciousness
but so do all mammals all reptiles all
dinosaurs all birds etc and maybe even
amphibians but of course that's a big
jump from humans only - oh maybe
amphibians but we're clearly talking
about something different so whenever
you have a conversation about
consciousness you have to be very
precise we don't have time to do that
today so we'll have to move on yeah
let's go on to the next topic which
again you did a very nice job of laying
it out for the layman the idea of
reinforcement learning or q-learning
I want you to tell people briefly what
that is so before I talked about
supervised learning this idea that
neural network or other machine learning
system gets labeled examples where I you
know human says this is a dog this is a
cat this is a lion this is a tiger and
so on well reinforcement learning is a
way to learn without labeled examples by
allowing a system to take actions in
some environment and then either get
rewards or punishments occasionally not
for every action but occasionally so you
know when you're playing chess you might
learn to play chess by making moves at
random and getting either a reward when
you win the game if you ever win it or a
punishment when you lose and then
deciding how to adjust your
probabilities for making these different
moves according to that reward or
punishment so there's been a number of
algorithms that people have developed
for this so-called reinforcement
learning which is really a form of the
kind of animal training people used to
do to get rats to learn to follow mazes
or do other kinds of tasks by getting
rewards like food at the end now if you
translated that into computer programs
you can make these sort of numerical
quote unquote rewards that the system
gets and reinforcement learning again
it's very old idea but only recently has
it seen a lot of big successes the
biggest one being the deep minds machine
alpha zero that learned how to play go
and beat the world's best go players yep
and I think name and the big thing to my
mind is that the rewards could be some
considerable distance from the action
unlike supervised learning where either
you got the picture right or you got the
picture wrong right in reinforcement
learning it might be like the game of go
where there's could be 300 moves before
you found out if you won or lost and we
get back to the old allocation a credit
problem you know how do we in some
principled way decide which moves
contributed to the win or to the loss
right and that allocation of credit
problem is what these reinforcement
learning algorithms like Q learning
solve and they solve that by having the
system not not learn to predict whether
it's gonna win or lose at each move but
to try and predict from one move to the
next to get its predictions to align so
we take a little bit more technical
explanation to to convey that idea but
it's a very simple idea and as long as
you have enough compute power so that
the Machine can say play games with
itself while it's learning for millions
and millions of games it actually is
extremely successful in the game world
it's not totally clear how well it's
gonna translate to more real-world
problems where you don't have this you
know the very clear-cut rules of the
game and the very discrete idea of Laika
moves at winning or losing and I think
that that's very very important point in
fact you know that work I've mentioned
that I did back in 2001 was essentially
self play with genetic neural nets that
learned how to play Othello they learned
pretty well so it's certainly doable but
the point about why it was able to work
was there was only a limited number of
choices at each turn and typically those
numbers are surprisingly small and
checkers it's something like five or six
chess it might be 20
I think they estimate and go it might be
250 but the real world it's much much
higher than that even some games are
much higher than that I also do some
work on a very advanced military type
war game called advanced tactics gold
and my rough calculation is that each
turn there's ten to the sixtieth that's
ten to the 60th power possible moves and
there's no way anything like the kinds
of cue learning and reinforcement
learning we have today could even start
to get any traction at all on problems
at that scale and yet humans clearly
can't write humans are very good at
taking a situation that they're in and
sort of dividing it up into discrete
concepts you know we see a whole system
of pixels in our vision and we're able
to see objects right we say this is this
object this is that object and we see
relationships between objects and we
kind of describe the situation in a very
finite way so if we could get computers
to do that in a kind of more human-like
way maybe they'd be able to learn using
reinforcement learning in the way that
we do but it's really a combination
between perception and learning and
being able to chunk the world or to
course screen the world in the right way
and there's something else to it maybe
even beyond that and what keeps coming
back when I think about these problems
and these alpha zero is a fine example
the huge number of data sets that they
have to have to get experience somehow
humans are able to generalize what they
know from one domain to another often
called transfer learning you know the
greatest chess master of all time may
have played fifty thousand games of
chess alpha zero would hardly have
improved at all after 50 that I know
that made it quite true but it certainly
would have got nowhere near its level of
expertise in anything less than many
millions of games and so there's
something going on in humans that's you
know maybe qualitatively different that
we don't even yet know the answer to how
to get to beyond just you know coarse
graining and objects and things of that
sort
yeah I think that's right people are
able to abstract very well they're you
know there's a movie about like it's
called searching for bobby fisher' did
you ever see that movie I know the movie
I don't believe I ever saw yeah it's
about a kid child chess prodigy who's
learning to play chess and it's kind of
about his life but there's one scene in
the movie
where he's being taught by this chess
master is his teacher and they're in the
middle of the game and then the teacher
sweeps all the pieces on the board onto
the floor and says okay put them back
the way they were and the kid can do it
and this is evidently something that
chess chess experts can do that because
they see the board not as just a
collection of you know however many
pieces but they see it in terms of
high-level concepts and so they can
reconstruct it because they didn't have
to memorize every single pieces position
they met just knew the concepts and they
could recreate it in terms of the
concepts so where the concepts are like
small configurations with pieces so
somehow being able to parse the world
that way into this set of high-level
concepts is one of the things that we
can do that we haven't figured out I get
machines to do and that's something that
I'm particularly interested in because I
think that's the heart of the ability to
do abstraction and analogy yeah that's a
perfect transition to my next topic
which I just have the word understanding
written down right you use that word a
lot of times and you know people
castigate me sometimes when I when I ask
well how close are you to language
understanding they'll say well under
what our understanding what does that
even mean right right but I think you
and I both agree that it does mean
something even if we can't define it as
crisply as we'd like I want you to take
a whack at what does what does it mean
to understand you started to get it to
it a little bit there earlier maybe they
take it a little further yeah it's it is
a difficult word but I think it's a
really important one when we're thinking
about intelligence so you can think of
say reading a story a little paragraph
or something about some event that
happened so machines can do that and you
can even ask some questions about the
the story and sometimes they can answer
them but the question is did they
understand the story in the way that we
do and often what psychologists talk
about is our ability to construct
internal mental models that
simulate the situations that we
encounter that we read about or that we
imagine and that we can use to predict
the future
that it sort of brings in knowledge
about the situation that that that we've
had you know stored knowledge about the
world so probably I should give an
example here so say that you read a
story about a young kid running a
footrace barefoot and winning that's
like a new sketch of a story well what
do you understand about that story well
you know a lot about what erases and you
know like did the kid want to win the
race yes of course the kid wanted to win
the ways because people compete in races
because they want to win did the kid
come in first
yes that's what winning means you know
did the kids feet hurt after the race
well probably if he was barefoot they
hurt his because you know when your foot
encounters rough rough surface that can
hurt it you know was the kid wearing
socks
no of course that hit being barefoot
means you're not wearing socks so just
we just have all this infinite knowledge
about the way the world works that
allows us to sort of run these mental
models that can allow us to answer
questions about the things that that
were faced with so understanding is a
lot about modeling and being able to use
those models to sort of access knowledge
and predict the future so that's a kind
of a one attempt at trying to get some
handle on that term yeah in what area
where this really comes out is in the
area of language processing which of
course is a huge area of investment
right now and the scientific and
academic research and yet you gave a
bunch of great examples about the tools
that we have today they don't really
have anything like this kind of
understanding maybe could you take
people through some examples of the very
impressive things that we have today in
language processing and how they don't
really show understanding one of the
more impressive things we have our
translation programs like Google
Translate that can
take in text and translate it into any
number of languages you know hundreds of
languages but the program when you
actually give it a passage it's not
understanding the passage in the way
that we humans understand it and we can
see that in some of the errors that
makes so it makes errors like if I one
of the examples I had in the book was a
little story about someone in a
restaurant and the man stormed out of
the restaurant and the waitress said hey
what about the bill and in one of the
cases Google Translate translated bill
as into French as legislative document
right even though the context was a
restaurant because it didn't understand
the story it doesn't understand didn't
have a mental model of what a restaurant
was and what a bill is in the context of
a restaurant well sometimes these
programs can take into account some
context but they're very far from the
kind of understanding that we humans
have that that you know lets us answer
questions are about you know what's
likely to happen when you're in a
restaurant and somebody mentions the
word bill and we also know things about
like with the person storms out of a
restaurant they probably didn't like
their meal you know and things like that
sort of basic facts about the world and
about other people so Google translates
really good at sort of the statistical
mapping from one language to another but
it makes mistakes that no human would
ever make because of its lack of
understanding this need for a deep
understanding and common senses have
been something people will talk about
for years and you mention it in your
book and so I've kept it out of the
corner of my eye at least I don't know
anything as much about as I'd like to
is the psych project down in Austin
could you tell people a little bit about
what that is and what it may have
achieved and what it may not have
achieved so far
so Doug Lynette is the founder of the
psych project he's an AI researcher from
way back and he's one of the first
people that I know of in
in the field who really took this idea
of common sense seriously who said we're
not gonna get anywhere in AI if we don't
have machines with common sense that is
the invisible knowledge that we all use
in the world to understand language and
other things but his idea was that we
would have this sort of encyclopedia of
common sense and that's why he called
his project psych short for encyclopedia
and the common sense would be in a logic
based language that humans like his
graduate students are later his
employees would basically type in all of
the knowledge that a machine would need
such as example a person cannot be in
two places at one time okay or every
person has a mother or you know just
statements like that all of knowledge so
instead of being an encyclopedia like
the Encyclopedia Britannica or Wikipedia
or something this would be an
encyclopedia of knowledge that is not
written down anywhere so he's been
working on this for I don't know 40
years something like that and it's
really hard to say how far they've
gotten because I don't think that I
think a lot of its proprietary but it
certainly doesn't seem like the the
project of trying to manually input all
of common sense or having the Machine
deduce new statements from the
statements that it's already been given
is going to solve the problem because
the system again it doesn't have the
kind of mental models that are needed to
to kind of get the right knowledge out
and predict the future usefully and I
think the other problem is that a lot of
the knowledge that we have about the
world is we don't even know we have it
and so we can't type it into the system
and you know that a person can be can't
be in more than one place at a time is
sort of like that but like how many
statements are there like that that we
know that would be really hard to list
so I don't think it's a very sustainable
approach but I do think that Lenin was
very prescient in his notion that common
sense is really going to be the core of
intelligence and I I agree with him yep
I heard some people say that maybe let
it is just took on a huge job that is
doable but it's just bigger than he
thought it was so maybe it's ten times
or a hundred times bigger than the
effort that's gone into it and that
maybe it would be worth spending five
billion dollars to build psych-out I'm
not sure I'm not sure either and I think
you know there's other research groups
now that are getting into the
common-sense business the Allen
Institute for AI which was founded by
Paul Allen the co-founder of Microsoft
is now focusing on common sense and I
think they have not exactly an idea of
like psyche but they have this kind of
crowdsourcing platform to try and get
common sense assertions from the from
the the the online world they're trying
to mine common sense assertions from the
web again I don't really think this is
the approach that's going to lead to
common sense but you know it's worth a
try I guess nobody really knows the
right approach another one then that's
onra it was concept net where they tried
to open-source this kind of stuff yeah
MIT and people do use concept net and
people do use psych for various projects
but it and its youth they're useful
right they're kind of knowledge bases
and Google and Apple and other companies
have what they call their knowledge
graphs they're not exactly common sense
knowledge but they're they're sort of
general knowledge about the world they
use in search and all these things are
useful but none of them are kind of
getting to the heart of what we mean
when we talk about common sense so DARPA
which has you know is one of the big
funders of AI research has its own
version of the common sense in AI
project and they have this program
called foundations of common sense that
the Grand Challenges develop a program
with a common sense of an 18 month old
baby
so they've enlisted cognitive and
developmental psychologists to work with
AI people on getting machines to kind of
learn the basic like intuitive physics
of the world in the way a baby would
learn it but by watching videos and
being in virtual reality and all that
kind of stuff so that's another approach
that yeah it was a pretty interesting
I'll I'm not sure how it's gonna work
that we'll see yeah my friend Josh
Tenenbaum at MIT is working on
approaches that sound a lot like that
you know aiming at the 18 month old or
two year old incorporating you know
intuitive physics folk physics if you
want to call it that to degree they can
assess what a 18 month old actually does
know and again it's interesting don't
know if it'll get there or not but it is
good that people are working on these
things yeah I think it's great
for our last topic I know this is one
that's near and dear to your heart
you've been working on it since you were
a graduate student and that is the other
way to ground AI might be through what
are called analogs analogies and
metaphors talk a little bit about your
thoughts in that space maybe tell the
story about your copycat program all
right so I got into AI I was originally
physics math astronomy that was what I
was working on as an undergrad but after
I graduated I read Kurt gödel Escher
Bach Douglas Hofstadter's book about AI
and about consciousness and so on that
inspired so many people to go into AI
and it also inspired me and I actually
sought out Hofstetter
and convinced him to take me on as a
grad student and the project that he
gave me was to build a program that
could make analogies and he had
developed this idealized domain of
analogy making that involved analogies
between strings of letters so here's an
example if the string ABC changes to the
string abd what does the string ijk
change to most people would say I JL you
know the rightmost
the string change to its successor in
the alphabet so change ijk to ijl and I
say okay same original change ABC to abd
what does i IJ j kk changed too and
there people will say oh well i i j j ll
that is they group the letters so they
don't follow the original rule literally
but they make a little change because
now we don't have a string you know
sequence of letters we have a sequence
of groups of letters and then i can go
on and on and give you hundreds and
hundreds of these kinds of analogies
that require different changes what we
call conceptual slippage --is like four
letter to group or you can do other ones
where you go from successor to
predecessor or any number of conceptual
slippage --is you can make so the idea
with this project wasn't necessarily to
focus on strings of letters but to use
the strings of letters as kind of an
idealized domain to explore much bigger
issues about how you take the knowledge
you have and apply it to new situations
and how you see abstract similarity and
so on so i built this program called
copycat because you know you're when you
do the same thing to a new situation
you're being a copycat and copycat was
able to do lots and lots of these
letters string analogy problems so but
it you know it was very much it was kind
of a mixture of symbolic and sub
symbolic AI and it only got so far and
then I started working on other things
but I still feel like a lot of the ideas
in that original project which was done
in the 1980s and 1990s
I think there's like genetic algorithms
and like neural nets there's a role for
those ideas that's kind of coming up
again you know 30 years later so I'm
excited about thinking about those ideas
again and trying to apply them to more
general domains you have some examples
of things you're currently working on
well one of the things I'm working on is
visual analogies so if you want to say
recognize a visual situation and one of
the exam
sweet we use often is a person walking a
dog okay well you could try and
recognize that there's a person there
holding a leash the leashes attached to
the dog and they're both walking and you
could maybe recognize all those things
and say an image or a video okay and so
now you've learned let's say what
walking a dog is but then I show you
like a person walking ten dogs or a
person running with a dog or a person
riding a bike with a dog on a leash or
any other kind of variation on this
theme and humans are really good at
taking something they've learned and
applying it analogously in new
situations but this is something that
machines as you said earlier are not
very good at you know we have this
problem of transfer learning where
systems learn in one domain and they
can't transfer what they learned to a
new domain but transfer learning is
another word for analogy and I think
that this big problem of being able to
apply knowledge to new situations by
making analogies is what's going to get
us out of the problem of you know the
long tail problem that we talked about
earlier and the problem of transfer
learning that so many people are
struggling with now interesting now the
other very closely related field is the
area of metaphors particularly a lot of
us know the work of George Lake off I
remember when I first started reading
Lake Hoff I said oh he's got to be
exaggerating can't all be metaphors the
meaning language but he takes you down
some very interesting pathways and you
realize that you know it's hard to say a
sentence or and certainly to say two
sentences without using at least one
fairly significant metaphor you tell us
a little bit about what that's about and
what might be going on in that space
lake often Johnson wrote this book
called metaphors we live by and their
idea was that our language just our
everyday languages is filled with
metaphors so so wasn't one example if I
say she gave me a warm welcome you know
that we're using the word warm
metaphorically because it wasn't like
literally hot you know in the room or
anything but it's it's more of us
social metaphor actually the theory is
now we're actually interpreting it by
using our model of physical temperature
our mental model of physical temperature
and so they go into this all these
different examples of how we talk about
abstract concepts like time and money
and love and we understand them in terms
of physical metaphors so those are
really fascinating study of its kind of
linguistic metaphors and I've seen a lot
of follow ups that I found really
convincing that that show that we really
do structure our concepts in terms of
very physical metaphors like you know we
talked about if you might say that
speech was very uplifting you know and
we say okay up is good down is bad or if
you say something like I fell in love
you know we think about falling being
out of control and all you know we apply
these physical ideas to more much more
abstract concepts so I found that really
fascinating I think it's something that
you know if we have a machine that can
understand language it's gonna have to
be able to understand this kind of
metaphor by drawing on mental models of
these more physical concepts you know
one of my favorites kind of a double
metaphors let's move forward with this
project you know forward I would argue
and I think lake Hoff does comes
initially from moving forward and
backward in our body which then was
projected onto time forward and backward
in time which is a metaphor from our
body walking forward and backward and a
project moving forward and as in making
progress is then another projection
probably from the projection of time and
so we have the stack of metaphors that
actually get us to the language as we
actually use it yeah that's a good point
and and you know it's invisible to us
that we're making these metaphors we
don't even notice it right when we talk
but there's been a some work in
like psychophysics and neural imaging
and and other psychology kind of
experiments that show that people really
are the activating the neural areas that
encode these visits the physical
concepts that were not aware that we're
even referring to but unconsciously
they're actually quite active and and
influenced the way we understand things
so it's really interesting now can you
see a commonality or or maybe something
that brings together the idea of
analogies and metaphors
um I think you know they're related
certainly they're analogies are about
seeing similarities sort of abstract
similarities between different
situations and metaphors are about I
don't know bringing in often physical
concepts into abstract situations and
perceiving them as being similar in some
ways the origin of many metaphors is a
little obscure I don't know how some of
them came about but I bet that that kind
of gives you some clue to how thinking
in general and the origin of language
and even maybe the origin of abstract
thinking so I think it's a fascinating
field but really very interdisciplinary
you know linguistics psychology
neuroscience and AI I think are all
needed to try and make sense of it game
through in biophysics right to degree
that the groundings of the metaphors are
in biophysics be really nice to know how
those work yeah besides your work who
else should we be looking at in the
world that's let's just limit the work
to analogies since that's really closer
to what you're working on today who else
who else you will be following well
there's a lot of different approaches to
analogy there's a group at Northwestern
Ken forbus and dead reget nur and their
colleagues who have looked at a more
symbolic AI approach to analogy making
and that work is very extensive very
different from the work that I'm doing
but definitely very prominent in the
field there is
actually some of the people at deep mind
the group that did alpha go and alpha
zero are looking at how to do analogies
with using neural networks and they did
some interesting work on visual
analogies I'm trying to think there
there's quite a few people who are doing
some interesting work in this area if I
can think of it any more I'll definitely
send you some links to post yeah that'd
be great one of the things people say
they find most useful is use the podcast
as the way to you know find other things
to learn about yeah that'd be wonderful
if you could send those to us
sure well melody I think that's about
we're up on our time limit now and I
gotta say this has been a wonderful
conversation and I can you know strongly
recommend the people go out get your
book and done a great conversation well
I really enjoyed it thanks so much for
having me on yeah I didn't necessarily
go everywhere I thought it might but
that's part of the fun of these things
yeah well I think it we covered a lot we
certainly did production services and
audio editing by Jared Jane's consulting
music by Tom Muller at modern space
music calm