you
[Music]
welcome this is a series in which I am
going to endeavor to put together pretty
much all of my work my name is John burr
of a key I am an assistant professor at
the University of Toronto I'm in the
psychology department and in the
cognitive science program and I also
teach for the Buddhism psychology and
mental health program I've produced a
lot of videos on a lot of various topics
some of you have perhaps seen them but
what I want to do now in this series is
draw it all together and present to you
a overall unified argument and that can
show you the interconnections between
pieces that you might have seen before
now how all this got started is I got
very interested in a particular
phenomenon I got interested in the fact
that there seemed to be a growing
confluence between people who are
interested in Buddhism and people who
are interested in cognitive science I'll
talk a little bit later as we go on what
cognitive science is but you know some
of this already in the world at large
because we're going through what's
called the mindfulness revolution
mindfulness is being spoken of
everywhere I was in a bookstore
yesterday chapters and there's a whole
section just on mindfulness itself so
why is the mindfulness revolution
occurring well it's occurring
particularly because of this
intersection between Buddhism and
cognitive science but why is this
happening and why is it you know so
explosive in nature and what do we mean
by mindfulness some of the work I've
done is trying to get clear about that
we're going to talk about that in this
in this series now there is also a lot
of other things that in my mind seem to
be convergent with this growing
confluence between Buddhism and
cognitive science there is an increasing
interest both academically and in the
public at large and the topic of wisdom
something that people did not talk about
very much not that long ago well the
wisdom is now a very hot topic within
psychology and cognitive
and books offering to train you in
wisdom are again becoming popular same
bookstore experience yesterday I bought
my son a book called how to be a stoic
this is a this is like how is it that a
philosophical position from the
Hellenistic era has become a popular
book that people are seeking why is
there this hunger for wisdom and why are
people meeting it with these kinds of
things
the stoicism the philosophies of the
Hellenistic period we're gonna talk
about that I think there's good reason
for that
of course there's increasing academic
and public interest in psychedelics I
just gave a talk earlier this week
Yale about psychedelics and the
increasing interest in psychedelics and
psychedelic experiences you're seeing
radical things with them people can be
released from treatment-resistant
addiction they can overcome
post-traumatic stress disorder like the
normal with the best therapy right
solution rate for people with
post-traumatic stress disorders about
right you know things go really well 20%
or so you introduce psychedelics into
the therapy and you can get the right
the healing rate up to 80 percent so
what's going on there why is there this
interest there's increasing public
interest which is matched by a huge
academic in in the topics of happiness
now we've always been a happiness
oriented culture life liberty and the
pursuit of happiness and so forth right
but it's taken a particularly
interesting turn the topic of meaning
and meaning in life is coming to the
fore people in more and more are talking
about not just sort of sheer
contentedness but what it is for a human
life to be meaningful and it turns out
that meaning in life is terrifically
important it's very predictive of
well-being
it's very predict
of how well you are doing in your life
in general so it is no wonder that our
people are seeking it out now my my
contention and what I'm gonna argue is
it's no coincidence that all of these
things are happening right now it's no
coincidence this confluence between
Buddhism the mindfulness revolution the
interest in wisdom and ancient
philosophies like stoicism the
increasing public interest in
psychedelics and transformative
experiences and mystical experiences
right
the increasing academic and public
interest in meaning in life there's all
a reason for there's there's a unifying
account for why this is happening but
there's another set of things this is
sort of the light side of what I'm
talking about there's a there's a
there's a set of dark factors that seem
to be converging as well right we have
what seems to be although they're you
know people have disputing it but I
think the evidence is becoming clearer
and clearer the CDC just released some
data recently we're going through amount
mental health crisis suicide is spiking
and it's right now there are some
socio-economic factors but there's
clearly other things that are at work
right there's increasing sense many
people are expressing it of losing touch
with reality we encounter more and more
often in individuals and groups nihilism
expressions of cynicism expressions of
deep kinds of frustration and futility
you have the abandonment of trust in any
of our public institutions we're losing
right we've completely lost any sort of
faith or trust in a political system
we're losing faith in our judicial
system right religious affiliation is
declining consistently throughout
people's participation in right clubs
organization is in decline
in general and my co-authors on the book
on zombies in Western culture the 20s
for century crisis Christmas Pietro and
Philip Mis eviction we argued right that
the this sense of being out of touch has
gone on with an increasing sense and
we'll talk about this because I'm going
to use this term technically we're going
to talk about this and Frankfurt's use
of it there's an increasing sense of
more and more
everywhere pervading any of you take a
look at the book we actually chart how
this has been spiking and it's
concordant with all kinds of other
increases in these dark factors people
are getting the sense that we're
spending and you can see this already in
the public media but it's it's also
within the academic world that we're
spending too much time in our virtual
environments there seems to be
increasing evidence for example of right
a connection between various social
media increased depression increased
loneliness and then more in general and
we'll talk about how this shows up a
little bit more implicitly it shows up
in the entertainment we seek and the
mythologies we like like they're zombies
we're gonna talk about that
why are zombies so big right why are
superheroes so big right now right
there's an increase this these
mythological and we'll taco what myth
means these mythological forms I'm gonna
argue our expressions of a cultural
sense a sense that we're stuck somehow
one way you can note that is just by
noting how pervasive almost to the point
of being a constant factor in our
background is people talking about
crisis and collapse apocalypse the
zombie apocalypse the imminent collapse
of civilization all of these things are
now pervasive they're taken for granted
at one point right the you know movies
demonstrating this had to be sort of
science fiction they were considered
radical right
now this is becoming a pervasive
background sense now I think all of
these negative factors also have a
unifying explanation in fact what I'm
going to argue throughout the course of
this series is that the positive factors
and the negative factors all point to a
unified explanation this is going to be
an idea that our culture is experiencing
a profound meaning crisis a crisis in
meaning and we're gonna have to talk
about what does that meaning mean now
I'm not claiming that this is the only
crisis we're facing far from it what I
want to do in fact is talk about how the
meaning crisis is interacting with other
crises the environmental crisis -
socio-economic crisis but in addition to
those which are quite well discussed and
the public at large there is a meaning
crisis which is being discussed quite
significantly with that academia but
needs to be brought to the public at
large
because one of the things I'm going to
argue is that these three crises are not
interesting not independent from each
other they're interdependent in
important ways but what is this meaning
that's coming to crisis why do we hunger
for it how do we cultivate the wisdom
that's what I'm gonna argue wisdom is
ultimately about to generate enhance
this meaning wisdom is about realizing
in both senses of the word becoming
aware and making real it's about wisdom
is about realizing meaning in life in a
profound way how do we cultivate this
wisdom what does it mean and I'm not
going to talk about that just
practically I'm gonna talk of so I mean
not just theoretically I'm gonna talk
about that practically as well what are
some practices that people can engage in
and are engaging in to try and address
this need for the cultivation of wisdom
what role for example
do mindfulness practices play within the
cultivation of wisdom so here's the
three questions that are we're gonna
keep coming back to again and again and
again what is this meaning why do we
hunger for it and how do we cultivate
the wisdom to realize it so some of the
topics of course we're going to be
addressing are centrally the meaning
crisis how did this kind of meaning
evolve what like what is it why is it so
important to the evolution of our
humanity
then more specifically the history of
the meaning crisis why did it arise what
are the historical factors by doing that
we'll get in a historical accounted
meaning we'll get a sense of what this
meaning is that has come into crisis
that people individually feel they are
lacking or losing in their lives we want
to talk about connections between
meaning wisdom and importantly self
transcendence it's going to turn out
that this notion of self transcendence
again which will have to develop and
explicate be something that's a core
need because it performs core functions
for human beings and to bound up with
these ideas of wisdom and of course
meaning and along the way in fact right
from the beginning we're going to start
to see that there's deep connections
between meaning wisdom self
transcendence and altered states of
consciousness why do human beings seek
to alter their consciousness in fact not
just human beings are there intelligent
organisms seek to do this right
Caledonian crows will tumble down rubes
in order to make themselves dizzy for no
other purpose than to alter their state
of consciousness what is going on why
does intelligence need to be conjoined
to an altered state of consciousness and
why in particular have human beings
developed very sophisticated processes
for generating harnessing and
interpreting these altered states of
consciousness
we're gonna talk about that in
connection with shamanism and ritual
we're gonna talk about that in
connection to the flow state this is
when you're in the zone and why people
seek it and why it's so powerful we're
gonna talk about it as I mentioned in
connection with psychedelic experiences
more importantly the mystical
experiences that can occur within some
psychedelic experience because it turns
out it's the mystical experience that is
more important and transformative but
there's a subset of those mystical
experiences that are very crucial these
are awakening experiences these are
experiences in which people come back
from the mystical experience and say
that was somehow more real than this and
I need to change my world I need to
change myself they engage in what la
Paul has called a transformative
experience what is also known as quantum
change a radical transformation of their
lives and we note we've got good
research now showing that they're right
their lives get better after these
awakening experiences I'm going to talk
about that in depth and dare I say it
maybe we can bring all of this together
and actually propose and and maybe some
people will be affronted by this but
propose a scientific a cognitive
scientific account of what enlightenment
is and why it alleviates the suffering
from lack of meaning that is
particularly pertinent for us today but
has always been a perennial threat since
the axial revolution now that means of
course we're going to have to also talk
about topics that have connection with
the darker aspects as I said of
meaning-making
what's the connection because they're
deep and profound between this meaning
making that is so central and our
endemic capacity for self-deception for
soft
struction there's a reason why we are so
a wash in because is a
perennial threat to us self-deception is
endemic that means it'll be important to
talk about foolishness as something
different from ignorance ignorance is a
lack of knowledge foolishness is a lack
of wisdom foolishness is when your
capacity to engage your agency pursue
your goals is undermined and threatened
by the self-deception and the
self-destructive behavior that is like a
perennial vulnerability to your
cognition but what I'm gonna argue is
the very same machinery that makes you
so adaptively intelligent it's the same
machinery that makes you susceptible to
foolishness that will take us into some
of the topics that are relevant to
people's existential experience meaning
crisis topics like absurdity alienation
futility horror real horror most horror
movies aren't horror we'll talk about
what horror really is and what people
experience when they're actually
experiencing horror their sense of grip
on reality
is being undermined and people find that
as you can imagine terrifying we're
gonna talk about meaninglessness and why
and why more people experience this
state the state of despair and once we
do that right as we're moving into these
kinds of topics we will be moving
gradually from the historical account of
the origin of the meaning crisis will
give us some sense from the history of
what this meaning is but we'll be moving
into the cognitive scientific study
cognition the client recalled in a
scientific investigation of meaning and
meaning making look when people use this
word meaning it's a metaphor they mean
there's something in their life that is
analogous to how a sentence has meaning
the pieces fit together in some way they
make an impact on your cognition and
connect you to the world in some way
there's something about our lives that
is analogous to the way sentences have
meaning we have to unpack that metaphor
what why is the metaphor used and what
does the metaphor point to when we talk
about the meaning of our lives how is it
in fact it's some of the most meaningful
experiences people have are precisely
ones that are completely ineffable to
them that they can't put into words
what's going on we're gonna have to talk
about different kinds of knowing some of
them that have fallen off our cultural
radar precisely because of the meaning
crisis we tend to have reduced all of
the ways that the ancients talked about
how we know to one thing to know is to
have a special kind of belief and so we
are very belief centric which is why we
are so focused as a culture on
ideologies but it turns out that we're
gonna have to have a much more expanded
notion of what knowing means there is
much more to knowing that having
justified true beliefs there's the kind
of knowing that's involved in knowing
how to catch a baseball there's the kind
of knowing of what it is like to be
having this experience right now there's
the kind of knowing that is knowing what
it's like to be in something you're
participating in like a relationship
we have to talk about all of that now of
course some of you might be aware of
those other kinds of knowing because you
know how integral and important they are
to therapy which is another thing that
is booming in our culture part of why
it's booming is the meeting crisis part
of what's booming is because people seek
out therapy precisely because they're
trying to recover these lost kinds of
knowing the kinds of insight that is
needed the kind of transformation not of
your beliefs but of how you see things
your sense of self and your sense of
realness
have to be transformed often in therapy
that is why the psychedelics are so
important for therapeutic success
because they transfer they transform
these other kinds of knowing we're going
to talk about all of that this will give
us this will give us a structural
functional account of meaning what is
the structure of it what are its
cognitive processes what are its
cognitive mechanisms how do they
function how can they fall into
dysfunction we're going to have this
historical account and this structural
functional account and were going to
make them talk to each other they're
going to inform and constrain and enable
each other and from that dialogue what I
propose audacious as it might sound is a
real response to the meeting crisis an
awakening from the meaning crisis that's
what this series is about awakening from
the meaning crisis not in some
ideological fashion but in a profound
transformative and existential manner so
this is not something that I can do
simply because this is not a problem
for which there are simplistic answers
if anybody offers you an answer to this
crisis in an hour
I would wager that they are deceiving
you manipulating or they are on
themselves significantly self-deceived
there's a reason why we're stuck there's
a reason why this is hard this is a
complex and difficult thing we are
undertaking so this series is going to
be several videos long because I'm going
to carefully and I hope responsibly
build an argument to try and show how we
can awaken from the meaning crisis how
that meaning crisis interacts with the
mental health crisis how it interacts
with the environmental crisis how it
interacts with the socio-economic crisis
now this is my commitment to you I will
always do my best to offer rigorous
rational argumentation I will try my
best to give proper scholastic credit to
other people please understand that I'm
aware that I'm not and nobody should be
claiming to offer you the absolute
uncontested truth I'm gonna offer you
good arguments and good evidence but I
don't want this to be an academic series
I do my academic work and I'm proud of
it but this I want this to be for people
who are coming to this precisely because
of a genuine personal existential
interest so I will try to keep jargon
and technicalities to a minimum I will
have to introduce terms to you and I
hope to explain them carefully along the
way so my commitment to you is to I I
can't be unbiased that's that's not a
thing what I will try my best to do is
to present to you my arguments my
viewpoints and why I think they can be
understood to be highly plausible
so I want to start with how and why is
this meaning so so so much a part of our
humanity why is its own in to our
humanity so much and I think the thing
that we wanted we want to understand is
I have to start somewhere right and that
can be misleading because I think and
one of my my co-authors Philip missive
itch he this is something that he's good
concerned with right I think this is a
continuum question I think the deep
connections between meaning making and
cognition go deeply back into our
evolutionary heritage way before our
humanity but that's right so the fact
that I'm starting somewhere is not meant
to indicate that this is the absolute
starting point what I want to do is
point to a time when many people think
our humanity the kind of people we are
now came into form not fully like the
way it is now because of course there's
been lots of historical and cultural
processes but the kind of humanity that
we would recognize as us and how much
this was bound up with meaning making in
the way that I've been talking about so
this period is known as the Upper
Paleolithic transition it occurs around
40,000 BCE
now with interesting about this is that
biologically as a species we had existed
much longer than this we existed about
you know it's a there's some controversy
around this but conservatively since
about 200,000 BCE but around again
roughly 40,000 BCE there's a change a
radical change now again picking a
Pacific time
look like there's this there's nothing
before there are no precursors some
people have presented the upper
paleolithic transition that way I'm not
doing that I think that's a mistake
there's a continuum you can see it back
but at some point there's this radical
change the upper paleolithic transition
you see things human beings doing things
they're not doing before they're making
art they're making representational art
they're making sculpture they're making
cave paintings we have good evidence
they start making music what else are
they doing well we have some pretty good
evidence all right that there's
significant enhancement in their
cognition how do we know this well we
have the first use of calendars
obviously not with numbers and dates
because numeracy hasn't been invented
but you have the symbolic representation
of the phases of the Moon and the
passage of days and so human beings are
keeping track of time across very
abstract patterns so that they can
enhance their hunting abilities
something else is happening which again
it's so intrinsic to our humanity we
right we're developing projectile
weapons we're developing projectile
weapons so the Neanderthals who are
contemporaneous with Homo sapiens at
this time don't have projectile weapons
their spears are thick shafted heavy
stone they're thrusting tools we know
that they were getting in close to their
quarry because they have bone damage
that's similar to the kind of bone
damage we see in human beings who are
involved in cowboy rodeos where you're
messing around with large angry mammals
the Homo sapiens do something different
they start to develop very thin Spears
not with stone tips but with bone tip
and bone is much harder to
use the point about these is right there
very good is projectile weapons they're
very light and human beings develop the
spear thrower and sling and they start
to develop the ability to carry multiple
missiles and project them at a long
distance now that requires right
increased development of your frontal
lobe area which is going to turn out to
be of course very important as we'll see
for enhancing your intelligence think
about how deep this is in your cognition
this idea of like throwing right right
think about how you talk about how you
have a project that you're working on
right project it's from your throwing or
people will talk about oh they're over
there there's an object that means
thrown against or I'm the subject that
means thrown under all day long
cognitively you're throwing that's
because this throwing task is such a
complex task I mean we take it so
trivial that you know there's a moving
target and I throw something I can hit
it but if you try and build artificial
intelligence to do that as the military
is discovered that turns out to be a
really really hard problem so there's
the projectile weapons are developing
the kolender --ax the music the
sculpture the paintings all right what's
going on why is all of this stuff
exploding now notice how all of this is
associated with different aspects of
what we mean by meaning obviously
there's art and there's music that's
somehow meaningful but there's also time
as being made more meaningful it's being
measured and understood and calendars
and even time and space are now more
meaningful because they're being used
right in this highly dynamic way in
projectile weaponry so what's going on
why did it occur
well there's a lot of good work done by
this David Lewis Williams mattress a
nose work in his book super natural
selection I think is superlative his
articles like did meditating make us
human I got the pleasure of meeting Matt
and he argues for what's going on at
this time is a radical change in human
cognition that's in line with the work
of other people like Michael Winckelmann
we know that before the upper
paleolithic transition about 30,000 up
to 60,000 or 70,000 times of what this
might be happening we know that we went
through a near extinction event human
beings almost went extinct we were
crunched down they think maybe to
maximum of 10,000 individuals we'd
almost died off part of it seems to been
the overall climactic change of the end
of the last ice age in Africa part of it
there's a supervolcano that goes off
around 70,000 years ago
not sure but what happens is there's
tremendous pressure put on human beings
they move to the coasts in general to
try and survive but human beings seem to
have adopted a interesting response to
this now first of all they diversify
their diet and blah blah blah blah
that's all important we'll talk about
that but what's really interesting is
that if the they don't come up so much
with a technological response because
climates too huge and on to poorly
understood they come up with a social
cognitive response what human beings do
is they start creating broader trading
networks you see because when you do
that you're not as subject to individual
environmental variation you have much
more resources both in terms of what
people can have what kind of discoveries
they're making
and so what happens is people start
forming these much broader trading
relationships now that's very
significant because it opens up the
scale at which human cognition has to
operate in an important way and human
beings plausibly responded by developing
things that we see now is pervasive they
developed a bunch of rituals and we're
going to talk a lot about why ritual and
so important for dealing with both the
environmental challenge and the enhanced
social network that they were creating
to deal with it by the way we're going
to talk about that a lot in this series
how your cognition is very much
participatory you participate in
distributed cognition large networks of
cognition meaning way before the
internet networked computers together
culture networked brains together in
order to provide some of our most
powerful problem-solving abilities so
what are the rituals ok so you need
various trading rituals because the the
thing you're doing now and again think
about how this you take this for granted
and living in a city it is the deep
presupposition of civilization you hang
around with strangers lots of them and
that's just like oh yeah well it's not
oh yeah that's a hard thing other
species don't do that so what's
happening is we're getting this shift
we're having to interact with people
that are not in our kinship group in our
hunter-gatherer group and we have to
form relationships with them so we start
to develop rituals too that have the
function of enhancing our ability to
come into communication and
relationships of trust for individuals
that we do not personally know you say
ok that's why you still do stuff that
makes no sense
you meet somebody like you do that you
stick out your hand and they grab it and
then they move it up and down right this
is the show you have no weapons
this is allow the person to touch you to
see if your hands are clammy or not
there's all kinds of intuitive stuff
going on I can feel how tense you are
most of us don't pay attention to this
stuff anymore but it's there when you
shake hands when you ask how are you now
again that has become trivial so we
don't want an answer how are you we
don't somebody starts answering you oh
no but originally that reflects
something because think about what
important skill has to be enhanced for
these rituals I have to be able to take
your perspective I have to know what's
going on in your mind I have to know how
you feel I have to be able to move from
a first person perspective to a third
person perspective really really well
because if I can't do that I'm not gonna
be able to trade with you now that
ability to take enhance perspective on
others especially people that you don't
know really means you have to develop
ability Daniel Siegel calls mind sight
the ability to pick up on other people's
mental states and here's the thing as
you start to increase your ability to
pick up on other people's mental states
you increase your ability to pick up on
your own mental states and that of
course is going to be part of the origin
of things like metacognition and
mindfulness now the next type of ritual
you need it goes in the other direction
the trade rituals is how I deal with
strangers the problem is now when I'm
starting to interact with all these
people right my commitment and loyalty
to my group is now more in question than
it used to be in the past it could be
taken for granted because you just were
with these people
and they were with you all the time but
now if you allow me the word there's
temptation from the stranger which of
course is now part of all of our myths
the way the stranger can come in and
tempt us
all right and so what do we do well we
we create initiation rituals rituals
that are designed to show right our
commitment to the group and those
rituals often require risk threat
sacrifice now our rituals our initiation
rituals have been very tamed down right
but if you look back back in time these
initiation rituals are often very
traumatic dramatic people are put into
situations in which they they might
experience tremendous pain or fear we'll
talk about some of these as we go
through this series so why like why make
somebody go through pain and fear
because if they go through pain and fear
that shows that they're really committed
to you they're really committed to your
group but what does that mean
cognitively what does it mean for what
how the mind gets trained you have to
really improve your ability to regulate
your emotion you have to really improve
your ability to do what's called
decentering
to let yourself right be in the hands of
other people a non egocentric
perspective because what's important now
is not it's not centered on you the
ritual centered on you but you through
the ritual are being centered on the
group so this is having again tremendous
impact on your cognition
now there's a third kind of ritual that
starts to emerge and it seems to have
picked up on these cognitive
enhancements that the trade rituals and
the initiation rituals bring so I need
to introduce an idea to you that's going
to become pervasive this is the notion
of exaptation exaptation now originally
this is an idea from biology but the
work of Michael Anderson has brought it
directly into understanding how the
brain operates how cognition operates
acceptation in biological terms is an
evolutionary mechanism so for example
I'm using my tongue now to speak okay
tongues did not evolve for speech if
they did all the animals that had
tongues would be speaking at you and
that'd be terrifying especially your cat
your cat talks to you I'm sure that
would be terrifying so what did tongues
evolved for they evolved to move food
around in your mouth they're very
flexible and they're poison detectors so
they have all these does your last
defense right for poison yeah right
so they have all of these nerve endings
so you have this highly sensitive highly
flexible muscle now just because of the
way we evolved this muscle is also in
the air passageway because evolution is
not an intelligent designer you use the
same tube for breathing and for food
very bad design but nevertheless that's
how it is so your tongue it can
interrupt your airflow flexible
sensitive muscle that can interrupt air
flow that's what I need for speech so
the tongue was exempted evolution didn't
have to make a speaking machine from
scratch it took something that evolved
for one purpose and was able to exact it
and use it for another so what Michael
and Anderson and others are arguing is
very often this is what the brain does
the brain will develop
and ISM a little machine a set of
cognitive processes for doing one thing
and then it will use how to learn how to
reuse that for something totally
different we're going to talk about that
repeatedly through this series so what
happens is that these enhance mental
abilities that are coming out of the
trading and initiation rich will seem to
be taken up into another set of rituals
exempted into that seemed to be also
pervasive these are shamanic rituals
these are shamanic rituals we know that
the ability to become aware of the mind
right to control the mind to control
your emotions or being trained as I said
we know that human beings just because
and we'll see more about this later
just because they're highly intelligent
creatures with sophisticated
consciousness seek out altered states of
consciousness in shamanism what you have
is you have a cultivated practice for
altering your state of consciousness
that taps into an X this enhanced mine
site this enhanced ability to manipulate
and control your mental state in your
emotional state now Michael Wingull
men's work shows that pervasive through
hunter-gatherer groups are right
shamanic individuals in fact the shaman
is such a pervasive historical figure
that I think you can make a good case
that it has become an archetypal figure
something like you know the wise old man
so Yoda and Merlin these are all
shamanic figures what we know about
shamanism is that they're the best
health care you're going to have for a
long time right and we'll talk about how
and why that's the case we know that if
you got a shaman in your group it's
going to help to reduce right discord
within your group it's going to enhance
your hunting abilities of your group now
I I'm a scientist I don't believe
any supernatural abilities or spirits or
things like that so I seek an alternate
and mattress a no and Michael
Winckelmann I seek an alternative
explanation of why are shamans so
effective what is going on and what I
want to talk about is how central
shamanism was to the Upper Paleolithic
transition because a plausible case can
be made that it's the advent of
shamanism that helps to explain how
human beings are capable of this sudden
explosion in their cognition this of
course the thesis is the thesis of
several people as I mentioned Michael
Winckelmann did Lewis Williams and
others mattress I know because here's
the issue
right it's not a hardware changed the
brain has already existed for a hundred
and sixty thousand years it's not
changing significantly during the Upper
Paleolithic transition it's much more
likely that it's not a hardware change
in the brain it's a software change in
how human beings are using the brain and
what part of what I want to argue is
that shamanism is probably playing a
significant role and that software
changed so now I need to introduce yet
one more other term and again this is
going to be important this is the idea
of a psycho technology
okay so technology means the systematic
use of a tool which is a tool right here
right the first thing to understand and
this is Andy Clarke's phrase you're a
natural born cyborg your brain has
evolved across several species to use
tools in fact when you start using a
tool even for a very short period of
time your brain will start to model it
as part of your body that is why you can
do weird things like when you're parking
your car you can feel where the edge of
your car is and all that sort of stuff
you're a natural-born cyborg you have
evolved to be integrated with machines
look at me I'm a cyborg look at this
around me the only thing that's natural
here biologically is naked me everything
else is a tool everything else is these
are tools
I wasn't born with clothing I used this
in order to modify my ability to move
through environments and carry stuff
around this is a tool this is a tool
this is a tool this is a tool these are
tools now what's interesting is that can
be accepted your brain's ability to
attach to a tool can move off of a
physical thing onto a cognitive thing so
a physical tool fits your biology C fits
your biology and enhances it right I can
leave permanent marks that I can't
otherwise do biologically on this board
I have a bottle it fits my hand and I
can carry liquids around if I had to
carry it like that's the amount of
liquid I can carry is minimal it fits
your biology and enhances it a psycho
technology fits your brain and enhances
how it operates and you say what are you
talking about what's this psycho tech
now look here's one right here
it's called literacy you're not born
literate you're born linguistic
you're born learning how to talk right
Noam Chomsky all that sort of thing but
you're not born literate in fact for
most of our history we were completely
illiterate
what does literacy do for you
it's a standard set of tools that
standardize how you process information
notice is how it enhances your cognition
I don't have to hold all these terms in
my mind I can leave them there on the
board I can write stuff down and come
back to it later so notice what I can do
I can take my brain now and link it to
my brain back then and my brain in the
future so those are I'm networking all
these instances together I'm improving
my cognition I can also network my brain
with your brain and improve my ability
to solve probably think of if I were to
do this to you I'm gonna take literacy
out of your brain right now and you
can't and I mean literacy in your head
too you can't imagine words you can't
put stuff on paper you can't reflect on
your own cognition I take that out of
you your brain is the same hardware but
then the problems you can solve collapse
down dramatically
that's what psycho technologies do they
do they enhance the software of your
mission of your cognitive machinery now
shamanism is a set of psycho
technologies for altering your state of
consciousness and enhancing your
cognition so what does
what does shamanism look like what are
the kinds of things you do when write
you're a shaman there are many people of
course claimed to be practicing
shamanism today and that's another thing
why this rise in neo shamanism what are
people thinking they're trying to get
from it okay so the shaman does a lot of
interesting things in order to get into
a particular state so the shaman will
often engage in things like sleep
deprivation intense long periods hours
of singing dancing chanting the shaman
will often engage in imitation put on
the clothing mask that represents some
other figures some other animal right
sometime the shaman will go into periods
of isolation social isolation go out
into the wilderness and of course
although it's not necessary but it has
been pervasive shamans will make use of
psychedelics in order to help bring
about an altered state of consciousness
so so
what's going on here Steve Taylor in his
book waking from sleep talks about these
disruptive strategies that people even
today use in order to try and bring
about what I called awakening
experiences these radical
transformations in people's sense of
self and reality we're going to talk
about that but one of the main ideas
here is what a shaman is typically doing
is trying to disrupt the normal ways in
which you're finding patterns in the
world why would you want to disrupt the
normal way you find patterns in the
world because the way you find patterns
and member I said this the very thing
that makes you adaptive also makes you
subject to self-deception the way you
find patterns right is very profound
so this is something I study as a
scientist right many of you may have
seen this all right so this is called
the nine dot problem you have to join
all nine dots with four straight lines
you have to start the next line from the
terminus of the previous line then what
people see this they initially say well
this is very easy of course I can do
this
right one two three four oh wait I
missed the middle dot okay one two three
wait one two wait one two and then they
pause this actually turns out to be a
very difficult problem for people to
solve joining all nine dots with four
straight lines but why is it hard one
line two lines three lines four lines
what was hard about that and when you do
that of course people get angry at you
they say you cheated you went outside
the box you went outside the square
that's where think outside the box comes
from now why that was hard is because
you projected a pattern here
the square and then you engaged
unconsciously unconsciously your skills
of connecting the dots when you were a
kid you connected the dots and when you
connect the dots you're not supposed to
do this make a non dot turn you do that
you won't get a picture of a picnic
table you'll get like an acid trip
psychedelic thing right so unconsciously
you project a pattern and then you
activate the appropriate skills and then
you're locked and you're blocked you
can't solve that problem not because of
anything there in the data but because
of the way you have framed it you have
to disrupt your framing we're gonna talk
a lot about that in order to get an
insight in order to get an insight now
let me tell you something again to start
to introduce this to you saying to
people think outside the box and this is
kind of funny if you think about it
saying to people think outside the box
does not help them with this problem
giving them the belief that they have to
go outside the box does not help them to
solve this problem that's what I meant
when I said you shouldn't reduce all of
your sense of knowing to believing
what's involved here is not believing
that you have to go outside the box it's
knowing how to go outside the box how to
alter your attention how do you change
your perspective on what's so what's
salient to you what's relevant how to
alter what's important or real to you
now what shamanism is is it's a set of
practices disruptive practices and
attentional practices that are designed
to disrupt everyday framing so that the
shaman can get enhanced insight well now
what kind of insight insight into
patterns in the environment
that other people might not be picking
up on enhanced insight mine site into
other people and and and here's this
that the sense of participatory knowing
that I mentioned when the shaman is
enacting the animal the shaman isn't
having beliefs about the deer the shaman
is becoming the deer I don't mean
metaphysically but the shaman is trying
to get together the sense of the skills
the way the kind of perspective the deer
has the way the deer thinks the kind of
world the deer lives in and by becoming
the deer by having this participatory
knowing of what it is to be a deer it
enhances the ability to track and find
the deer now these enhanced capacities
for insight and mindsight participatory
knowing means the shaman combines a lot
of things that are for us in separate
individuals shamans are highly
charismatic imagine if you could take a
rock star like a super rock star a super
therapist a super artist put them all in
one individual and then they come to you
when you're sick they can enhance your
ability to trigger your own placebo
effect the placebo effect is real 30 to
40 percent of all real medication the
ones we sell as real drugs is placebo
effect if you have an individual can
they can trigger that and that's all you
have at that time that's still thirty to
forty two percent better than you had
before see so what are the shamans doing
notice what they're doing they're really
enhancing their capacity for cognition
now what we're going to do in the next
video
is we're going to come back to the
shamans we're going to talk more about
what they're doing how they're enhancing
their cognition and why this played such
an important role in making human beings
into the kind of meaning makers there
are but we'll see what it is right but
you can see already notice in order to
tap into all these kinds of knowings in
order to bring about this altered state
of consciousness notice how much that
shaman is manipulating the meaning of
things which isn't the same thing as
being a charlatan so we're starting to
see right from the beginning the
connections between meaning making
altered states of consciousness and
enhanced capacity to be in touch with
the world and then what's the connection
to wisdom the word shaman means one who
knows one who sees one who has insight
shamans are considered wise people and
that's what you know that's why we have
all these words that the word wizard
means a wise person okay so that's it
for our first video and get a sense from
this of how we're going to proceed thank
you very much for your time
[Music]
you
[Music]