[Music]
welcome back to making awakening from
the meaning crisis so last time we took
a look the theory of Schwartz and sharp
and that was an important theory for
linking wisdom to virtue and positive
psychology and we saw the deep
connections between wisdom and the
cultivation and practice of virtue
we made some criticisms of Schwartz and
sharp I argued that they should include
Sophia and not just for nieces if you
remember those they were invoking
Aristotle's two notions of wisdom and
giving priority to phronesis I think you
need both as Aristotle argued Sophia and
phronesis in order to be virtuous I also
argued that their attempt to explain
four nieces with expertise I think it
was confused and we should put that
aside and then we took from that some
ideas about the you know the
developmental aspect that's of course
central to Aristotle remember he brought
the developmental dimension to wisdom
how much wisdom is becoming a virtuous
person other things I think are lacking
in the theory and we'll come back to
this you know there wasn't much
discussion about the connection between
wisdom and meaning in life but we then
passed to taking a look at a theory that
took very seriously the connection
between wisdom and virtue and this is
the seminal theory work of Alton Thunder
we took a look at the idea of the meta
heuristics pragmatics right for
orchestrating mind and virtue in
excellence and they talked about the
fundamental pragmatics of life I pointed
out to you that a way making sense
conjointly of the invocation of Medicare
sticks and both senses of pragmatics is
this idea of that it's core to wisdom is
this capacity for relevance realization
obviously improved in some fundamental
way which i think means that there's
integral connections between wisdom and
intelligence via
the notion of rationality that we've
already been developing together and
then we took a look at the five criteria
there was clear indications of
propositional knowledge procedural
knowledge the contextualism I argued can
be best be seen as perspectival knowing
I argued against their I their notion of
relativism and argued instead for
humility and fallibilism and then
obviously I I think that's sorry that
that that was maybe too harsh them I
think it's pretty clear that many of the
seminal figures of wisdom fingers from
the past were not moral relativist or
relativists in any significant way so we
strongly recommend replacing relativism
with fallibilism and humility and then
finally the fifth criteria is that
wisdom is applicable to domains in which
there is uncertainty and of course as
I've already argued that a huge aspect
of our life and our cognition because of
ill-defined and this combinatorial
explosion etc etc which again means
relevance realization is being strongly
presupposed I want to give you some
further quotes to indicate what's going
on about that so they talk about wisdom
having to do with generativity
flexibility and efficiency in
application and of course the
generativity and put the flexibility but
also the efficiency are bringing
together many of the ideas that we've
been talking about with relevance
realization they talk about it taking
place listen to this language within the
frame of bounded rationality they're
invoking the notion here from Simon of
bounded rationality this is rationality
that it's taking place within a framing
you know it's taking place within the
constraints of combinatorial explosion
within the constraints of building with
ill divided Ness
it's a notion of rationality deeply
enmeshed with relevance realization they
talk about highly calm these are all
quotes I'm giving you by the way highly
complex sets of information about the
meaning
and conduct of life are highly complex
okay are reduced quickly listen to this
to their essentials without being lost
in the neverending process of
information search notice that Commodore
explosion directly being invoked here
that were to occur if wisdom was treated
as a case of unbounded rationality so I
think it's pretty clear from all of
those quotes that they are directly
invoking the machinery of relevance
realization I pointed out that they with
their criteria they were able to begin
the operationalization of wisdom and the
some of the first experimental work they
found that you know cognitive style in
which one had excellent skills of
judgment seemed to be predictive of the
ability to do well in the experiments
they also found that discussing with
another person or imagining discussing
with another person enhanced your
capacity for wisdom challenging an
individualistic notion of rationality
going back to descartes and assumed if
you remember by cohen in his argument
and the but was really interesting about
that is of course this brings up the
relevance of platonic dialogue but also
the stoic idea of internalizing this age
because the case where people imagine
talking to the significant other was
just as efficacious is actually talking
to a significant other and both of those
were more efficacious than just giving
more time to think and reflect on your
own i pointed out that one plausible
explanation for why this works is that
you're getting something like what igor
Grossman has shown with the the solomon
effect that the move to take the
perspective of other people move to a
third-person perspective really enhances
I'm sorry I'm gonna have to get a drink
I seem to have something caught in my
throat
really enhances one's ability to
overcome the transparency and the bias
induction of one's own perspective and
that right it can be facilitated of
course if you not only are taking the
perspective of somebody who's present
but you can do that by simulating them
internally and eventually you could
internalize that perspective the way
we've talked about with the Stoics
internalizing Socrates and one can learn
to remember this one can learn to
converse with one's self dialogue with
one's self do something like an Linkous
with oneself and provoke aporia provoke
the challenge and the demand for
transformative change
mmm-hmm I think all of this is really
excellent work on their part I noted
that they also like Schwartz and sharp I
think make the mistake of trying to
understand the wisdom in terms of
expertise and I'm not going to repeat
that argument and I think that is um it
is a kind of fundamental mistake I think
understanding wisdom on the lines of
something like rationality is a much
more fruitful connection now what are
some further criticisms of Vulcan
starting there I think one of the most
important criticisms I would make other
than the ones I've made about expertise
and not being very clear on explicating
the role of perspectival knowing that's
kind of an unfair criticism because it's
anachronistic but we should at least
endeavor to bring that into our account
of wisdom given their own experiment and
given the further work Igor Grossman I
would also say that one of my criticisms
and this is a criticism that I made with
Leo Ferraro in the 2013 our article weap
published on wisdom I would argue that
there's a mistake here a more
theoretical and conceptual level it's
it's a mistake of omission not
commissioned what we're getting here is
a product theory of wisdom
in which what you're trying to do is to
come up with sort of the account of what
wisdom is and that that's a valuable
thing you should definitely do that you
should try and come up with not just a
feature list of course that's a little
bit of a problem with just the list of
criteria of course but what you do is
you want to come up with you know what
am I gonna do I'm gonna find wise people
or I'm gonna get sort of you know widely
shared definitions of wisdom and try and
come up with an account of what wisdom
is based on that and that and that's
that's a that's a legitimate thing to do
it it's it emits something that's very
important though and it emits what we
saw as so central to the ancient
theories of wisdom that we were looking
at it right if you'd look at Plato even
Socrates and Plato and Aristotle and the
Stoics and if you look at the Buddha
right and the the centrality of
transformational change in wisdom is
being lost in a product theory what you
also need and these two should talk to
each other you need a process theory you
need a theory and this is what I think
the ancient theories of wisdom are you
basically are what you're getting is an
account that works something like this
in a process theory you have an
independent account of what is
foolishness right and what is
flourishing and then when a process
Theory tells me is how I could overcome
foolishness and how I can afford
flourishing and then from that it tries
to derive what wisdom is and I think
this is a very important thing to do to
try and figure out what wisdom is from
an account of how one becomes wise
because first of all it taps into this
long-standing and important
philosophical heritage so there's a
tremendous legacy that we've explored in
this course that we should be making use
of and secondly it does something that I
think is much clearer than what a
product theory
which is it picks up on the central
insight the McGeehan barber talked about
which is seeing through illusion and
into reality the process Theory gives
you an account of what self-deception is
and how you can see through it and into
reality so that you can be better
connected to yourself to other people to
the world and thereby flourish so I
would advocate that in addition not in
competition but complimentary to a
product theory we should be developing a
process theory tells us what foolishest
is how foolishness develops how we can
overcome foolishness how we can afford
flourishing and then on the basis of
that get into a dialogue with accounts
of what wisdom is so I think that's
important
I think I mean the fact that Aristotle's
being invoked really says we need to
bring in the developmental and
transformative aspects of wisdom in a
more serious manner so that's one of my
most central criticisms balton spa nagar
the other one like i said is they seem
to make a mistake around expertise I
would now like to share with you some
central criticisms made by a really
seminal thinker somebody i've had i've
had the chance to meet a couple times
and interact with and this is Monica are
dealt I think she did something really
important she's the critique she
published at Bolton sauna in 2004 and
her ongoing work
she's generated one of the wisdom scales
that has used experimentally she's
generated a lot of experimental work
Monica's work is really important in
central now I'm gonna use some of my
language that we've developed in this
course to talk about Monica and I hope
it's not imposing on her but III think
it's plausible that it's not her main
criticism of the bolts installing their
paradigm or approach is they confuse
this is her criticism and I agree with
it they're confusing Harvey
theoretical knowledge about wisdom with
being a wise person so there's there's a
sense in which there's a bit of a modal
confusion going on in the bolts
installed under theory it's like I have
a lot of knowledge about wisdom that
doesn't make me wise so I'm like I'm an
excellent case in point of that I would
think I mean I've read a lot of the
wisdom literature both the philosophical
no psychological I teach on it I you
know I'm involved with currently some
experimental work etc so I think I have
quite a bit of theoretical knowledge
about wisdom I would not in any way dare
to equate that with the claim that I'm a
wise person
well that knowledge I think could be
argued to be necessary I think what our
dealt is clearly pointing to is that
it's nowhere near sufficient it's
nowhere near sufficient and so what I
think she's pointing to is the fact that
a wise person and we can think of the
Socratic example here about the truth
and the transformative relevance needing
to be kept together the wise person must
realize these theoretical truths within
a process of self transformation must
realize this within a process of self
transformation so people that are wise
have gone through a process of self
transformation they have achieved a
significant kind of self transcendence
that allows them to embody and enact
these truths rather than just having
them in a propositional fashion so our
delt is clearly pointing towards
something missing right the importance
of the process of development
she's also important important Lee
pointing to the way in which wisdom is
the project of you know becoming a
particular kind of person and so she
write a pretty good
a person living in a particular kind of
world right and so she's directly
pointing towards what I've articulated
in this course as participatory knowing
so she then brings out something very
important about this distinction she
makes use this distinction between
having knowledge and being wise and she
makes use of a distinction from a really
important philosopher John Keeks I've
mentioned him before that's done some
important work on moral wisdom in its
relationship to virtue and Keeks makes a
very important distinction between
descriptive knowledge and interpretive
knowledge
which Monica points to and what our
Delta is pointing to is of course that
wisdom has to do more with this so
descriptive knowledge is basically your
knowledge that you know the cat is a
mammal your knowledge that the cat is a
predator or something like that the
interpretive knowledge is your ability
right to grasp of the significance of
your descriptive knowledge now that
that's going to be important because
that actually turns out to be a central
feature and most of the theories that
are now being developed about what
with what understanding is and how it
differs from knowledge and I think what
our Delta is pointing to here by
invoking Keeks notion of interpretive
knowledge right is the centrality of
understanding to wisdom and of course
grasping the significance is putting us
I'm going to argue later that this of
course is going to be have to do with
Const rule and this is going to have to
do about of course with relevance
relevance realization now I think that's
very important work and
I think the fact that there's so much
happening in this theories and the thing
is it's happening in a very sort of
concise fashion so let's gather what
we've got here we we we've got their
realization that we shouldn't be just
talking about having knowledge about
wisdom we should be going through the
process of self transcendence by which
we become wise that that involves right
as I said a process theory we're gonna
need a process Theory not just a product
theory and that what the wise person has
above and beyond knowledge I would call
descriptive knowledge knowledge and
interpretive knowledge whether that's
knowledge I don't know but that's at
least what many people are considering
understanding and this has to do as I'm
going to argue with that
that I'm going to argue that grasping
the significance of your knowledge is
you know good construal that realizes
what's relevant so adult then talks
about the personality characteristics
that you should see in the wise person
so she thinks that if we want to talk
about what it is to be a wise person we
shouldn't just be talking about the
knowledge obviously we should be talking
about the kind of characteristics that
the wise person has and that's important
because we've already seen the deep
connections between wisdom and virtue so
she thinks that there are three ways in
which we can judge the relative value we
can grasp the significance of
information there's three domains mom
that's not right I don't want to say too
I mean there's three dimensions of our
personhood that are crucial for being a
wise person she thinks there and up
until now we've been clearly giving
these emphases there are cognitive
factors so what are the cognitive
factors here
this of course is your ability to you
know have a comprehension of the
significance and meaning of information
okay and and not just theoretically the
significance of the information for your
development for your going through a
process of self transcendence and
becoming a wise person then there are
reflective and I think the distinction
here that this is picking up a bit on
the the way rationality has this
reflective component into it as opposed
to intelligence which is just your
ability to grasp what's relevant so I
think that's that's something that can
be integrated quite well with the
discussion we had on rationality so the
reflective factors a person who has been
cultivating wisdom is multi perspectival
they're capable excuse me I don't know
what's wrong with my throat they're
capable of engaging in multiple
perspectives they're capable of
self-examination self awareness self
insight so notice again that the
reflection here has an existential
import you're taking these perspectives
but you cannot ultimately write
internalize this perspective of ability
onto yourself in self reflection self
examination itself insight so I think
that's very valuable and then there's an
affective component and I'm doing this
because our dealt clearly thinks that
these three are mutually influencing
mutually constraining causally
interacting with each other so the
affective dimension she talks about in
terms of compassion I've made a case
that so because of some of the model
she's invokes from Buddhism I don't
think this is inappropriate I've made a
case that the the the capacity for agape
is the best way of understanding
compassion the main idea here is and
this is why
invoking agape as opposed to either file
Leah or eros is because it helps to
overcome ego centrism
and you can see how these two are
working together right how the this is
helping to overcome ego centrism in kind
of a powerful way so this is sort of
overcoming eco-center ISM respect I
believe and this is overcoming
egocentrism attitudinally and in terms
of your core motivations your core set
of priorities and preferences the
basically the way in which you're caring
about the world and that you're caring
is directed towards the the flourishing
of other persons so I think that also is
an important improvement in the
theorizing the fact that our Delta is
clearly giving equal priority to
cognitive I would call you know these
are perspectival and the the prospective
of all aspects of rationality and of
course the important affective things
and if you remember and this does
something also at least implicitly that
we don't have in the vaults and stronger
and so this is one other criticism I
would make on behalf of Monica are dealt
of the bolts installed under theory
which is agape right starts to I've
argued so I'm not attributing this
argument to adult but I'm supplementing
it to her theory because what agape
gives is it at least gives a way of
trying to talk about meaning in life the
way Wolfe talked about and I argued that
agape helps us to get that kind of
connectedness and caring that is right
it's so central to grounding meaning in
life you don't have to ground meaning in
life in being subject alia tracted to
something that's completely objectively
attractive we just have to be trans
subjectively couple
- right - those things we find
inherently valuable because of their
connection to meaning making coherence
right and caring and so the this allows
well what it affords and I would argue
enables our adults theory to do is to
connect her account of wisdom to meaning
in life in a in a much more direct
fashion that connection to meaning in
life is not clear in Bolton's doneger
and and if you remember wolf argues that
you can't reduce meaning in life to
morality so the connection between
wisdom and virtue while central and
being discussed well by Schwartz and
sharp and by bolts and started her is
right not reducible to it's not
sufficient for the connection between
wisdom and meaning in life by bringing
in this affective component and the idea
that we are becoming wise not just
thinking about wisdom and so the process
of identification the modal existential
aspects are dealt is doing a lot more
with about connecting wisdom to meaning
in life and I think that's very very
important okay so you know this is sort
of understanding in a sense I'm gonna
hope develop later right but the disc
did this ability to pick up on what you
know to to realize the significance of
your knowledge and allow you and again
in an existential fashion not just
abstract theoretical but in a way that
allows you to I would argue ultimately
see through a lot illusion and it's
reality so that you can afford your
development then you you that is
connected to your reflective capacity to
perspectival knowing which ultimately
could be linked to the stuff we saw with
Grossman's work and Ian Berlin Berg the
Berlin paradigm of Alton starting er
right right the ability to take the
perspective of others being multiple
perspective and ultimately turn that
back on oneself in self-examination
lies it right in self insight and that
those two are also linked to something
like a capacity for agape and I would
argue that you need these two for
overcoming ego centrism and it also I
haven't seen Monica develop this very
explicitly in connection especially with
Wolf's work but there's the real
potential here of connecting wisdom to
something other than virtue it should be
connected to virtue but it should also
be importantly connected to meaning in
life what are some of my criticisms of
our delts work well it it clearly
invokes transformational processes it
doesn't really incorporate a theory of
transformative experience or an account
of it you know like like we have in LA
Paul's work it doesn't really give us a
processing theory it points towards that
and this is important it points towards
the need for a processing theory but it
doesn't give us an account of what that
process looks very much like and it
doesn't have an independent account of
foolishness it doesn't really tell us
very much what foolishness is and that's
something needed if we're gonna I would
argue to have a good process theory of
wisdom there is an untapped potential
this isn't so much a criticism as as
encouragement that there's an untapped
potential given this theoretical
machinery of connecting wisdom to
meaning in life in a way that
complements the connections between
wisdom and and virtue so I think these
are all some very important features
about this I've already indicated you
know grasping the significance I think
this points towards our our we've
already talked a lot about agape and the
relationships I tried to draw between it
and relevance realization and of course
I've already indicated this is bringing
in the recursive aspects is bringing in
prospective or knowing and there's also
there's also at least in the background
sense the participatory knowing because
one is
right one is coming to know oneself
differently is cut the one is coming to
know the world differently because one
is going through this inherent
transformational process so we're seeing
how the theory of wisdom is sort of
building up it's becoming more complex
it's bringing in different aspects you
know different kinds of the different
kinds of knowing there is you know quite
important aspects of relevance
realization in Schwartz and Sharpe
clearly involves installing er quite
strongly implied in the central role at
least in the cognitive aspects although
I would argue also and the reflective
and the affective aspects of our doubts
theory relevance realization is playing
an important role and we can see how
it's getting RAM we see how it's getting
sort of developed and specified into and
connected to other important cognitive
processes all right
I think the next important theory we
should turn to is Sternberg so and this
this is because you can see stern Birds
work running throughout the history
Robert Sternberg work that running
through the history of the psychology of
wisdom Robert Sternberg basically really
gets this off the ground with his
pivotal work not only in his own
theories but the tireless work he's done
in putting together anthologies various
anthologies on wisdom or related
anthologies on foolishness why smart
people can be so stupid as one of the
best anthologies on the psychology of
foolishness I've seen but he has also
been tireless in trying to connect the
psychology of wisdom to pedagogy he gets
right again something that is important
in central and we see it crucially in
the ancient theories of wisdom it's not
so clearly present in the current
psychological theories but the deep
connection between wisdom and teaching
that's of course clearly the case in
Socrates it's clearly the case in Jesus
of Nazareth it's clearly the case in
Buddhism that they're like in the work
of the Buddha that there's a deep
connection between wisdom and education
and so he's been very tireless not only
sort of theoretically pointing out that
connection but trying to work out and
you'll allow I mean this word in a
complementary Sun trying to engineer
some psycho technology sets of practices
for how to bring the cultivation of
wisdom into the educational domain so
and so for many reasons
Sternberg is a pivotal figure in the
wisdom into the wisdom I hope it's gonna
call the wisdom industry that sounds
like an industry for producing wisdom in
the community of people who are
endeavoring to come up with a
psychological cognitive scientific even
neuro scientific theory of wisdom there
are some people who are pursuing this
beak suggest our
other people are pursuing the
neuroscientific aspects but I'm not
going to go into that in great detail
right now I'm just trying to concentrate
on the psychological theories precisely
because they are the ones that are most
directly accessible and relevant to
trying to respond to the meaning crisis
so in 1998 Sternberg he had an earlier
theory where he was talking and he's
come back to this many times he has a
book where he tries to talk about the
relationships between intelligence
wisdom and creativity and I'm trying I
tried to follow that out but you know in
my own way trying to show you the
relationships between intelligence
rationality wisdom insight etc so
definitely influenced by Sternberg in
that way but he he then came up with a
more I'd oh I don't I want to be
complementary of the newer theory
without being completely dismissive of
the older I would say the newer theory
is sort of more coherent more tightly
integrated more explicate 'add so in
1998 he came up with what he's called
and maintained a balance theory of
wisdom that's actually the title of the
1998 article a balance theory of wisdom
so the notion of balance is going to
play a crucial role in this theory now
what he Sternberg starts by talking
about sophia and phronesis and a paestum
epistle me which is at the core of
epistemological that's that's what I
would call propositional knowledge he
calls it scientific understanding he
quickly dropped that as not being
particularly relevant to wisdom not
because knowledge is unimportant because
everybody knows the centrality of
knowledge to wisdom that's what we're
spending so much time on getting
knowledge in this course but everybody
pretty much also understands that wisdom
is something above and beyond scientific
theoretical propositional knowledge okay
so that that's sort of easily
understandable he also like I said he
invokes
Sophia and talks about a sort of contact
connection with contemplation and from
esis and practical wisdom he zeroes in
like Schwartz and sharp on phronesis I
think that's again a little bit too much
of a neglect of the important role of
Sophia he also draws on polanyi's idea
of tacit knowledge remember we talked
about that when we talked about
subsidiary awareness and he talks about
the the the tacit knowledge having
having to do with our procedural
abilities it's relevant to attaining
goals it's not explicitly taught we
experience it intuitively so he's in the
he is invoking all kinds of important
aspects about implicit learning
intuition and procedural knowing I think
that's that's good I think he needs to
also add to that Tecna what what are
some important psycho technologies
especially since I can I think in
fairness say that he is trying to
engineer such micro technologies in his
pedagogical endeavors I also think he
needs to try to do what Aristotle did
which is integrate how phronesis which
is largely happening in an implicit
intuitive sort of s1 kind of fashion is
integrated with Sophia which can have a
more reflective perhaps more s2 aspect
to it all right that being said what's
the core theory well the idea is we and
this is important because it's just sort
of directly invoked right he invoked the
the the the tacit knowledge is is also
right it's
it's used as a way of because he starts
talking about it as tacit understanding
so the the tacit knowing the tacit right
the implicit learning it is also a way
in which Sternberg tries to invoke the
capacity for understanding now that
isn't very well explicate 'add in the
account I'm thinking I'm trying I'm
speculating that what I think he's
trying to get at is that the machinery
by which we sort of grasp the
significance of our knowledge and use it
to directly and intuitively cope with
the world is a significant component of
understanding so I think that's why the
shift is there he then talks and the way
the reason why I want to invoke that is
because the what the tacit understanding
is doing its again so pregnant with
aspects of relevance realization because
he talks about the understanding guiding
our ability to adapt to listen to that
language to adapt to situations to shape
them and that doesn't necessarily mean
physical it can mean how we construe
them how we formulate our problems and
the selection of environments the
selection the moving around the
exploring or exploiting this is all very
much doing with relevance realization he
talks about these their abilities are
needed to deal with practical problems
and this is why he's emphasizing wisdom
not as the same thing as theoretical
knowledge he's picking up on the same
point that Monica resulted but he said
these practical problems quote are
unform alized
or in need of weave so I misquoted and
that miss quotation was an important
mistake these problems are unform elated
much more relevant to problem
formulation or unform elated or in need
of reformulations and so he's invoking
problem formulation here he
of course with the notion of
reformulations he's invoking the notion
of insight and so we can see again the
relevance realization machinery being
invoked so he his theory quote invoke
involves sorry
his theory involves quote views let me
start that again his theory quote views
who is 'dom as inherent in the
interaction between an inventor and an
individual and a situational context
whose inherently trans jetsam outfitting
in fact he then goes on to say wisdom
depends on the fit of a wise solution to
its context so notice the fitted Ness
right all of the language that we've
developed is being directly invoked is
being put at the center of the theory
and I'm gonna argue that what he's our
what he what he's invoking when he's
invoking balance is he's invoking
optimization and of course argued that
relevance realization is an optimization
theory so what's sort of beautiful about
the theory is he gives a mattock diagram
of it and draw this for you so here's
our tacit understanding that's that
implicit processing etc remember we
talked about that so much in connection
with flow and
what's happening is it is dealing with
trying to balance your interests balance
your interests what you're interested in
what you find salient important and he
talks about three kinds there's the
intrapersonal the interpersonal and the
extra personal so this of course is
interest between people this is interest
within a person so you can think of
Plato here trying to get your various
centers and what they're interested in
coordinated together and extra personal
having to do I think this is ultimately
how you're connected to yourself how
you're connected to other people and how
you're connected to the world
I think he's invoking at least
implicitly the the three dimensions of
connectedness that go into meaning in
life and so I think at least implicitly
we could make a clear argument here that
he's trying to connect wisdom to meaning
in life okay and that this capacity for
sort of zeroing in on relevant
information is playing an important role
in that and the reason why I say that is
because it's not clear to me why the
arrows only going one way it seems to me
that I well this is a criticism I would
make
I think the arrows right should go both
ways because there's a there's also
going to be feedback but anyways they
feed forward to the three things that
are clearly I would argue RR which is
right the adapting the shaping and the
selecting
I'll come back to that notion the
triangles are meant to indicate balance
and I've tried to indicate to you that I
think I'll put that down here and we'll
come back to it the balance has to do
with optimization okay so what's going
on here is right this is a balance of
your response to write the environmental
context so this is balancing your
interests and this is balancing your
response okay like I said that's pretty
clear our relevance realization stuff
this then is directed towards he argues
the common good
here again is where I have to step aside
from the value he's articulating and the
theory he's generating I agree
especially within a liberal democratic
framework framework deeply influenced by
Christianity that the common good is an
overarching value for us I'm not sure
that that is going to be universally
shared by all people who I think can
reasonably be deemed wise individuals so
if you're in a culture that's firm what
this means maybe you have to bend this
so much then if it's then trivial it
doesn't mean maybe it doesn't mean
common in the sense of shared by
everyone it might be you know you you're
in some sort of hierarchical feudal
society and the common good
isn't that everybody equally benefits
from it it might be more than or that
you know everybody is working well
together some sort of justification like
that I'm not trying to justify a
hierarchical Society or anything like
that
I want you clearly to understand I think
this is an important value I'm just
concerned here that Sternberg is being
anachronistic here and he's using one of
our central values and attributing it to
every person who has been wise I'm not
I'm not sure I mean I think you could
make a case that that's clearly the case
in Jesus or the Buddha not sure that
it's the case for Marcus Aurelius and
all of the Stoics it's clearly not the
case for a pic tutors so I'm hesitant
about putting that up there I I'm gonna
advise that there's something I think
more more broadly comprehend I think the
things that we should put up here are
things that there's already a consensus
on a broader notion of virtue oh sorry
that really makes it sound like I'm
making an emphasis here that what we're
connect what we're really concerned with
is virtue right and because of this I
think and meaning in life okay I have
changed that is not in his model I have
changed it because of again I'm worried
that his particular term is
anachronistic and idiosyncratic to our
particular historical cultural context
it's important to also note that running
alongside of this is values and then
arrows that are kind of indeterminately
pointing so trying to interpret what
that means it is something like the wise
person is being constrained by values
what those values are
are not clear again is it that we're
talking about things like meaning in
life and the virtues perhaps so another
criticism I have is that this part of
the theory in this part of the diagram
the way it's operating is unclear it
might be something as basic as the wise
person is is working normatively they're
trying to get the best and then this is
not that not that interesting a claim
because wisdom is itself a normative
notion and therefore the fact that the
wise person is being governed by
normativity is is almost definitional if
it if it means something specific like
the wise person has a specific set of
values that needs to be explicate a'
dand defended so i don't know what quite
what to do with that so III have to sort
of leave it somewhat inert what I would
argue and I think what these triangles
indicate and what the language indicates
is the the balance is used to adapt to
shape and select environments and what
is this balance he argues that something
like SPEA JS equilibration between
assimilation accommodation he argues
that it's a balance between coping with
novelty and procedural ization do you
see what he's doin sphere is it's
balanced that is directly invoking a lot
of the machinery we've talked about
about relevance realization and he's
clearly not invoking sort of a spatial
balancing he's invoking optimization
he's invoking optimization so I think
this theory is also a theory that is
deeply integrated well with a lot of the
material we've been discussing the
relevance realization is playing a key
role in terms of the balancing and the
this process here also down here at the
level of grasping the significance at
least intuitively of our knowledge and
the patterns we picked up from the
environment there's deep connections to
at least there's a real potential in
Sternberg theory for making deep
connections to
meaning in life because as I said I
think this is pretty clearly how you
connect to yourself how do you connect
to others how do you connect to the
world right there's important possible
connections possibly it's I'm unsure
between this and virtue and meaning in
life so this is all very good and like I
said overall this is clearly a dynamic
optimization and it's invoking something
very much like relevance realization all
right what are some of criticism that on
the board for now what are some of the
criticisms of Sternberg this is still in
the end a product theory it's not a
process theory it doesn't make this sort
of I mean this avoids equating wisdom
with expertise and that's that's a
powerful advantage of this theory but
there like I said this this domain the
values unexploited it you could either
be a somewhat trivial because it's
almost tautological that the wise person
is acting according to normative
standards or it could be a much more
controversial claim that specific values
are involved I don't know I've already
told you I don't think that the common
good
is the goal of all wise people that
seems anachronistic to me an important
way the theory could clearly be improved
by getting clearer about the nature of
tacit implicit learning getting clearer
about optimization getting clearer about
relevance realization getting clearer
about how relevance realization connects
to meaning in life so all of those
things would be developed the if one
started to develop a process theory and
not just a product theory so Sternberg
needs an independent theory of with
foolishness now he has a theory of
foolishness but it's not independent his
theory of foolishness is basically
foolishness is an imbalance in these
things so what foolishness is is
basically a lack of wisdom and again
while that's definitiely the case what
you need is an
gently constructed theory of wisdom a
theory sorry a theory of foolishness you
think media theory of foolishness that
takes in hand right the centrality of
seeing through illusion and into reality
that has an independent account of how
we're self-deceptive our self
destructive how that operates how that
unfolds because we see that in many of
the ancient wisdom theories and how we
can ameliorate that so I think that that
that is missing in an essential way from
Sternberg's work ok so I think in the
end what I want to do is try and draw
all of these together I've tried to
indicate important points of improvement
one one from one theory with respect to
the other relative strengths and
weaknesses I've also tried to indicate
powerful points of convergence and
connection to the ideas of relevance
realization that we've been developing
in this course because that's part of
the big plausibility diagram to show how
the machinery of relevance realization
right can help to explain what it is to
be wise and help to explain noise I'm
going to argue what it is to become wise
to give a processing theory so I want to
take that up and the next account oh and
I'm somewhat hesitant about that because
you know I I'm sort of okay with you
know offering you proposals of well I'm
not I mean I'm very cautious about
proposals about consciousness and other
things like that but you know we've got
proposals about higher states of
consciousness and insight and that I've
tried to make arguments for that and I'm
going to make an argument that and then
that I have made with Leo Ferraro about
wisdom but there it is something you it
borders on hubristic to talk about this
in that way
but I'm gonna try and draw on this and
at least show you a plausible way in
which we can draw all of this material
together with the theory of relevance
realization and come up with an account
of wisdom and then I think you also
subject that theory at least the version
that was published in 2013 to some
important criticisms and and then
hopefully then be in a place where we
can fold it back into the connections
between wisdom the cultivation of wisdom
the cultivation of meaning in life the
cultivation the pursuit there are these
the right verbs of enlightenment how
these are all connected and how that can
be situated into the larger project of
awakening from the meaning crisis thank
you very much for your time and
attention
[Music]
you
[Music]
you
you