howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
rut show.com that's Jim ruts show com
today's guest is Ken McCarthy internet
marketing guru well Jim I'm glad to be
here thanks for inviting me it's great
to be on line with somebody that I argue
was so amicably on Twitter yeah it's
also great another old-time internet
dude around been around since the
beginning of before that Ken's been
around the internet for a long time he's
known for his pioneering work and some
of the early movement to commercialize
the Internet including early experiments
with white hat email advertising
contributions the development of the
banner ad and practical applications of
pay-per-click advertising and believe it
or not he was a visionary and foresaw
internet video long before it happened
that all really happened I can prove it
I have the documentation
yeah I actually a little research to
confirm some of these claims are linked
now they're all true so what did you get
on the Internet
well it's an interesting story my wife
wrote a cookbook and it was nominated
why I helped her a little bit and it was
nominated for the Julia Child cookbook
award this was back in 93 and it was a
public vote so I was trying to find
everybody I knew and ever knew asking
them to vote for her and I couldn't find
this one guy who had gone to college
with Jim module and someone said oh well
we don't know his phone number but we
have his email address and I kind of
knew what an email address was but I
didn't have an email account so I called
a friend in Humboldt County I used to
live in San Francisco and I said can you
send an email message to this guy and it
turns out he was only living three
blocks from me he had moved all the way
from the east as I did and was like
living in my neighborhood I didn't know
it
so I asked him what is all this internet
stuff and he filled me in and then he
said you should get bored watch magazine
so I walked up the street and amazingly
on Fillmore Street in San Francisco at
the time a coffee shop was carrying
bored watch magazine Jack records old
magazine and they were announcing their
1993 convention so I said I'll do that
I'll go and see what that's all about
and I went and I was there with hundreds
and hundreds of online obsessed people
my first real exposure to that world
I met mark Graham who figured very
importantly in my education and in all
things internet in those days and I had
this revelation that the world was gonna
change soon dramatically and I had a
little notebook with mice you know one
of those marble eyes notebooks with you
know 180 pages or whatever and by the
time I'd finished the four-day
conference I'd filled it with ideas and
I said this is what I'm gonna devote
myself to for the next couple years
that's how I got started 1993
absolutely absolutely I'll disclose this
right now I'm a technical klutz I was a
tech writer I did write apparently the
first manual for an ISDN modem for was a
company that was in San Francisco
downtown they had their Hayes Hayes had
its high-end
cutting-edge engineering office in San
Francisco and I was a tech writer and I
I got the assignment contract to go down
and write there is DN manual so I kind
of knew technical things but I never was
comfortable with them and so when my
boss said hey I want you to get a modem
so he can send stuff back and forth I
refused because I didn't want to be
intruded upon so it's just it's funny
but that's that's the that's the reality
of my technical prowess that probably
made you a good internet marketing guy
not one of these guys was overly
enamored of the shiny little objects
funny you mentioned Hayes you know I go
back to their early days 1980 at the
source which was one of the very big in
fact it was the first consumer online
internet service and actually worked
there and I met Dennis Hayes at for the
Consumer Electronics Show in 1981 where
he was selling is there
revolutionary Apple modems it's plugged
into the backplane of the Apple II he
couldn't spell with the CES would he
have a little Carter table and I then
went out and met him in the parking lot
he sold me a very early version of the
DC Haze Apple modem out of the back of
the trunk of his car for $300 cash money
that's how we used to do it I I bought I
bought a very early CRM customer
relations management software program in
1992 from a guy from the back from the
trunk of his car literally mr. Rose I
kept members first name but while he was
a visionary yeah you came on board right
about the time the internet started to
go early early early mainstream 1993
what makes that significant is that's
when the mosaic web browser by Marc
Andreessen was released by University of
Illinois the Illinois yeah NCSA right
and I noticed you also know mark a
little bit mark and I became friends
when he was CTO at AOL later ah okay but
when I was also you know just down the
road we hit it off pretty well so that
was kind of cool but anyway that's when
the internet became accessible to normal
people before that it was character mode
only things like telnet and gopher and
FTP you probably didn't have to do all
day of that right no I actually did
I actually learned that stuff because 93
you know the browser I'd seen the mosaic
browser in the summer of 93 in August
but you know it was through still a lot
of text being used you know there was
another thing that happened around 93
give or take a few months that was also
very important that was when internet
email became ubiquitous in other words
all the services finally by that point
made internet email available to to this
users so CompuServe I think was the very
first to do that prodigy and then of
course all the little bulletin boards
which which played I think a really
important unheralded role in in in the
adoption of the online world
but by 93 pretty much everybody that was
on any kind of an online system could
mail to anybody else on an online system
I meant to to younger people that may
seem like not a big deal but you have to
realize before the internet online
systems were island so if you were on
CompuServe
you could communicate with people on
CompuServe and no one else
absolutely the walled garden they called
it yeah yeah the the source was a well
garden CompuServe AOL you kind of wonder
because I do remember that transition
point before I went on to the air
Internet by about 93 or 94 although I've
been dabbling on it since 1990
but I had email addresses on things like
that CompuServe I still remember it it
was seven one four 10.3 right where's
that email go I should send an email to
that dress see what happens and I had it
brought at aol.com this morning me and
my cousin would always see who could get
Jim rut first on any service so it's
kind of a fun little game we played but
yeah those back too that's right for the
audience before about 93 there was
really a whole series Islands and also
at about that time ninety in fact we
were doing it 93 the company I worked at
was just implementing it corporate email
was typically on lands and
interconnected land so it only worked
within your corporation so I could send
a letter to a co-worker but I couldn't
send an email to you know a customer
even in 1996 right by 1993 the gateways
had been built and it was fairly
straightforward to send your internal
mail from your mail servers which were
expensive and hard to keep running out
into the internet it was very
interesting you're very right that was a
that was the second important transition
phase change as we would say in
complexity science that occurred in 1993
I'm sorry I have to say I put on this
event in 94 and in this fall of 94 and
in the summer of 94 I was in building up
interest for it and I was amazed at how
many people in the digerati of San
Francisco as late as the summer of 1994
did not have email addresses on their
business card or email at all so so even
though even though it was a
possible for everybody even people in
the business still hadn't it hadn't
clicked with them in fact you know if we
if we remember Wired magazine they
didn't get hip to the internet until the
fall of 24 they didn't sing his praises
or see it as a as an important
initiative they just sort of sort of
something you know in the mix as opposed
to the thing yeah and again it's
important for people have a historical
mindset to remember that I mean today
it's all so pervasive it's hard to
believe that you know not that long ago
really less than 30 years ago this stuff
was just starting to happen yeah I have
lots of connections into that world
because I was a fairly early member of
something called the well the well
cotton oh yeah of course
Wow and I'm still a member to this day
believe it or not it still exists these
I do like I do with Facebook now
typically take long breaks currently on
about a year long break on the well but
I promise on my well friends I'll be
back this month well calm the best
conversation on the Internet no
advertising and no abuse of your privacy
so and you know that really was and and
I guess still is but certainly was in
its heyday one of the most amazing
salons on the planet I mean the number
of fascinating people that were on the
well back in the heyday was incredible I
was on the world tour not not super
active you know one of my buddies with
Jim Warren and we used to communicate a
lot Steve O'Keefe yeah that was a great
moment in history that well I have to
say yeah and it's still going and while
it's obviously not central like it was
in 1991 it is still a very interesting
place to hang out and it's ethical and
honorable you know high level of
discourse all things we wish we'd saw
more of on the Internet these days so
we're you know we're both here 93 94
when did you start to smell economic
opportunity right away right away
because I was in the direct mail
business which meant I was used to
writing huge checks for postage for
printing to mail houses and the idea
that I could spend a communication to a
customer for essentially free I mean
once I grasped that it boggled my mind
my calculation was if just 10% of my
customers get on this email thing I'll
save some money you know and I'll be
able to communicate with that 10%
segment more often that was my initial
thought and then I started thinking
about things like FedEx packages you
know she I could just attach a lot of
photographs to an email and send it for
free and get it there faster than in
FedEx so just the simple savings in
communication immediately sold me my
only question was was it gonna catch on
it and I and I have to say when I went
to that BBS con conference in in 93
there was a panel and that the subject
was can the internet be commercialized
and it now hit it legally it was and
this is another thing we need to tell
younger people or people that don't have
the historical perspective it wasn't
legal to use the internet for commercial
purposes until I have the date somewhere
here sometime in 1989 1989 there's a lot
of argument about exactly what you could
do web but that was about the time yeah
so what that did was we had a whole
generation of people that were involved
in building the Internet
with the attitude that this is not a
commercial space so when an sfn I guess
is their acronym said hey guess what
guys you can do business now there were
crickets initially you know there was
the culture of wheeling and dealing and
buying and selling and promoting didn't
exist in the internet culture when that
when the laws were changed so there was
a little bit of a gap before people like
me showed up and said okay how can we
make this thing work on a commercial
basis and you're right I was again part
of those discussions and you're also
right but then very interest in
Intermezzo between the walled gardens of
Fayette CompuServe and AOL and the
Internet there was this BBS world and a
lot of the early people that got
involved on the commercial side of the
internet actually came out of the BBS
world absolutely when it was they had
the model you know subscribers and you
know providing access to people
providing content to people so all now
that was a that was the other thing that
sold me when I went out to that
conference in 93 and I saw the
that these folks had for the online
experience I realized well if these
people love it then this is a something
that is possible for the nervous systems
of other people you know there was there
was probably a time in fact I know there
was a time when when movies were first
invented and it took a while for people
to get comfortable going to the movies
there's reports of you know when the
train arrived on the screen some people
would lose it and run out of the theater
assuming they were about to be run over
I heard another funny story recently
about a Texas the early days of Texas
and there was some bad guy doing
something bad to a damsel in distress
and some guy literally took a six-gun
out of his pocket and started shooting
the screen so yeah so so you know you
don't know whether a mediums gonna catch
on or not you don't know if it's neuron
eclis or neurologically congruent with
with human beings right but when I saw
the passion that people had for sitting
in front of screens and communicating
and downloading and you know doing all
the things they did I said well if if
this little cadre of people is this into
it then it's neurologically congruent
for human beings and if it is the only
barrier is to make this thing fast easy
and cheap and then everybody's gonna be
on it you saw it you made one of those
great life insights and you were right
well oddly oddly enough where I don't
know why this is because you know we've
you know I don't know how long
humanity's been around but it's a long
time and suddenly in the last hundred
and twenty years or 150 years we become
screen Watchers you know first it was
the movies and it was TV and I just
thought well this is just another
version of screen watching and
apparently we are again neurologically
congruent to sit in front of screens and
watch flickering lights you know it
might go all the way back to the
campfire don't be telling a story right
yeah you know and the things flashing
and you know you're sort of sitting
there looking at it I'm gonna add that
to my possibly true but probably not
hypotheses I can see it now okay before
we get into some of the early evolution
of the commercial Internet they can be
useful for our audience
who are mostly not marketing
professionals to go into the distinction
between brand advertising and marketing
and direct response huh i SPECT walk
mostly about direct response but might
be useful to make that distinction for
folks very good you hear the term
branding a lot and and it certainly is
incredibly valuable to possess a
successful brand however building a
successful brand is a really really
expensive process so that that's one
consideration some brand advertising is
to build the brand but a vast majority
of brand advertising is to maintain the
brand so when you turn the TV on and you
see generally funny we know if we see
Coke and Pepsi commercials anymore I
haven't seen one in a while but I
remember growing up there'd be Coke and
Pepsi commercials all the time they
weren't selling you on the idea of soda
or the idea of coke or the idea of Pepsi
they were just reminding you so that
when you were in the store and had the
choice to make you had the Pepsi theme
running through your mind so you'd grab
Pepsi to me that's an example of brand
advertising its saturation it's
expensive its unmeasurable to a certain
degree and and the whole point is just
to get you when you're in the store
looking at the shelf to remember that oh
yeah
Pepsi is the thing or whatever the the
slogan was direct response there's a
whole other kettle of fish it grew out
of the catalog world of the 19th century
it's measurable that's its most
important feature you you run an ad you
know exactly how much the a drug cost
you know exactly where it appeared and
because you can key the ad which is you
know change the order form slightly so
that it's unique to that particular ad
in that placement you know exactly how
many dollars you made back that's that's
how closely they measure things and that
allows a small business small being you
know less than ten million dollars a
year to go out there and start selling
you know actually book transactions you
know and it's a very very simple model
of dollars in dollars out I spent so
much money on on the ad I got this many
orders you
you do a little calculation you think
well I may not make a full profit on the
first order but this is a repeat sale so
there's a lifetime value to the customer
so yes I can keep running these ads so
an infomercial is sort of a classic
example of a direct response ad it's a
long ones long form they put down their
money they buy the time they produce the
commercial and they run it as long as
the phone rings and the phone rings
profitably they will run that
infomercial forever the day it stops
being profitable they stop running it
and try to come up with the next thing
so I'm from the direct-response world
which is we measure everything because
we don't have the budget of Coke or
Pepsi so that's the difference between
brand advertising in my mind and direct
response advertising yep that makes
perfect sense and I was also involved in
some businesses that generate a
surprising amount of dead trees back in
the paper-based the direct response
modeling world and you're absolutely
right though the whole business was
about capturing up information to run
the numbers to see if what part of the
matrix you were marketing to worked ramp
up your dollars there and ramp down your
dollars elsewhere and hopefully you'd
make a winner out of it exactly oh and
we both know what I at least once we
figured out how to do it what a
revolution the Internet was so tell me
about the very first thing you tried to
do commercially on the Internet
Wow let me think I mean well I mean one
of the things was promoting my events
because I was putting on conferences in
the Bay Area believe it or not it was
very hard to convince people in the
multi then called the multi media
industry who were the digerati of San
Francisco at the time and it was very
hard to convince people in the software
industry just in the mainstream software
industry that the internet offered any
promise whatsoever and you know cd-roms
everyone you know they're ubiquitous now
they're no big deal we probably don't
even use them anymore because we have
the Internet but there was a period
before cd-roms were commercial items and
so you had this whole industry of people
in San Francisco that were custom making
multimedia presentation so you know IBM
needed some kind
sailes things so these guys would create
these laserdisc type things to that the
salesman could either you know bring on
the road or they could show at
conferences so there was a big solid
infrastructure of san francisco of
people that could make multimedia
interactive communications right they
did not for the for the most part what
not is not fair to say half of them
fully half of them did not get that the
internet was going to be important to
their futures as late as the summer of
1994 right and you know one of the
things they would tell me is like well
i-i can't stream my multimedia over the
internet the band was too small so why
would I even want to get involved in
this and I just would you know slap my
Fortis like I can't you see this is
coming it's like it's so obvious I'm not
a technical guy but my thought was
alright it's slow now but I see these
motives are getting faster every season
I think the technical guys can figure
out how to make him even faster right I
mean it like I always think of like well
they laid a cable from England to the
United States on the floor of the
Atlantic Ocean if they did that they can
make you know modems move faster right
how hard could it be I didn't think I
was gonna happen overnight
but I saw it coming so that was my first
businesses besides helping people you
know do little things we had a hosting
company we would build websites for
people but my main business from 94 till
2011 was teaching business people how to
use this thing effectively so my first
business ventures in the internet world
were bringing the then Internet
commercialization experts together for
audiences and trying to explain guys
this is what's coming this is how it
works this is how you might use it very
interesting did you try to promote your
own businesses other than how to take it
almost seems recursive here I'm using
internet marketing to market to people
at each of internet marketing uses per
anything for something with more like
real bullets like we sell a product sir
well I've got a couple of websites that
I run now that kind of fit that model
one is called jazz on the tube and it's
a service for people that love jazz and
everyday we put out a
male pointing them to a jazz video we
found and then we run advertising what
else do we do we get we solicit support
because as jazz fans are really into
what they're into and they're willing to
support the thing above and beyond you
know it's a free service but sometimes
we say hey kick in some money and lo and
behold they do yeah I sold my
conference's online but it's just do
enough in 94
you couldn't bail the conference's
online because there weren't enough
people online to make it really work so
I had to do the selling the
old-fashioned way I had to go to you
know Chamber of Commerce meetings I had
to you know make alliances with with
trade associations and mail to their
mailing lists so my original efforts to
promote the Internet were mostly done
offline the old-fashioned way remember
that you know that was we all had to do
because as you said you can't sell to
get people online online I mean the most
famous example of that was the AOL
cd-rom bombing of the world I mean run
it literally billions of cd-roms that
they drop all over the United States and
Europe to get early adopters on AOL
right and that was kind of a direct mail
play or direct marketing play for sure
and they had assumed they did the
calculation that if we mail act
thousands of discs we will get X
hundreds of new subscribers each
subscriber will be worth X and it will
all work out in the end I happened to
meet the woman who actually came up with
the idea for that campaign and she said
yep they did some back of the envelope
simple calculations but frankly they
were so desperate to find something to
crack this conundrum that they just
punted and went for it yeah committed a
fair amount of money they did not do
what you and I would have done as our
own startup entrepreneurs a shitload
into the first shot and it did
fortunately work then they got furious
about you know hardcore direct response
marketing metrics yeah so that you know
for a long time when did the AOL bombing
occur look that up your online during
the 90s you might even look for sugar
than that even cd-rom
well I I mean I remember AOL being so
small that I could write Steve Case and
he'd write me back yeah yeah and and
they were pretty small in the early 90s
here it said between 93 and 2006 AOL
sent out more than a billion in the CD
oh my god it was in the 90s and early
double marks but as late as 2003 they
were still doing the world like it used
to be a kind of a pop-culture stunt to
see what kind of cool things you could
do one friend of mine took all the CD
ROMs you'd received from AOL and turned
them into ornaments for his Christmas
tree there you go yeah I mean somebody
else who turned them into coasters and
whenever you had guests over he'd hang
out and that's a o L CD ROMs with a
little rubber feet glued onto them so
that was kind of interesting now the
other thing you talked about this is
something I was tracking always was the
transition on what is it feasible to do
online based on bandwidth and the
earliest days a 1981 text was all you
could do basically right yep that was
images in the mid 80s and it was audio
which you could do on a store and
forward basis but not real-time and the
later 80s then it was real-time audio
and there very early 90s then it was
downloadable video or forget this little
era where people would want to watch a
movie typically you'd get it for free
from some pirate site but it might take
12 hour movie that's right the earliest
days of pirate video sites were all a
non-real time and then finally you know
streaming video finally came on and
remember what that logo that Netflix was
in the business of sending out cd-rom
yeah I remember that I do and I will
give them credit amazing credit huge
balls right is that what they knew that
the real play was streaming video but
they decided to preempt that market
place they would invest a bazillion
dollars in owning the cd-rom mailing
back and forth business which was an
insane business to be in could never
possibly make any money you know I don't
know how much they raised but it was a
shitload to dominate that business and
there was a period when Walsh
thought they were nuts and the
transition wasn't going to happen fast
enough for it all worker their stock
price collapsed I mean to a really low
level if anybody bought the Netflix
stock then they would have made a pile
of dough but they were right and they
rode that transition and now they're
probably the dominant entertainment
company in the world or at least number
two behind Disney which is amazing you
know considering how young a company
they really are I know I remember the
Netflix of physical business was so big
that in my little village where I live
the post office decided to devote an
entire window just to Netflix returns
that's I'm not not a window but at the
slot
they had a Netflix lot because the the
volume was incredible when that thing
was going and they acquired the
customers then when we all went online
they had us now here's something that's
gonna blow my blew my mind it's gonna
blow our audience's mind to Netflix
didn't launch its streaming business
until 2010 Wow so it's only nine years
old and already we have cultural memes
like Netflix and chill man
right it's only nine years old that's
ridiculous yeah yeah I would have said
it was older than that but nope that's
what wikipedia says and we know they're
not allowed to lie on Wikipedia huh yeah
do you know there's a page speaking of
Wikipedia do you know there's a page on
Wikipedia itself that states do not
believe anything you see on Wikipedia
and do not even use Wikipedia as a
source about information about Wikipedia
we're so unreliable it's on there so
it's very funny of course there's been
some tests done in the last five years
it showed that on average Wikipedia is
more accurate than cyclopædia Britannica
really yeah and it makes sense because
it's updated in real time to cross-check
now of course it does not apply a highly
controversial topic save the
least-experienced I'm Clinton or look at
the article on Gaza Strip or something
those things are edited hundreds of
times a day in a bad faith horrible kind
of fashion yes a shame because you're
right when they're on they're really on
you know Wikipedia especially on the
science stuff and the chemistry stuff
and the biology stuff oh my god
in history - amazing right obscure
little battles that no normal military
history buffs and you know that yeah you
can chase down some monograph someplace
that cost you $100 for an out-of-print
monograph or you can read an amazing
detail article about not true and I love
jazz and so I'm interested in all the
history the historical information about
the history of jazz and the musicians
and incredible just incredible
yeah well doing stuff you know that your
your client so you were teaching direct
mail stuff - what were they doing in the
early day Oh everything under the Sun
I'll give you an example this is one of
my favorite stories he name is lloyd
irvin and he was a is a martial arts
person he won Brazilian jiu-jitsu world
title twice a really high level guy he
trains a lot of MMA fighters now and he
decided to take his knowledge and
systematize it and package it and make
it available via the Internet this was
back in 2003 and he went out and builds
a really huge business for himself you
know a lot of these guys in that
industry you know they make money from
their bouts and they make money from
training but it's kind of short money at
the end of the day and you can only
fight so long and then you you know just
can't take the the bang bang ups anymore
and they end up in not very good
financial positions so here's a guy
who's he's got multiple businesses now
online cuz once he figured out how to do
it for MMA or for martial arts he
learned the formula which has find a
hungry market which is very important
come up with good offers for the market
and put ads in front of them and make
sure the ads pay out so he's doing very
well I had another student who there's a
lot of weird businesses wedding party
favors which you'd think well what kind
of a business is that and the reality is
everybody that gets married and has any
kind of reception gets wedding party
favors so they were bringing over
their own container loads of custom-made
things from China that they you know
with huge markups of course and they did
all that marketing via the internet then
my website jazz on the tube I compete
head-to-head very well with with Jazz
times which is you know in the jazz
world a fairly large organization with
dozens of employees and downbeat another
largest organization for my industry
with dozens employees and decades of
track record well when it comes to to
web traffic you know sometimes I'm ahead
of Jazz times I'm always ahead of
downbeat so those are some examples
we're mostly mostly selling information
though the wedding party favors is an
example of somebody's selling physical
and that business got to 20 million a
year believe it or not I mean I find it
hard to believe myself but a lot of
people get married yeah and the four
dads that are paying the bills are never
really price sensitive either right do
you have some daughters in in that
category I have one daughter
fortunately successfully and happily
married off five years ago
congratulations
Lichter ever since right but hey that's
it was well worth it it was a wonderful
event but I do notice that you point to
the fact that high net margin businesses
are easier to direct response market
oh it's essential yes it's essential in
every business really if you can get
away with it you really need those high
margins is there's a lot of bills to pay
I know as a civilian you look at the the
margins I think well that's unfair how
can you charge ten times what it cost
you to make well because I've got
inventory and warehouses and employees
and advertising and utilities and
insurance and all the things that go
wrong I need that eight to ten time
margin yeah at least six and a 60% gross
margins the low the lowest I'll look at
perfectly but I do love that 90% gross
margin which is typical of amateur
software business and for an online
information business might be closer to
95 yes and my conference business
definitely was you know very high up
there in that information is a great
product if the price is elastic you know
what's good information worth
to somebody who really really wants it
and what is it cost to produce well
there's the research of course but once
the research is done the actual form is
trivial even when you're printing books
and sending books why was an opposing
business first in books and then an
online most career and I used to say
something at you know industry meetings
and company conferences and stuff which
I'm sure they've put me in HR prison if
I said today which is I used to say the
information business is like the
prostitution business you got it you
sell it and you still got it yeah we
probably can't stay stuff like
unfortunately again I'm podcast
above it all em if they can't take
a joke yeah that's about why I love
podcasts you know it's part of the
emergent radical media fridge that's
under nobody's thumb no gatekeepers
which is amazing
it really is a beautiful thing you know
how many great voices and interesting
people are doing stuff that would have
been absolutely financially
unsupportable pre-internet i mean more
than we can even imagine you know for
every hobby for every interest you know
there's there's at least one guru who's
doing great and probably a dozen of them
doing really specialized media that just
otherwise wouldn't be supportable so
that's one of the beautiful that's one
of the things I saw right away because I
would I was a you know somebody that
loved information and and loved
publishing I had a business before the
internet which was really a money-making
business but I was putting on
conferences for people in the real
estate finance industry and I just from
that experience and before that I had a
business teaching speed reading and
study skills to college students which I
love doing and you know it was hard to
make you know we made money but it was
hard to make a living pre-internet
because you were sort of constrained by
you know print and ink and geography
into to a degree but beautifully about
the Internet is open you the whole
planet can be a customer potentially and
so I can have customers from Singapore
and from Finland and from Bolivia and
from Japan and that otherwise I never
could have reached you know
talk about you know brand awareness I
mean how do you reach somebody in Japan
from the United States if you don't have
the internet it's never gonna happen
yeah there's quite remarkable in fact
one of the surprises to me and my little
podcast venture here is only about 50%
of my listenership is from the United
States 50% scattered all over the world
I mean unbelievable Malawi Cambodia
there's a few and there are so I think
there's four or five countries that
actually have higher per capita
listenership actually pulled my
listenership data by country and
cross-referenced it the country
population that have a higher per capita
listenership in the u.s. Australia being
number one Wow and one of them was a
non-english speaking country Sweden did
about 12% better per capita of listeners
to my podcast that the USA and it's
amazing to me right to your point but
the Internet just gives us the ability
to address the whole world for very very
very little money yeah this is something
that's so easy to take for granted and
and forget but you know you and I both
remember what it was like before and it
was you couldn't do things like this
well this has been buts a great
background let's switch now to the nitty
gritty we got ourselves a marketing guru
let's have him goo rise a little bit
because I was looking through your books
one of the things that caught me first
was you called it your secret the secret
the only thing you really need to know
battle is won or lost on day one when
you pick your market successful
marketing you not so much about what you
market or how you market it as it is
about who you market it to tell us about
that well I think this it's so important
you know different markets have
different levels of responsiveness and
different levels of financial potential
this is an example I use a lot taking
two different sports tennis and golf you
don't see a lot of direct response
people going into the business of
selling stuff to tennis players and it's
worth thinking about why that is well
tennis players have one racquet maybe
they'll get a new one every now and then
but they tend to like a particular
racquet they might buy a bunch of them
so that they have you know
they're serious players they have they
can replace them quickly they get their
rackets restrung and they have to buy
cans of tennis balls and that's pretty
much it
now golfers on the other hand you know
they need the new dry don't golf but I
was a caddy for two years as a kid and I
I observe this firsthand they need the
new driver they need the magic putter
they need the you know magic golf balls
they need to learn the new improvement
on their swing they there's just a
million and one things that for some
reason the golfing community is willing
to spend money on so if somebody went
into business thinking they could make a
living selling to tennis players they've
got a tough road if they're going into
business trying to sell to golfers it's
actually almost laughably easy I had a
friend that was selling you via the
internet special vitamins specifically
this was ludicrous but it actually made
some money special vitamins formulated
to the needs of golfers you know I'm
just crazy but they're you know a buyer
is a buyer is a buyer so if you're gonna
go into a business you're kind of
looking for pockets of people who are
buyers and I know that sounds
ridiculously simple but I'll give you
another example that might help I had a
student also in the martial arts arena
he had been a college wrestler pretty
good college wrestler wrestle for
Nebraska he wrote the ultimate book on
how to be a successful college wrestler
and it died on the vine you know and the
reason was college wrestlers are not
buyers they go to their workouts they
listen to what the coach says they're
not buying books and courses and tapes
and going to conferences on how to be a
better college wrestler it's all a
self-contained unit so he he had a
brilliant idea and it's made him you
know definitely deep in the eight
figures at this point he was selling
sales martial arts stuff he just
transferred his wrestling knowledge to
the broader world of martial arts now
people that are into martial arts are
kind of lunatics you know therefore
you're really into it you know you learn
how to punch then you have to learn how
to block and then you learn that then
you have to learn a punch that overcomes
that block and you have to learn how to
kick and you have
learn how to get a new kick that evades
that kick then you have to learn how to
fight with knives because someone might
come with a knife then you have to learn
you know gun disarmament then you have
to learn oh that's no good now you have
to learn ground fighting well that's not
very good now you have to learn the new
ground fighting you know it's just it's
endless and if you see magazines like
black belt for instance example which
you could probably see it Barnes and
Nobles on the if they're if it's
politically correct to sell that
magazine in public anymore you'll see
it's loaded with direct response as why
because they are ravenous buyers in a
body and you get you get that first sale
and if you don't screw it up you'll get
many many more opportunities to sell
them more and more and more and more
thus building up the lifetime value of
the customer thus raising the amount of
money that you're able to spend on
advertising which we talked about
earlier in the call which is it's all
numbers in numbers out so so picking
your picking your market is so important
I go on to the I riff on this because if
you look at Facebook what if how does
Facebook start Facebook and then you
know there was no grand scheme it and by
the way this is I think very important
for everybody listening whose wants to
do something in life chances are when
you're doing the best work that you've
that you're ever gonna do in your life
as you're doing it you're gonna have the
feeling that you don't know what you're
doing and you don't know what's going on
and you're not sure where it's gonna
lead and it's only in retrospect that
you're gonna look back and go wow that
was brilliant
you know I've that's been my experience
to life you know you find something
you're interested in you love it you
give it your all it for some reason it
captures your imagination yours
practically she possibly can be while
you're doing all that but you just dive
in so what was Facebook well Facebook
was well we had Facebook's in college
most private colleges published a
physical Facebook literally because then
young guys aren't going to know this but
you derive as a freshman and they'd give
you a book and it had a picture of
everybody in your class with a little
where they went to school what clubs
they were a member of and where they
were from
so all that Facebook was was making that
electronic that was a ravenous market
you knew because of and I remember as a
college student I was reading that
Facebook every night you know checking
out the girls seeing yeah I wonder if I
could meet this one
so you already knew that there was a
ravenous consumption for Facebook type
information right so that was an
accidental backing into an amazing
market and then you know once once he
got Harvard online you know he realized
well my god I'm in the and the Nexus as
you know right Boston Cambridge I mean
you throw a rock and you're gonna hit
twenty schools so he immediately
networked all of Boston Cambridge that
whole area and then it was just a
logical leap to go to all the other
universities of the United States and I
have a video somewhere in my archive of
him saying we just want to do colleges
and we're done you know so but but he
lucked on to a ravenous marketplace now
if he'd gone into you know creating an
online resource for tax attorneys we
might never have heard of him we had a
hundred million dollar business selling
information to tax attorneys and tax
practitioners how about that but it you
know decades are hard work to build that
business that certainly didn't explode
exactly you know this is I think an
important marketing story too you know
when when wasn't a can jobs created the
first computer kit it was was the AK
that made the business decision I don't
think people realize that initially
right then jobs
you know took took it the rest of the 99
yards but that first yard was Wozniak
and his calculation was beautifully
elegantly perfect he said let's see
there's fifty thousand ham radio
operators in the United States that
means there's at least fifty thousand
guys that are nutty enough to buy a kit
to make their own computer we can
probably make a few bucks doing this
yeah and he was many anyways he was
right there was him using that principle
of hey there's a ravenous market you
know it's not like oh I have a product I
think it's great no that's not it you
you look for a pocket of people who are
really into something and you supply
them you know that seat might seem
overly simplistic but trust me I just
turned 60
I've done this a while and I've seen
thousands of success stories and many
many more enough success stories and it
always seems to boil down find the
hungry market and serve it don't come up
with the newest amazing thing and try to
ram it down the markets throat that's
great advice another bit of advice you
had probably a little less relevant now
actually because the internet makes it
so easy but back to the paper
direct-response days one that we need to
pay a lot of attention to you you've
described as you must be able to easily
reach your market we used to rule out
products basically called the needle and
haystack problem yeah there's a million
people that would buy the product but
there's no way to distinguish that
million from the 300 million in the
country if you talk about that a little
bit yeah it's it's you know it's it
again it's just logic and strangely
enough this you know there's a lot of
fantasy in business thinking and not
just among civilians or amateurs and
there's this idea if I have the great
product you know the world's gonna beat
a path to my door there's also the
fantasy oh if I write the great ad the
world is gonna be to pass in my door
and it's yeah it's good to have a good
ad but you also need to be able to put
that ad in front of the people who are
gonna care and do it economically and I
don't mean inexpensively I just mean
economically in the sense of dollars and
dollars out so if you can't clearly
figure out how you're gonna put your
message or your product or your offer or
whatever it is in front of the right
people you don't have a business
opportunity you have a you know an idea
and you know ideas as they say or a
dime-a-dozen so you know the Internet
hasn't necessarily solved the problem
you still have to figure out okay where
are the people I'm it's a little bit
easier but you know where are the people
who are gonna be interested in this
offer it's up I'm just curious like for
instance my podcast I do a small amount
of promotion so far just experimental to
understand the shape of the field I
would I initially started doing just
some regular small-scale Facebook
advertising didn't work at all right
yeah yeah well why is that I said you
dumb idiot you should realize this
before you spent your $50 which is that
only a relatively small minority of
people listen to buy
gasps so yep yep if you say all right
give me everybody in state of Virginia
some random sample of Minh and push them
to my podcast listen was that again I
said about podcast so even if they do
accidentally click on ago I might have
guessed right and you actually do have
to be quite tricky to figure out how to
zero in on people who actually do listen
to podcasts and it took me several
iterations and I think this year I'm
gonna push a little stronger on
marketing now that I have figured out
there is a way to find a concentrated
enough market of podcast listeners but a
naive approach didn't work at all it was
off by a factor of five and they took
some incremental experimentation to find
out what worked you don't have a friend
the sadly passed away two summers ago
James Martell and he had as far as he
could tell the longest continuously
running podcast on the Internet not not
the original one because the original
one discontinued but the longest-running
one and he came up with a few gems one
of course is get on as many related
podcasts as a guess as you possibly can
that's just the golden method yeah I've
got a bit of that six or seven and I'm
gonna do more this year and he's
absolutely right instead it's cheap
right now we're worth your time and you
reach you know thousands of people and
every person you reach is qualified on
at least one level you know they're a
podcast listener and and interesting you
know that's that every is an interesting
subject if somebody's doing a direct
mail campaign and let's say they're
selling looking around my office for
something irrelevant I'm gonna say
they're selling CD I believe it or not
to have a CD player in my office still
there selling CD players what's the most
important thing to have if you're if
you're going after a list of prospects
for CD players well one of course is
that they are interested in the CD
players but there's another element
which is absolutely essential which is
that they are a known mail-order buyer
all right so in other words it's not
just enough that somebody's in the
direct-response world it's not just
enough that somebody's interested in the
product category that's that's good
you need that it's sort of a fundamental
but you also have to blend in the
element that this person as some time in
their history hopefully a lot has made
mail-order purchases before so when you
go to let's say to a list broker someone
that you say hey I got this thing I want
to sell it do you have lists of people
that love music
okay here's people that love music now I
want a responsive list I want a list of
people that have bought via this channel
before so when you're a guest on a
podcast the great thing is you know that
100 percent of the people you're in
front of our podcast users right so that
that's really good the other thing that
that he taught me that's so obvious and
it didn't occur to me is that people
search people that are into podcasts and
are doing searches on particular topics
search for things and you want to make
sure that you have a really good and
detailed description of your show with
just the kind of keywords that you that
we used to put on pages on the web to
make sure that they were findable by a
you know search engine and that turns
out to be you know pretty important
thing so put as many buzzwords and
related words as you can and each
description of the show and the other
thing you said is use every conceivable
syndication service out there they cost
nothing mid least currently and you know
some people are gonna want to listen via
this syndication service some people are
gonna elicit that so you might as well
make yourself available to to every
possible person so those were those were
his secrets and the other thing to the
beginning of the show at the ending of
the show asking people for their email
addresses and encouraging them to share
the show you know being religious about
that he was emphatic about that I must
have not done that last one the other
ones I am doing I probably should the
other one I hear very successful
podcasters do is ask for five star
ratings on their podcast apps yep
haven't done that either I used to be a
shameless promoter and never used to
never be unwilling to do such thing but
so far a little shy on this podcast
maybe that'd be what part of my 2020
marketing campaigns get a little
stronger about asking people who
of this my thing I've got you know all
five star ratings pretty much and
everybody tells me they like it I don't
know I don't seem to be lying and
numbers keep growing so maybe you should
start asking people to do more to help
promote it that's actually a great idea
and that's one thing you know you learn
from direct mail as you know ask ask ask
I remember this really simple experiment
that was done they were trying to
persuade college students to get the flu
shot right so one version of the ad gave
all the reasons why it's a good idea or
why the people providing and thought it
was a good idea and the other version
did the same thing but it showed a map
of where the clinic was and how to get
there right and just adding that little
bit of concrete how-to information that
that explicit direction you know boosted
the response you know and enormous ly so
little things can make a huge difference
like sue saying hey you know give us a
you know feel e if you enjoyed it give
us a five star rating or give us the
rating you think we're worth tell your
friends you might have a friend that
likes this kind of stuff you know you
know my jazz site you know it fluctuates
a lot I'm gonna have enough it's it goes
bangs between thirty and forty thousand
subscribers email subscribers I mean I
have never advertised it now I had the
advantage of starting when video on the
internet was brand new and that's our
main thing is we have thousands and
thousands of classic jazz videos so I
got a bit of a run up that way by being
early but still I we grow by the thing
being passed hand to hand and makes
sense in a networked world like the jazz
world you know people have their jazz
buddies they go out and hear things you
know music together they hang out on
various online sites so there's quite a
bit of natural sharing so I've built
that entire business with no advertising
that's amazing and being there first of
course helps but then you also have to
have good execution which you must have
right if you're still here lowly's many
of the years later and you know at least
tied for number one with some of the big
names in the biz
and unlike them I am focused on getting
my users to share the information so we
asked we say that in every email you
know and they don't do that they just
think they're very corporate you know
they're very buttoned up and
everything's very proper and you know
I'm willing to a degree to shamelessly
beg and I think that's made all the
difference for me also I mail every day
now that takes a lot of work and some
people might say well gee that's kind of
excessive people are gonna be disgusted
you know getting email every day and the
answer to that for me is if they're into
the subject they're gonna love it and
they're gonna wish that I mailed 10
times a day and if they're not into it
well yeah they might be annoyed but
that's not my customer anyway just so my
date my daily email I think does a lot
to keep keep me very competitive with
the the bigger companies and I have not
been to assiduity emails either the
website allows people to subscribe and
they get an automatic announcement
truthfully it's not a huge number of
people do most people who listen to
podcast listen to them on their apps the
website so relatively hard to capture
email for a podcast love to give some
thought to it like I noticed so you had
interviewed my friend Ryan holiday ah
long ago and I was chatting with him I
don't know about a year and a half ago
about something else and he was is
repeating again and again everything is
your mailing list yeah that is amazing
job of creating this Empire amazing
Empire from absolutely nothing of all of
his various online properties and
personas and what have you it's the most
improbable business in the world I mean
this is an example what I was saying
earlier who could have imagined a young
youngest guy I don't think he's even 32
making a good living selling stoic
philosophy to the masses I mean it
possible but he's doing it and before
that it was book reviews right yeah
takes on book so he is an amazing guy I
met him a couple times which added
several times he's actually my go-to guy
if I want to hear you know what's the
current best thinking about so
we add you to my list do you obviously
thought about this dude on the book
marketing side Wow is he who is holy
smokes
in fact I ran into him when he had just
done the magic that it turned max
Tucker's hook into a magnet haha Wow
quite a book was it welcome to hell or
something like that yeah yeah I'm beer I
hope they have beer in Hell or something
out of something else I just read the
book and then I saw Ryan speak at a
conference and I went up and as I will
do and just button hold up we started
talking we just happen to hit it off so
how great let's move on a little bit to
a little bit more of the tricks of the
of the master here I was actually quite
happy you know you think a marketing
guru what kind of cynical piece of
is this right but I have found very
little citizens at least in your books
right and I like the fact that when you
talked about your copywriting rules
there are no copywriting rules knockoffs
are for losers not winners and in
reality great ad copy comes for
passionate caring not BS hype and con
artistry that's just great yeah is it's
a weird field that I'm in you know
there's definitely a segment of the
direct marketing society that doesn't
think that way but I all I could say is
I'm still around and I'm doing well and
a lot of those guys that were smarter
than they you know than everybody else
are gone I mean they're literally gone I
don't know where they went to but
they're not in business anymore
I think ultimately I'm at least from my
point of view ultimately you have to be
on your customers side I just don't know
how else you could be in business that's
my bottom line you know and I think you
can make plenty of money doing it that
way I don't I'd never understood these
guys if I felt that they had to you know
cut corners and trick people and I don't
know it's not a long-term franchise it
might be a way to make a quick buck
strip-mine some keyword on Google but
it's not a way to build a really cool
long-term property like your jazz site
yeah and and then they're gone I mean I
can you know what when you teach
marketing you're gonna meet everybody
and I've met everybody and I can't tell
you the number of guys that have gone
out and strip-mined
more
good place made a lot of money and now
they're broke and they can't get
arrested
like they just can't they can't get the
next thing because the thing thing that
they were doing was was coming from I
don't know in a pure ex place of pure
exploitation you know as opposed to hey
value exchange and you got to make a
money you have to make money you have to
make a profit you're entitled to high
margins as long as your service is great
but yeah it's it's just funny how some
people just I don't know why I don't
know why they do it I still is a mystery
it's like you can make all the money in
the world playing it straight and if you
build a great business with great
customers where there's a value exchange
that's key then you've got something
we'll keep you'll providing you an
income for a long period of time as
opposed to you know being a strip mine
here okay I cried five things I got
lucky once you know how many more my I
have to try before I get lucky again
all right that's really old well yeah
and I'll give you a great story this is
this is out of Virginia this is a guy
who had a another improbable business he
sold the ingredients for making your own
fireworks which to me sounds like a
letch legislative or administrative
business from hell you know it's like
you got to be kidding you know
skywriters from Round Hill yes yes
that's the guy I'm a homemade
pyrotechnics guy myself all right all
right
I lived five miles from Round Hill okay
so so you may may remember at one point
he had a business big business associate
I think he had a warehouse and the
warehouse was made of wood and the local
you know the local government came and
said you can't store this stuff in a
wooden warehouse you need this this and
this and it was a much bigger check than
he had the ability to write and he told
his customers guys I'm in a jam and so
he offered some crazy deal give me a
thousand dollars I'll give you two
thousand dollars worth of stuff later
you know and because he had treated them
so well and because he had been central
to their fund the money flowed he got
all the money he needed he bought a new
land he bought built a new warehouse
everything was fine so you can do things
like that when you treat your customers
well the funny thing a weird thing or
thing that seems to contradict this is
there seem to be all these big
businesses that I guess you reach a
certain size and a certain infiltration
into society you know you're just you're
so in everybody's business that they
can't get rid of you because I don't see
that happening on the big business side
I see kind of the opposite happening you
know they start out good you know
thinking of Google you know I'm thinking
of Facebook to do you know an even AOL
to a degree they reshuffle the cards
after they've brought everybody on board
you know I don't know you know AOL I'll
never forget AOL had a model it was you
paid by the minute and so a whale didn't
didn't have the resources to create
content to keep people on the site so
they recruited lots and lots of content
experts that said look as long as
somebody's on your in your area we're
gonna share revenue with you and that
was a great model it brought a lot of
people in a lot of people made money it
was wonderful and then AOL said hey this
guy's making a lot of money with that
content site we can hire somebody for a
fraction of that and keep all the money
and they would so they brought all these
content producers in and then they
booted them off and I you know I
understand businesses business but you
know I actually invented that business
oh really
yeah I was on the source it was called
user publishing the source was tiny we
had several tens and thousands of
customers it was by the minute this has
been 1982 I think and I identified some
people that had their own kind of
prototype blogs that ran on our software
and I went out to six out who I thought
were the most interesting and I cut a
deal to pay them seventeen and a half
percent of the revenue they generate it
as a royalty and so that was actually
the beginning of that old business model
and before I launched it I got a moral
commitment from the president and the
CEO that they would never do what AOL
later did which was to try to cut out
these guys by doing it in-house Oh
granny I could see that hazard even then
even when the stakes where these guys
were lucky to get checks for 500 bucks
a month but I tell ya 500 bucks real
money in 1980 to be the equivalent about
$1,500 a month now was life-changing for
these people they and they they have
they long thought that was it was a
great deal for that ya to do something
you love and to you know how you know
how much better can it be and and it's
done as I don't understand certain
things like some of the things that
Google does for example they make all
their money from pretty much straight
advertising like without any super
surveillance you know and yet they get
involved in all these extracurricular
surveillance activities and I don't know
I just well they're do surveillance I
mean why do you think they give you
Gmail for free so they can read your
Gmail that's why they get free which is
why I never used Gmail I thought this is
appalling
one and I don't want to miss I don't
want anyone even a machine to read my
email but their their logic was well if
he's talking about you know fireworks
will show him a fireworks ad there's a
logic to that when you're doing
searching or when you're on somebody's
website and they've made room for Google
ads if it's a again if it's a fireworks
website why not run a fireworks ad that
makes sense but some of the other stuff
they do yeah I guess you know problem is
a public company has to keep growing it
has to keep grabbing more and more and
more and more and I think that you know
that's one of the one of the things
that's going wrong in my opinion like
take you something like YouTube which I
think is the wonder of the age I think
it's one of the most amazing miraculous
things that human beings have ever
created but now you know you google
YouTube's made a deal with the network's
and there's less sort of putting the
screws to a lot of these amateur content
makers to make more room for the network
content and it's like really you know
you see that also in healthcare they did
a got a 700 million dollar plus deal
with said Glaxo or one of these
companies and you know it's like you
just share health information in a site
with yuka why do you have to go there
well they have to go there because
they're public and they got to keep
coming up with newer and newer and newer
ways to make more and more money but I
don't know we'll see a lot more of that
too because they
equivocal always when Brin and page were
running the place right but now those
two guys are retired I'm gonna assume
unless I see wrong evidence the other
side that the suits will have taken over
and Google will be set on an economic
maximization setting on its business
model I don't think it ever was before
but I believe it will be going forward
you know the other one truly sad to my
mind is Facebook yeah you know Facebook
was so profitable from so early there
was absolutely no reason they had to
take that puppy public right they could
have run a small secondary market in
private stock
Goldman Sachs would have been happy to
do it so that people want to cash out
who worked at Facebook they could but
suck could have done what he said he
wanted to do which was to change the
world in a good way by bringing us all
together but instead he got in the
business of hijacking our attention to
sell us to advertisers because he had to
yeah yeah to keep that price up there
Darby would have made a personal fortune
greater than hear any of his descendants
could ever possibly spend and his
supposed to stop employees too but
somebody sold him on the idea of going
public and then the whole goddamn thing
became a show yeah and these these
handful of companies Facebook one of
them one of them has corralled a huge
portion of Internet traffic and the
thing that I was hoping wouldn't happen
is happening what I hope was the
internet was going to remain this quirky
very specialized you know whatever your
interests are you go out and find them
and plug in and have at it and small
producers would have a chance to thrive
and it's you know we've got the
hijacking of attention by by you know a
few big players here even more weird
than curiously if you've seen this I'd
love to know you've seen the same
pattern because of their super powerful
network effects and at Google and
Facebook now on about 70% of all
internet advertising in dollars at least
because they're so dominant their ads
are actually not very obnoxious you know
they don't pop out at you and flash and
all this sort of mm-hmm and so
oddly enough the fact they have these
that
effects have allowed them not to be
quite as abusive of the direct eyeballs
as all these other people even now quite
prestigious newspapers and magazines you
know the Guardian you know these
pop-up ads these invisible links that
pop you up and take you places you don't
want to go because these guys are so
dominant due to their network effects
everybody else is forced to use the most
obnoxious the most craze the most
extreme attention-grabbing tress
accelerate actually because these guys
are dying on the vine and so they're
willing to try anybody we said that's so
it appears yeah and I've been watching
that for for a long time you know and
it's gonna that's gonna continue yeah it
is interesting and you know the thing
that I remember reading Chris Anderson's
book free when it came out way back
yonder in fact I'm gonna look up when
that book came up it was a great deep
book which convinced me he was right for
either radical the future of a radical
price by Chris Anderson but was
published in 2007-2008 something like
that where he basically said that for a
whole bunch of good psychological
cognitive reasons free will be paid
every time right even if the pain is
tiny but it seems to me that that
insight which everybody has rushed to is
what has destroyed the internet because
now all they have to build their
business model around is attention
hijacking and selling ads you know for
the longest time if you pointed out AOL
got almost all of its revenue vermut to
hourly fees in the bulletin board world
it was typically a yearly subscription I
had a BBS that's like it was the first
BBS for Visual Basic programmers tonight
to chart $99 a year and I had a deal
with Microsoft to put my ad and the
first 200,000 Visual Basic compilers and
this I love to show how the world has
changed in scale this was 1990 to kind
of deal with Microsoft to put my little
one tiny three by five inch glossy piece
of paper in every visual basic compiler
to under 50,000 of them how much you
think Microsoft bars me for that
okay I'm just gonna guess a CPM of 10
bucks so that'd be 25,000 put this in
front of graduate students and have had
estimates of a million you know 25
thousands getting closer they're the
right number 4,000 Oh minds that
business worked great right yeah it was
it was an unbelievable little cash cow I
basically just you know proud the world
looking for you know free software free
coding bits and pieces and articles and
stuff getting permission to my mind and
all you can eat you know people were you
know doing visual pink professionally I
thought it was a greatest deal in the
world but anyway I guess my point is it
seems to me that it was the turn to free
around 2007 that has led to the internet
becoming much less clear on whether it's
a net good or a net bad for society and
I monthly it's not all clear to me
there's any way back yeah it's
interesting I mean our model is always I
mean there is this you know reality that
the advertising and the thing that
catches people's attention and brings
you in is is free even in the old media
you read articles publicity articles
about a product that contents free but
it would lead you to a purchase it would
point you to a purchase and that's
always been my model versus if you're an
information marketer you've got
something of value to a group of people
give away all kinds of free good stuff
but you know have other things like
online courses or you know live
conferences or consulting using Ryan
holiday as an example he's selling
medallions believe it or not which is
fascinating to me with you know
important inscriptions from the from the
great stoic philosophers on them to his
mailing lists i I assume he's doing it
because it works and it may work very
well so you can have both well let me
give me this is this example might
really be helpful for people the Super
Bowl
you can watch the Super Bowl at home
essentially for free I mean you're not
paying the NFL anything you're get your
Cheez doodles and whatever hashed of God
and your beer and you're watching the
amen it's free or you could get in the
car and drive to a place that's been you
know a bar sports bar that's been
licensed to show the game right now you
got to buy some drinks so you got to
spend a little money you get burn some
gas you could also go to the game itself
and maybe you don't have a whole lot of
money so you're sitting way up in the
bleachers okay now you've got now you've
got some money so now you've got a good
seat maybe down on the 50-yard line now
you've got a humongous amount of money
and you're buying a skybox with Butler's
and caviar and champagne and all that is
the game any different it's the same
game exactly OMERS follow it better
that's true it's true but but
essentially it's the same game but
within any marketplace there'll be
people that want to consume it
differently they're not satisfied with
sitting at home they want to go where
the action is at the local bar or
they're ambitious and they they're not
satisfied watching it on TV they want to
be at the Superbowl you know or they've
got the resources and they've got a
business reason to buy a skybox and
bring all their big hitter clients and
reward them with us with the Super Bowl
experience so you can take the same
thing and and parse it at different
price points for people who want and
demand different levels of access and I
think people that want to make money
online need to think about that
everything doesn't have to be free
that's the lazy way out I mean as you
point out it's the race to the bottom
and what kind of abyss toises
everything's free but free things to
bring people in that makes sense you
know miss number mrs. Fields Cookies
they were going broke and then mrs.
fields went out or I guess her name
wasn't really mrs. fields but she went
out with a tray of cookies in front of
the store and started giving them out
out of desperation and that turned out
to be the thing that turned the tide for
that store and then it became this big
chain of stores I don't know what
happened to them but a little secret you
may not know how they how they ramp that
up when they go into a shopping mall
they have an agreement with the shopping
mall to allow the mrs. fields to blow
the smell from the cooking area the
shopping mall there you go and they
probably have specialized chemical
canisters that are even better
for the smell of the ovens who knows you
know but yeah it would certainly be a
classic race to the bottom well turns
out you know big wood burning tanks full
of the size better than real cookies to
blow out some pheromones in their groan
from you know fingernail tissue of
Marilyn Monroe or something there you
know there you go I mean yeah that's
kind of a model for the inter for what's
happened to the Internet we had we had
good cookies they smelled good naturally
everybody was happy and how people are
bringing in tanks of you know
synthesized cookie formula that was
developed by mad scientist's you know
for maximum addiction you know we have
even we haven't gotten out of the
addiction the deliberate you know
creating of addictive of responses on
the internet but that's kind of this
kind of a model for what what's happened
and you write how do we go back I don't
know I spend a fair amount of time
thinking about that you know there's one
little data point it's gonna throw this
out to all the wannabe entrepreneurs out
there who are thinking about you know
how can I do something really singing
into the world
I've been tracking Facebook's revenue
per user for quite a long time and it's
surprisingly low all the Facebook gets
has been remarkably consistent about a
dollar ninety to two dollars a month per
active subscriber do now right so in
theory if Facebook could get everybody
to go to a paid model two dollars right
and to your point there's always a
hierarchy of experience versus price
right and so there ought to be a hell of
a lot of room above the $2 so we imagine
a specialized Facebook for good-faith
honest and high-quality discourse right
could that be worth twenty dollars a
month might be ten times that to your
point about the Superbowl compare the
free Superbowl to the hundred thousand
maybe it's a million dollar you know
luxury box Super Bowl same product much
higher price yeah because the costs of
deliver Facebook have to be clearly less
than $2 a month
more like $1 that means that there's a
nice gross margin for a more bespoke
more ethical wonderful experience that
is not all about using cutting-edge
cognitive psychology to make you
addicted to that little red circle up at
the top of the Facebook page right then
and then sell your personal data to you
know Merck and JP Morgan million people
which is you know a thousandth of
Facebook's less than a thousand of
Facebook's laying at 20 bucks a month
hey guys that's two hundred and forty
million dollars a year
I probably 90% gross margin business do
the math a business well worth building
yeah why not why not I wonder I just I
wonder if they're just so enamored of
this we're gonna grab all their
psychographic information and sell it
ten million different ways and they just
can't let go you know sort of like that
that old that old story of the the
monkey puts his fist in the jar to grab
I don't know what he was grabbing a
cookie will say but once he closed his
fist around the cookie his fist was too
big to get out of a jar but he couldn't
let go of that cookie so he couldn't get
his hand out of the jar which leads to
this interesting point at some point
Google and Facebook are going to start
being valued by Wall Street as
publishers right now they get a they're
getting out still a lot of lift from the
fact that they're growing fast and you
know there's spinning off lots of
revenue and really that's the growth
it's the growth that's the thing but at
a certain point the growth is gonna slow
down and then Wall Street's gonna go
well you know you guys are kind of like
Life magazine you know you've you've got
um eyeballs and you make a certain
amount of money from them and you know
we don't value publishers at the way we
valuing you super high tech guys so
maybe we're gonna start valuing you as
as a justice regular old publisher cuz
you're really in the eyeballs for
dollars business whereas all these years
they've been in the fast growth taking
over the world business but that will
reach a limit at a certain point then
their valuation you know stagnates or
goes down and then all of a sudden you
can't keep all those engineers as easily
as you could before when the stock price
was doubling and tripling
you know constantly I've heard that
analysis from some Wall Street people I
don't know if it's gonna play out but
there's a certain logic to it there's
another kicker that may actually
accelerate it which is because the
margins are so high and it's all
advertising should direct-response
marketing drop significantly during the
next recession you can see an explosive
decompression in the profitability of
those companies you know they have
relatively high fixed costs now
particularly now they both want to
police the world piss out of me but
imagine that all the random that's
advertised on Facebook and Google the
demand for that's gonna go down a lot if
we're in a really serious recession and
truth the matter is this dominant
Facebook Google world did not exist
really in the last recession and very
interesting to see what happens when the
 inevitably hits the financial and
economic fan here in the in the months
end or years ahead whether it'll be a
kind of reverse ratchet as their
revenues drive down their marginal
revenues or all their profits are
they've built up this cost base and
growth slows and so then you get kind of
valuations like a crappy publishing
property like like magazines in their
later years right we're amazing
Businessweek one of the great properties
of all time when I was in my business
prime in the 90s was sold the Bloomberg
for a million dollars I remember that
what a tragedy at Newsweek I believe was
sold for $1 to Meredith unbelievable if
you told somebody that in the 80s or
1990s if that was gonna happen they
would have said impossible yeah my
little strange little risk was damn I
wish my dad had left me a monopoly
newspaper right and that was actually a
cop so unlikely to own the newspaper
that seemed to be like the ultimate
thing to own say in 1985 would have been
a monopoly big-city newspaper Washington
Post The New York Times LA Times
something like that but now you know

even the Washington Post was sold for
relatively pennies on the dollar well
you know weren't warren buffett believed
that for the longest time that local
newspapers were the ultimate money maker
and he was right
for that time you know another thing
about about ad revenue and this is
another advantage of you and me being on
the phone because we both go back so far
did the dot-com crash the value of a
banner ad
I mean went from you know gold to
very rapidly those first couple of years
in 2000 you could buy every banner ad in
the universe for the spare change I had
in your pocket I mean the inventory was
unbelievable it was just they couldn't
give him away
almost free in 99 and 2000 of my company
Network solutions was we believe the
second biggest advertiser on the web oh
wow and it was crazy because we were at
that point paying good prices because
that was the dot-com bubble on the way
up yeah but you know we were big enough
that we bought an ad agency because
nobody else we know how to do this
we spent 10 million dollars in building
the tracking automating and rotational
devices to keep our ads fresh so if
you'll remember even things like Yahoo
you could only change your creative once
a day out of crazy yeah I think we spent
probably 70 million in in web
advertising in 99 and 200 million in
2000 which put us behind Ford is
probably the only company that was
spending more on internet advertising at
the time Wow
I can tell you this the was
remarkably profitable because hello
domain name in those days 70 bucks for
moving a few pointers in a database pure
there's a margin right margin for me of
people words later unfortunately I
actually sold at the top we pulled the
company March 10th 2000 which is as
close to the top as the internet bubble
as you could possibly find and so we got
the best possible price for it but the
operating environment probably got
better in the years ahead as you said
the direct response clicks became almost
worth noting there for a couple of years
in the years afterwards yeah I have to
admit you know and that's one of the
challenges of being early you know you
started in the 80s early 80s I started
in there in earliest 90s and so by the
time 2000 came along you know there's
sort of a psychological landmark of 2002
it's like okay this is the end of time
in other so weird it's a weird
phenomenon but clearly that the markets
grown quite a bit since
and yeah there are things that I wish
that I'd stayed with that I was doing in
2000 but I went in other directions and
did other other fun stuff but yeah I
mean they the growth since 2000 has been
spectacular but there was that death
valley period where I mean I went back
to San Francisco even as late as 2003
and it was like a neutron bomb and hit
the bay area
she could actually buy residential real
estate for a reasonable price yeah the
buildings were still standing but the
people were gone can I tell you the
banner ad story because alright so and
this I think was this might have been my
biggest contribution of all so it was
June of 1994 which was just a couple I
think a month earlier had been the
hundred and fiftieth anniversary of a
demonstration of the Telegraph and I
kind of looked at that I said Wow 150
years since the Telegraph we got this
internet thing going on why don't I put
on a little meeting so I asked mark
Graham big internet commercialization
pioneer he really should get a lot of
credit I think in 93 Micro Times called
him one of the 100 most important people
in computing he was called mr. Internet
in the Bay Area which kind of gives you
an idea of how central he was to to
helping people get with the idea of
commercial Internet so I asked him to
come I asked mark Fleischman to come and
mark Fleischman believe it or not was
the first guy to declare himself a
full-time freelance web producer web
designer we know web web maker he's the
guy that put the Palo Alto weekly online
that was the first newspaper to put all
of his content online so he goes way
back he hung out a shingle in 93 so I
had him there the purpose of this
meeting was to sort of brainstorm and
figure out how are we gonna put a
financial footing under this thing that
we love and are so excited about so one
of the guys I invited to come as a as an
outsider was an ad agency then an ad
agency executive named Rick Boyce and
Rick worked for Hal Rainey which was
very you know super cool ad agency in
San Francisco at the time may still be I
don't know but in those days it was the
hippest agency you could work for and he
was a very very bright guy and I could
see that you know his mind really was
could work so I asked him to come to the
meeting so we talked about all these
different possible models for the intern
have it on tape thank God
and we talked about all these different
possible models for commercializing the
internet and we really weren't coming up
with anything so on the break mark
Graham and I were talking with Rick and
Rick had no exposure to the web at all
they you know this was this was June 94
you know this was there weren't a lot of
people on the web and we said look Rick
you can put a little square on the page
right they click on the little square it
takes them to a big square and you can
count how many people see the ad and how
many people click on the ad like you can
get a sense of how effective and that is
right two months later he quit Hal
Rainey he went to work for hot-wired
which was Wired's online magazine as the
head of business development and
hot-wired was the first business as far
as I know that put a flag in the ground
and said we are going to be a serious
commercial advertising supported website
and Rick Boise was the first person to
sell banner ads on a commercial
corporate scale you know an industrial
scale you know so I was there you know
we hired and I want to say this to folks
like we didn't know what we were doing
when we were doing it we were just
interested and we had a problem that
fascinated us and we were trying to
solve it and we didn't know what we were
doing but we thought what the hell you
know we were young we have a little
extra energy you know why don't we just
you know I had a whole other business I
was running the the real estate finance
conference business and that was a
full-time thing I was doing most of the
internet stuff on the side you know but
so I want to encourage young people like
it doesn't have to be opportunities are
not going to be presented to you
completely formed and there's not going
to be this clear step 1 step 2 step 3
I mean Zuckerberg didn't know that
Facebook was gonna be Facebook when he
was putting his college classmates on
the web was he acted no Apple was gonna
be Apple when he calculated that were
there were 50,000 serious techno geek
hobbyists in the world that would spend
money on chips you know if you love
something you know go for it you know
you don't know where it's gonna take you
and so I know it's I just want to make
sure I convey that message you know it's
not like there was a gray
scheme and everybody knew what they were
doing from day one quite the opposite
well I think we're gonna wrap up on that
note this has been so much fun Ken I'm
so glad that we got connected and I was
able to do this episode well thank you
and I think our mutual friend Steve Oki
for introducing us indie production
services and audio editing by Jared
Jaynes consulting music by Tom Muller at
modern space music.com