cool we're just talking about we started
talking about John's practices and I and
I just committed to doing a meditation
like an extra hour of meditation each
each morning and so we started going
asking him about his practices yeah
that's interesting because I'm I'm also
thinking in parallel too because of
getting requests about this parallel to
the after Socrates series I've done a
few of these doing some more
instructional videos on meditation
contemplation Praja practice some stuff
probably uh maybe a little bit on the
cheek on the each one tai chi also some
maybe also and so Alexia Davina and the
journaling practices what I've been
mentioning to you so I haven't taken it
up I've got the resources and I bought
it I want to try and take up sort of the
sacred geometry practice trying to work
through Euclid's elements and doing the
geometry because I'm trying in the
ecology of practice idea I'm trying to
find not only the checks and balances
kind of idea the opponent processing I'm
also trying to find any finding find
mediating practices like this is that
mediate between kinds of knowing so
they're thinking about the sacred
geometry is I think it it mediates
between the perspectival and the
propositional on a certain way yeah and
a bit of the procedural because you
actually construct the figures when
you're trying to do some of the proofs
and stuff like that and I think it was
an ancillary practice for dialectic so I
want to I'm trying to do that I mean it
might become part of my personal
practice but I'm doing it because I want
to sort of enhance the participatory
observation around dialectic right step
starting that up soon so there's a
there's a bunch of practices I do that
are my ongoing noctis's and then there's
practices I take up as sort of a
participative observer to try and get
material and understanding for some of
the work I'm doing I mean I'm really
interested about what what
what you find with the sacred geometry
which um which book are you reading by
the way yeah hang on I'll go get it
yeah I think I think this is the book
you mentioned to me it's this one okay
oh no no no I got I got an older one of
that sacred geometry for artists and
dreamers oh cool okay very cool yeah so
we're gonna try and do this and I've got
Euclid's elements the greek-english big
version and so that's what I'm gonna try
and do yeah see because I I have a set I
mean I have a sense that that because
the that's the only way Greeks the
Greeks did math is they own that they
only did it in geometry they didn't have
anything like algebra or what we have
calculus of course so I want to see if
that particular way of developing sort
of rigorous inferential propositional
thinking in connection with you know
constructing figures and thinking it's
sort of a spatial perspective of fashion
yeah I want I want to see I have I have
some intuitions that it interacts with
the kind of cognitive flexibility in the
perspective of movement and the theory a
theory or the thing that's going on in
in dialectical practice yeah so I don't
know yet it's something I want to
explore I haven't I haven't been able to
find any academic work on that I'll keep
looking mm-hmm I would imagine it's an
open because I've been I've been
scouring the internet for or things
about what the Platonic Academy actually
practiced yeah it is not a whole lot
there's not a whole lot out there and
I've got bits and pieces one of the
things I'd like to do is to try and also
read through the Platonic dialogues in
the in the neo platonic order so the
neoplatonist got an order in which
you're supposed to read the dialogues
again to try and get some of that what
we've been talking about the four of us
yeah that's that that sort of meta
dialogue since you know the dialogue
that unfolds between the dialogues the
via logos that unfolds between all the
individual dialogues and so if they have
a tradition of how you're supposed to
read through the dialogues that's
supposed to be not it's not like our
modern obsession with their historical
lineage of the dialogues but it's a
developmental one what's the best
ordering pedagogical transformative
ordering of the dialogues so I'd like to
try and do that as well
see if my will see if my time and my
resources and my energy match my
ambitions that's always that's always an
issue well Chris Chris and I were
talking about getting together and just
reading reading through the Platonic
dialogues and actually I had this
thought about it'd be interesting for a
like say there's you know I don't know
how many interlocked earth but have as
many people you know just have a they
take a character and in there just
taking your phone and going on a walk
and doing it like on a walk with yeah
yeah somehow and you kind of sit down
and you just I just thought that that
would be really interesting with you
know that sounds like a very interesting
idea yeah that's a good idea I know that
Jonathan Miller at one point filmed a
few of the dialogues he actually turned
them into little plays and actually
filmed them yeah I have been able to
track those down maybe they're on
YouTube somewhere I should look again
yeah see see as we get further and
further into the age of YouTube more and
more things are findable on it that we
used to be very very difficult to track
down
Oh totally the the yeah I'm my sense the
reading that I've done in the book that
I have on sacred geometry it's
interesting I've always been bad at math
mm-hmm way today I was like wow if I
were to read this book right and doing
math I think math would have occurred a
lot differently I think it does and it
gives you a sense and this is also why
I'm very interested in it because
Neoplatonism is also deeply affected by
a revival of Pythagorean by
deeply and Pythagoras is this weird
figure right because he's both he's in
one since he's shamanic but he's also
this mathematical I guess genius or
something right and so I'm interested
also in because when you say when you
know when you read text and you know
it's all made out of numbers we sort of
go like what what does that doesn't make
any sense cuz we think of numbers right
if we don't think of the numerals if we
actually think of numbers we just think
of them as abstract sort of you know
things yeah but when you do when all
when all of math is geometry numbers
actually have a shape they take up space
in certain ways right and they they have
these sort of synesthetic almost thin
aesthetic qualities to them that get
connoted into the the number and and I
know there's evidence that when people
are engaged in mindfulness practices
that it tends to enhance synesthesia so
again I know I'm I don't know but I
wanted to explore this well give a sense
of that Pythagorean understanding of
number that was so important right and
then and then what does that do you
again for the practice of dialectic what
does that mean because if you can if you
can get like it feels like what you do
with a mnemonic when you're trying to
remember abstract information and you
create these images to remember them
like will it act like a mnemonic
enhancer when you have sort of sacred
geometry I don't know I think these are
a lot of things I want to sort of see I
want to explore my sense in reading it I
want to do the practices to undo this
and just get a I that's my that's that's
my interest as well is is get a sense
cuz I do get this sense in some
intuitive way that I don't know how but
the whatever it is that you exercise you
know it's like holding multiple
dimensions at once and got like a song
back and forth and that whole movement
heals a lot like what it's I'm imagining
it'll feel a lot like
what it is to kind of be in a circling
group right yeah room and people in the
in the circling practices well so what
I've observed is they often fall into
sort of geometrical languages at some
point they'll talk about intersections
and like you know the few points and you
know perspectives and and then and then
and what they'll do is they'll
spatialize it as I'm doing with gesture
yeah and they'll be all this gesturing
that's going on I think of geometry is
something like that again it's picking
up on that place between gesture and
proposition as well because of course
very often what we're doing when we're
gesturing is we're doing is geometrical
like we're doing specialization but it's
not just space we're often figuring and
we're trying to figure and we're trying
to manipulate the figure as a way of no
exploring intelligibility and so again
this is this this is something I'm
interested in because I want to try and
understand like I said you know what
what could we use that could help us
sort of reverse-engineer these often
really cryptic maddeningly cryptic and
exciting statements that are made about
dialectic when you read about it cuz
they talk about it is the greatest of
the sciences and you know and it's all
this and there's all this really like in
this world and it's frustrating it's so
indirect and I think that's not that
they're being coy or there's there being
you know esoteric the pejorative sense
of the word I think that dialectic was
so pervasive and it's so permeated right
it was so close to them like you often
talk about the nearness that like they
can't get outside of it enough to talk
about it to somebody that's outside of
it the way we are and so because there's
there's a lot sort of like in like
there's there's there's lots of talk
about it but there's nothing that's like
well this is how you do it all right
there's there's nothing there's nothing
that comes close to that
and so trying to reverse engineer as
best as we plausibly can I think that's
all we have
oh yeah part of that's what I'm probably
interested in because in the end guy I
mean I mean I am interested in it
historically but in the end my interest
is more as a cognitive scientist I want
to try and craft some kind of useless
useful not useless
Oh what is love useful bridge between
whatever that was something that could
act as a template for us now yeah yeah
trying to craft you know something
analogous yeah Jordan what Jordan calls
the meta psycho technology what you
sometimes call circling 2.0 you guys
have different names for convergent
things that's what I'm at that's the
project I'm ultimately more interested
in so I mean I'll try my best to be as
historically accurate but I have no
illusions that are gonna get that close
to the like you know a confident
historical claim because the evidence is
just too underdetermined it's just 200
determined yeah and that that's one of
the things I think would be really
interesting for us at some point is to
is to look at like take one of the
dialogue wishes that we're doing yeah
and watch it together I would like to do
that yeah I think it's a really good
idea I I want to do that I want to
figure out how to do that with software
I want to do that as part of the series
I want to take snippets of where we're
doing things so like pivotal moments and
use that and say look what's happening
here look what's happening here well I
think I think having one of those a
meadow one the problem with us is that
we'll get into another I see that we'll
just we'll just start another but maybe
that'll be valuable too but trying to
yeah I would like I would that would be
good but I'd like a little bit and what
I want to say a little bit cooler one
where we're more analytic and you know
more meta and we're looking back and
trying to note this and note that and
try to craft some vocabulary or and also
try to apply some of the vocabulary that
Chris and I have been working very hard
to hammer out and say look this here
this dimension here not trying to
foreclose on anything but to again try
to you
well facilitate the project I said to
you I want to try and help facilitate
this shift and that a lot of people are
putting their finger on about how we're
trying to shift out of just theory into
some kind of trip you know
transformative practice a lot of people
are talking about that right now yeah so
that's that's what I would really like
to address yeah so okay maybe we should
we should do both we should have the we
should have one of the ones where we're
just riffing like just all of us on it
and maybe a one where we're doing
something more analytic theoretic is
that those would both be valuable
uh-huh anyway so that that's that's what
I think that might be a good way of
proceeding because one of the things I
mean it's it in I think it will take
some restraint on our part but like you
know cuz watching them and like I've
watched them and tried to look at some
of the patterns and stuff and it's so
interesting because and this I think is
telling of what it is right is it's
really difficult to not get pulled in to
the conversation like like you are in
the cinema
yeah yeah that's yeah that's why it was
that's why I was expressing that concern
yeah to you and I know many people say
that I was watching a really interesting
discussion between Andrew Sweeney and
Christopher master Pietro and Andrew was
pointing out how he gets a sense and
that same thing he what he you drawn in
he says that there's a lot of he said he
could feel joy there's a lot of joy in
in the conversation
as opposed to
you know at the serial processing yeah
and yes and I think that's what many
people are commenting on it's it's it's
I'm sorry I'm hesitating because it's
such an insufficient thing to say I'm
not I'm not criticizing Android he was
expressing something but just saying
there's joy there isn't isn't quite
right there's it's it's there's
something much more going on there and
it's hard to articulate what it is but
it is it is very attractive to people
yeah I know
no that's getting a lot of feedback
around on that idea that it's very very
attractive right right if you look at
the cut a lot of the comments a lot of
the comments are just people like you
can feel you can feel the spirit of the
compass and they they they overflow with
like impact personal impact but also
their own own ideas like I'm just
comments are just so a stitute and
profound oh very much and and there's
often there's often that expression of a
desire to enter into this or to figure
out how to do this with other people and
so that's part of gain about why I want
to have the the one we were not catching
fire because I want to know like I want
to be able to say to people well this is
I mean as much as we can and they have
to be careful I don't want to be
idolatrous or anything but as much as we
can you know this is how you do it and
this is what's going on right yeah so
that's why I was expressing their
concern about like trying to get I think
riffing on it is great but I think
that'll just be here I'll just be
another level at which were unfolding
things that's valuable but also one
where we're like I said a little bit
more no let's try and get out the the
metaphor I use it some people don't but
let's get at the machinery of what's
going on here
let's try and explicate that as best as
we can because I I think that's that's
part of what is going to be needed so
that other people can enter in
yeah well they know that that you know
I'm as we're talking I'm I'm referencing
a lot in my mind and having memories of
when that's the seven stages circling
which is what we teach in our course
they're part of do articulate and it was
vet it was very much the process of like
God there's something really amazing
happening here but what is it like and I
remember we had our first two training
courses Jerry and I did and the moment
we had our first one when we got our
students in front of us was the moment I
realized I had no idea what I was like
right yeah that that that process of and
it's a very difficult thing to do in my
experience it's like because so much of
it is about a reflective attuned
response yes right like this kind of
this you go into a into flow States
right very much very much but at the
same time there is there is as quality
where you start to be able to make
distinctions and notice more right yes
and and because you can notice the more
you can respond to them more precisely
and more elegantly right that brings
more on and it had this kind of
autopoietic process I think that's I
think that's very helpful on so I maybe
this will be helpful to you I'm thinking
about this in terms of two languages I
talked about this one in the stuff work
on mindfulness I tell you that chapter
that Leo and I wrote on that the
language of training in the language of
explaining and I think we need both and
I'd and so that trying to articulate a
training language for people but also
trying to get a language of explaining
that connects that training language to
the cognitive science because ultimately
for me I want to situate this like it
back into the project you know that
we're talking about which is responding
to the meeting crisis so being able to
resituated deeply into
you know a cognitive scientific
worldview yeah it is part of project for
me it's part of project for me oh yeah
we cracked all this language and then it
sits over here as the language that's
disconnected from the scientific Olivia
then we haven't really done what we need
to do ultimately totally yeah that's the
burden that's the burden you're bearing
yeah well I'm not broke I'm not being
totally alone you know yeah I mean you
know
Christopher's helping me a lot and and
yeah and Jordan has you know he's got a
science background to that he's bringing
into the discussion yeah so that's very
helpful as well yeah but yeah but that's
that's kind of what I'd like I'd like to
try that's why doing the two riffs might
be good yeah the first riffing you know
the the the right that might be help us
sort of start drawing out a language of
training maybe we could even frame it
this way we could frame we do an
overview of one of our via logos and we
we do it and what we're trying to do
there is the language of training right
yeah and then we do an overview and then
we're trying to get more language of
explaining and I understand because of
my training I would have to take you
know a more heavier burden there I get
that but nevertheless having everybody
involved in that might be yeah like we
could frame it that way so like you one
around a language of training and one
around a language of explaining right
right like like for example I'm just
imagining like for example like the
different the different kinds of love
right yeah you know when when you when
you shift to one or the other and being
able to spot that right yes yes that
would be good mode of like oh we just
went up a level or we went just we went
more right lateral oh we just went
horizontal like yeah that's great
language of training that's excellent
well then I would try to say okay what
is that in language of explaining I
might try and begin and say well what's
going on in terms of like attachment
theory or development or
wake up 'native exaptation is working
what's going on here it's similar to
like like flow I mean so you have you
have all this training language but you
know the work I did with Aaron and Leo
right we also try to okay but what's
going on what's what's actually
happening cognitively you know yeah
because if you understand what's
happening cognitively you can understand
why these trading practices are working
right and and you can improve them
because that's ultimately what I want to
do right because I want to try and make
this a practice of with many other
people's help yours you know especially
but I want to try and make this practice
off idea Sophia yes right and it's not
going to be funnier Sophia you can't you
can't cultivate wisdom independent from
your best knowledge system you didn't
that's just that just not gonna work
right wisdom it can't be reduced to
knowledge I mean I've argued that in the
series but neither can it be you can't
prep it can't be ghettoized from the
best knowledge we have the wisdom and
knowledge have to inseminate each other
is very powerful way and and I would
imagine the best like the best that you
can do is is have the experience of it
and then work out the constraints that
give it well that's what I'm trying to
think I'm trying to think which is what
you sort of do it flow so you you want
to try and you want to try and get nice
you want to get nice integration between
the phenomenology and the functionality
yeah right so what the what the
explaining should do is to ultimately
tell you what's what are the what's the
function here what's it doing right and
then you want to see if you've got
something that bridges between the
phenomenology and the functionality in a
powerful way
like why does shifting perspectives
which is a phenomenological thing why
does that have this functional impact of
getting people to have an insight into
their the problems that they can't get
while they stay in the first-person
perspective we have sort of an intuitive
sense of that
but what's actually going on right
what's actually going on in the ship I
tried to do that I tried to bridge
between phenomenology and functionality
when I gave the talk on the view from
above because then and me I'm using that
as sort of a template of yeah so what I
was trying to do there as I was trying
to write zero in on a specific practice
huh
and what Hitler and Donald Robinson
actually took us through the view from
above as a practice and then and then
say okay here's the phenomenology and
then here's the functionality and try to
keep those yapping together that that's
what I would like to do for for
dialectic and deilogos the same kind of
thing so when people are doing this when
this shift is occurring what like what
cut what cognitive functionality is it
you know activating and then why does
that make sense and and so on and so
forth
totally so I mean that's not something
it's gonna happen right away and I don't
even expect to have that that answered
by the end of after Socrates but I want
that's that's the thing I want to start
moving towards and get a rhythm I wanna
move towards that and with you on that
I'm with like yeah I know you are I know
your dad and your your accompaniment is
deeply deeply appreciated like I said
when Chris and I were working today or
on the chapter on the four kinds of
knowing and dialectic I will here let me
give me an example let me have an
example of what I mean so we were
talking about this and I said and I said
oh there's a connection between
dialectic and prospect refuge theory and
you said well what's that this is a
theory right that there that we like
situations in which we have a vista
before us yeah but we also feel safe
prospect and refuge it's also known as a
womb with a view you can see why that
would be something that would really
enhance our optimal grip because we're
we're relatively safe from predation you
can see and we can see opportunities
right and then I said notice and then I
was saying to Christmas notice of guy
constantly will bring us back to the
relationship between the horizon and the
out round as we're get we're getting a
secure footing yeah but right that's the
refuge and yet we're burying put into
the prospect of the horizon continually
and then when we talked about how that
maps onto these different aspects of the
sacred like the homing and the numinous
see that's the kind of thing I'm talking
about we're trying to get between like
the language do you bring out right you
bring out that language of the horizon
and the ground right but then you can
link that to my prospect and refuge
theory and an evolutionary functionality
and but oh right and oh and if that's
what people are looking for then how can
we better tailor the practice to afford
that that's an example that's a concrete
example of our talking totally totally
that's really cool that's really really
cool
yeah it's this it's yeah there's
something about this back and forth
thing that like there's some there's
it's almost like I guess it and very
much in many ways I think about the
thing that you guys talk about and I've
heard you talk about addiction right
it's reversed of that back and forth or
the reverse yeah I call it reciprocal
narrowing as opposed to reciprocal
opening we're bringing that we're
bringing that into into the chapter
right it's because we're talking we're
trying to get right the the the the
horizontal sensibility transcendence
unpacked in terms of you know an acog a
which can be unpacked in terms of
reciprocal opening as opposed to
reciprocal narrowing and then right and
then you've got all the machinery all
the excellent work that mark Lewis has
done telling you how reciprocal
narrowing works and then that gives you
just okay that gives you some
understanding of how the reciprocal oh
but that's another example of how you
could do all this bridging and see
addiction is great because sorry the top
the fiction is great addiction is were
look for people didn't I shouldn't talk
so cavalier about such a devastating
topic I apologize to anybody that to
whom an apology is old but
it's it's it's an it's it's a see see
how if you really want to understand
addiction you can't just stay in the
phenomenology yeah I have right you
can't ignore the phenomenology because
then you'll just be prescribing yeah
other drugs
yeah so Marx twerk is brilliant because
it bridges between the phenomenology and
the functionality ah okay
totally got it right because if you can
take the phenomenology and and then do
you what he does he says no no no the
phenomenology is not well described by
the disease metaphor let's describe it
with this reciprocal narrowing and then
once you do that you could connect it up
to all of these self-organizing
developmental aspects of cognitive
processing which is what he does yeah
so the addictions almost like kind of a
dyslexic form of enlightening kind of
it's it's it's kind of it for me it's
it's an instance of the very machinery
that and lead to self transcendence is
the machinery that could afford deep
self-deception right right yeah the
thing I've been paying attention to a
lot lately is so what one of the like
what actually I think one of the cool
things about what this also affords
right breaking everything down like this
and looking at and looking at all the
ways that we're describing is it's like
once once we get um a description of the
Phenom like some aspect of it say it's
like oh the transition from like a gap a
defy Leah and back again well let's just
say we can put it up and start to we can
start to tell the difference and then
describe what happens and then what
you're yes Kristen I were talking about
just that because we were talking we
were talking about I was I was wondering
if right if one of the things we're
doing see so we're talking a lot about
arrows this attractive element in the
Ilocos right the that Socrates talks
about but but it's also bound up with
midwifery which and that this is like
very close to like to getting to a goth
because you're trying to help people to
give birth to their aspirational selves
right but I was saying I said you know
there's a there
there's a potential I'm not making an
identity claim here I'm on a potential
there's a potential for eros to
degenerate with the need for a
consummation can degenerate into
consumption yeah right and eros can
generate into lust and you know this is
an ancient worry and I said I wonder if
the attempt to move to agape right is an
attempt to always forestall eros
degenerating into last because you can
see file at Philae an Ikea as the lust
for victory in conversation as opposed
to the you know the Philae pursuit of
wisdom or the agape midwifery of
people's aspirational selves yeah so
that language of the loves and way might
feet they might feature in as you said
the constraints run dialectical practice
I think that's germane I think that's
very germane and it's like in it and
then if we if we get those kind of
phenomena logically distinct and they're
able to see them you know then we go
over to this side and we start to look
at the Cox side and we look at the
machinery yes right and start linking
that up what's cool about that is then
you then we have something that where
you can actually take an aspect of it
and then make it its own practice yes
very much lies that particular muscle
right ill info it's very much like like
some of the work I'm doing with Jensen
came on that we're working on a paper a
naturalistic explanation of of Chi yeah
and so and and we're doing exactly that
we're trying to care very carefully move
between the phenomenology and the
functionality and exactly that as you
get a better understanding of that
bridge that enhanced language of
explaining and the way of bridges to the
phenomenology then enhances your
capacity as a train it just enhances the
capacity to Train because like you said
the problem with the phenomenology is it
often hits you as a gestalt right a
dialectical self a dialectic no I don't
want to say that I want to say a
dynamical we're talking about dialectic
that's why God it strikes you as a as
you know I namaka Gestalt hey you know
it's all at once and it's moving yeah
right and it's very very hard
like you know when I teach Tai Chi to
people it's very hard to intervene in
that that's why there was there's
there's like two levels of learning like
yeah really knowing the form well
insofar as I know it it is I've been
doing it 28 years so but but that's
radically radically insufficient for
teaching it yeah cuz right because
because because typically what happens
is if you know if you can't step back
and do this kind of translation and
analysis what you're just doing is
demonstrating the gestalt to the people
right around you and that's I mean
that's not useless yeah but that it's
very very hard for them to get to self
correct that's yeah yeah to get an
access to know how to correct themselves
right it's very hard because it's like
well no that's not right and and and and
they're like yeah well why what should i
do well do this well I tried to do that
like you get you get those that you
write if you better try and like get
something like you said that can take a
piece out and make it independently
intelligible and accessible to people I
agree with that I think that's that's
very pertinent that's a kind of like
though like when you go and do circling
um do you ever got you guys ever like
start off by doing those like line
exercises where you face somebody yeah
yeah but yeah we did we do we do we for
the first four questions can't remember
how many we've done though it's really
wonderful thank you so much just amazing
mmm really transformative that's all so
now I consider part of my practice yeah
we did some of those initially I think
for two or three sessions I'm not sure
yeah and then but what happened is
because there's only what seven of us
what and we started meeting regularly we
can no just it's like when you meet your
cousin that you haven't seen for 10
years and you just yeah yep
so um now the other other day when one
of the people Taylor he brought in an
issue that we were not taking into the
circling we were discussing it was was a
bit it was fraught with a little bit of
not tension around the group attention
around the ideas never been discussed
and so we didn't immediately just start
circling we went in to the the mutual
noticing kind of practices in order to
warm up again to get back into it very
much because those those were actually
we extracted those out as a way that's
what basically taking particular muscles
like where you just where there's one
where all you can do is just paraphrase
what the person says yeah yeah thick
through it you stick through you stick
through it right um and then that this
is the one that I find just fascinating
is the one where you basically you stood
across for somebody it's really simple
you just say like being with you right
now I'm noticing and the practices to
really just speak slow enough such that
like you're actually describing what's
happening such that if if what you're
describing
you can adjust right and then the other
person says hearing that being with
don't know I'm noticing and and that
practice a few times too and I
understand what you're saying there and
I had a suspicion that they have they're
not just warm-ups that they're
confidential their components yeah like
you're talking about now yeah so I'm
also interested in like I said Peter and
I've been talking about this peter
lindbergh about sort of ordering a lot
of these practices in sort of a
pedagogical program yeah because they do
they do they do but once we get it clear
understood this is another thing the
analysis will help and I think this is
what your point is well we if we get a
better understanding of a confidential
analysis of the whole thing like we can
get a better understanding of a program
of how to set these practices in a set
in an order yeah
will sort of give us the best momentum
into the overall thing yeah kind of like
the dialogues right yes exactly that's
exactly no it's exactly analogous that
was in my mind as a and so that's been
something that Peter and I have been
sort of thinking about like where would
you put you know oh you know something
like the the anti debate or insight
dialogue or right the empathy circling
like they seem to be putting different
emphasis I'll use your metaphor on
different muscles and how could we put
them together and then meet into what
you call circling 1.0 perhaps and then
can we then and then what could we do to
you know bootstrap that into right no no
it's a it's a dialectic that's what I'm
really interested in so there's a I
talked with Porcelli
who is who helped run the the integral
Institute in Colorado when it when it
was existing and he's been talking
actually I didn't know this but he's
been talking with Jordan you know every
other month or so he lives down in San
Diego
and with the other guy's name who does
the war on sense-making Oh Daniels
 Alberto yeah and there he just
had mentioned that they've been talking
about their kind of a vision of like
some kind of thing where it's like a
three-tiered they made these
distinctions where it's like there's one
practice where it's just purely like
that in the moment like personal right
circling stuff and then and then but how
do you transition from that into like
doing stuff right you're like
implementing stuff right and he said he
said that the stuff that we're doing is
like the is like the center right of
where you start to generate the ideas
and work them out and then there's and
how do you go from that with a
cohesiveness all the way through the
space of where you go and kick ass right
you going right yeah I think I think
that's well said yes I mean and that's
that's that's a really that's
really difficult problem I mean that
goes towards Paul snow should probably
about you know almost every corporation
that ever existed or any kind of group
yeah get anything done like it's a huge
it's a huge problem it is and like I
said I'm again we've got some cotton ear
science of distributed cognition trying
to bring that in we understand you know
network formations better than we've
ever had in the past so we have we have
some new tools we can bring to bear on
this weekend we can like Jordan has
suggested in the dialogue I had with him
on the religion that's not a religion we
can supplement and complement the
interpersonal process with you know a AI
data analysis of things that we can't
process because of the sort of the
number crunching involved yeah so we
have some tools to bring to bear on that
problem you put your finger on the you
know that the the scalability problem
yeah the the the thing that that gives
me a bit more hope then perhaps Paul has
Paul bender clay is there's a sense in
which and there's a danger in this so I
bring out the danger in the series but
there's essentially which really good
ideas and practices self scale they sort
of self organize because instructor I
was talking about this stuff who was I
talking to about this and I said you
know the way Freud's ideas have
permeated through the culture we now
take it a second nature or even you know
some of baked arts ideas like there's a
there's the degree to which you know I
don't I don't want to invoke too much of
Richard Dawkins here but there there's a
degree to which these ideas have like a
memetic to palace area to to sort of
replicate it themselves and evolve their
own scalability yeah to a degree and I
think I think that's as it should be if
I'm allowed to pronounce on that
precisely because that I mean that's
focus right that's part of the logos its
ability to to its own generativity its
own its ability independent of us yeah
whoever us is
to evolve and permeate itself in some
way that's not in our hands so I'm
hoping that will also be a factor for us
you know I'm wondering I just had this
thought about that thing that evolves
itself right yes it depended from us in
some way you look back is it I think
it's that thing that where when you look
back it all looks like a plan right yeah
like that cooker gar talked about that
yeah thing of like this oh yeah it's a
straight path when you're looking back
but as you're going forward it you can't
see the pattern you're so in it well
that part of it is right part of it is
when you look would you look forward
you're facing combinatorial explosion
but you look back all the relevance
realization has been done so it looks
like it was a career and something
something says like when we look forward
and we see freedom and we look backwards
we see destiny something about along
those lines and it's like yeah yeah why
is that well because this is
combinatorial explosive and they're all
the relevant the relevance realization
has all been done right and so there is
that asymmetry there this is cop Latorre
explosive however somehow it's in some
way that we can even think we're doing
in fact we can think we're doing the
opposite right yes yes of what it ends
up being and it ends up doing all the
right things yeah this goes yeah this
goes towards your point about like in
the end dialectic isn't like it's it's
like it's a virtual engineering we're
trying to set up you know probably a
somewhat complex and dynamic set of
constraints to afford something that
ultimately has to be a logo so it has to
be a gathering of it to a you know
through itself out from itself kind of
thing yes very much so
I'm I'm trying to also run reading
through and trying to integrate
slingerland
ideas from the book trying not to try
because he argues that the in the east
especially in how is some branches of
Buddhism and
this issue about trying not to try about
how to how do which is I think the
central problem about participation is
like how do you balance you know Tanabe
talks about this in meadow no etics he
talks about hi Ricky and John Ricky self
power and other power how do you how do
you balance those together so they
you're genuinely participating in a
self-organizing system that has some
life of its own right right that's so
that and you see that it's interesting
because you don't see that becoming a
focal philosophical problem so much in
the West perhaps act perhaps with part
eager it comes to the fore but it's it's
a perennial at least long-standing
philosophical problem in Asian
philosophy yeah is it in it in it now I
was going to ask us so it's been
difficult for me to really grasp what
Heidegger talks about is historicity
correct but I'm wondering if this is
kind of gets added a little bit of that
which is like there's a you know his
views like well what you know how do we
to understand the current Anto theology
or understanding being right you can go
back how you do it is you go back and
you look at the like the ways in which
it's was understood differently yes and
what's interesting is like when he
excavates that understanding from the
different epochs of history like with
cons and then you know yeah aristotle
and plato and this pre-socratics it's he
this is where it's really it's it really
interesting just as an exercise to do to
do that and what that exercise is just
to exercise to excavate this but that um
it's not like it's not like you're
hearing ears Aristotle or can't talk
about their understanding of being in
fact you may even read them talk about
their understandings me but where he
where he seems to kind of go is he
somehow unconcealed uh that
that by virtue of which they would say
this about being right yeah way back
there right the primordial pre thematic
understanding such that everything that
they're saying both conceals but reveals
you know you know what I'm wondering if
like that in that sense of destiny right
yeah that is it has its own movement
right that is it is so I think that
there's a couple things I would want to
say in response to that I mean so I take
the Heidegger and I sort of infect it
with thick and start and and I sort of
and you could see that in this series
because they're trying to get at this
notion of it evolving grammar yeah
positive cultural grammar that's how I
try to make sense of that and how that
is really much you know back during
other relevance realization process is
unfolding um great actually there's that
firm I love that tournament you use that
grammar ring the Porto grammar yeah so
that's how I've tried to do it
I try to integrate because I'm een a lot
of people noted this there's there's
some deep convergences between the
consign and Heidegger on this sort of
stuff and when I try to get a
participatory knowing I'm sort of
drawing on both of them towards that so
there's that and then this the sense of
destiny see so I have like I said I I is
well let's the formulators a question
because that's what the most appropriate
representation of how its situated in my
mind right now is that is that an
illusion right cause when we look back
the relevance realization has occurred
and contrastive Lee when we look forward
you know it's open it's like we're
facing a combinatorial explosive future
yeah because I'm try
I'm trying to I'm trying to get a sense
of well let's do one of the
pre-socratics because Chris mentioned
this Chris mentioned this with Anderson
you know Heraclitus the characters
destiny and the characterization that
Chris does this riff on it raises it
well that means characterization is
destination and then I'm trying to think
yeah but there's there's would like is
is it is it that the right way to think
about it right
because for me I it's to if I guess want
to try to get it is to uni-directional
yeah I'm very I'm very sensitive to
Keller it's point about the the promised
of self-transcendence or what she calls
self creation all right it even if it
just totally overtakes me from outside
and some external force right then I've
lost myself it's not self transcendence
and if I totally make it happen and
caused it to happen
then there's no self transcendence
because there's nothing that's being
created or new ice right and I think it
was started who said well that means
that soft transcendence self creation is
actually impossible and she says no no
aspiration actually is the process in
which people do this and as I tried to
argue I think aspiration is deeply
linked to participatory knowing which is
deeply linked to the sacred second self
right and all of that stuff and so
that's that's kind of why I want to
challenge the I'm calling or at least
call I want to call into question that's
because that's how I framed it right
this idea of a destiny I think we
definitely have the phenomenological
sense of that
well is it is that sense or reflective
of the process that we're participating
in or is it actually a skewing of that
because we have this contrast between
right the open future and the completely
intelligible past right the I'm picking
up on a crooked Guardian theme yeah
is it fair to say that you're saying
that that sense of destiny the sense of
right is its is what it's the way it
somehow constitutes maybe the way I
participate with the unfold it is but
I'm wondering if it's irreplaceable
that's what my good well that's what I'm
trying to bring out I'm trying to bring
out because the issue with the the
destiny isn't because it can slip into a
kind of unilateral TD ology a
unidirectional TD ology I think it
actually obscures
a problem rather than addressing it the
problem that
you
and it seems impossible it seems like
it's all it's almost like you know again
a pre-socratic you know paradox here you
know it smells like something at a
permit it is you know if I create other
than myself then I'm not self creation
right but if I only make it and I'm
complete then there is no creation
there's only repetition and so how can
right and so I feel that the let me just
call it this Pro Tem the illusion of
being destined actually obscures a
problem that existentially and
philosophically needs to be resolved
perhaps my concern that's my concern
right right totally
yeah is it irreplaceable yeah cuz there
there is this sense of I've been I would
imagine it gets a pity like the epitome
of it is is the flow state like that
well that's it the flow state is very
much one and which I think a lot of
these the cotton pieces to break down
along in an important way
yeah because the thing about the flow
state is again that's why it's it's so
exemplary of you know the perspectival
really of being really deeply aligned
with the participatory because these
like the self-organization is sort of so
far grounded rather than background it
the sense of being the author or just
the recipient they're they're basically
marginalized by how foregrounded this
while the flow is hence the name right
the flow gets foregrounded and then the
thing about the flow is it like it
pushes against these ideas of authorship
from within or destiny and from without
or or things like that and again that's
why I often when I'm in discussion with
you know Jonathan puja or Paul bender
claim they bring up sort of you know the
teleological things all say well you
know and things like that was them you
don't have that you don't have this kind
of teleological drive and you don't see
the universe in terms of a cars
story it's almost pre axial in some ways
you see it as these huge self-organizing
systems yeah right
and that's a fundamentally different way
and so I'm interested in the wet the
degree to which human beings could go
sort of trans or post narrative and get
out of being found to that illusion of
Destiny in their self interpretive
self-transcending projects yeah yeah
totally totally now and when we say
purpose right cuz I know that there's
like lots of like that's a big I mean
big buzzword yeah it is not as important
to meeting his life as we thought a
rhetoric mattering mattering me sorry I
was gonna say bang during matters more
but I think this really came out in
Susan Wolf's book like experience
feeling I want to use the word sensing
to mean both perceiving and having an
understanding of right right sensing
that you are relevant to others
yeah and that you make and you make a
difference to others and to something
beyond yourself yes that seems to be one
of the central things that's what some
of the most recent work on meaning in
life is showing that that connectedness
we there's two ways we need to feel that
if you'll allow me again the geometry
yeah you need to feel we need to feel
that people are vectored towards us and
care but we also right so we need that
connectedness but we also need to matter
we need to feel that what we do is
relevant to others and to the world at
large yeah totally
in paper yeah and we know and so I can
get how purpose can he could obscure tha
Erica right well it could also gather it
right it could it could it could gather
it so and I wanted to be clear purpose
does seem to matter not to meeting in
life and so it does make a difference
but what I'm arguing against
the idea that we can reduce meaning in
life to purpose yeah and so it's the
obscuring of the intelligibility the
connectedness and the mattering by
purpose that that concerns me and I was
trying to address that in some of the
final episodes of the series when I was
trying to get into Heidegger right and
and and the Rose blooms without a why
yeah by the way that those lasted that
those three those last three you did in
Heidegger I was so impressed by how you
basically took Heidegger and figure it
out how to make it available in such a
short period of time right thank you
cancel her toast like it's like a
difficult feat I would have met like in
precisely in what exactly what not to
talk about right yes that was the
hardest problem yeah that was the
hardest problem yeah so I made the
decision that to basically that the
bridge through Dreyfuss between
Heidegger and Cox I was the most
pertinent to the overall argument of of
the series so that's how I made the
choice right right yeah just you helped
you got it and you held it and just
linked better at right and like even
with Corbin and I mean a Corbett is so
obscure right yeah yeah oh I'm gonna be
talking with Thomas Chatham I'm gonna be
talking with him yeah we're going to do
a video thing and probably record it
yeah
so somebody reached out who was sort of
a student of him and was watching my
series and said you two should talk so
yeah we're gonna have a discussion and
sometime in January about him it's it's
somebody who's worked with Corbin oh
that it's the person who are whose work
I cited up a lot check on the book he
wrote the book like the world turned
inside out
I think it's a imaginal love all the
world an icon that set of books on
Corvin which is I highly recommend his
work as the way of getting into Corbin's
so that you can start to you know yeah
get a sense of what's really happening
in Corbin rather than the probably
Corbin right is this beautiful lyricism
yeah it could keep you sort of outside
of the movement of his thought yeah that
stuff but Chatham is like he's he says
this perspicacious access providing
because I was I was I got in contact
with Corbin first um when I think I want
like right after I graduated high school
through James Hillman yeah yeah
psychology I was like that was a whole
whole period of your life diving into
that
yeah Chatham talks about that and he he
talks so he talks about which I tried to
touch on he talks about the relationship
between Corman and Hillman it's
especially in the book on a national
love that because human figure is much
larger much more largely in that the
connection between Corbin and Hillman
also comes out in avens book the new
gnosis uh-huh but Chatham also discusses
also the Corbin young connection to
because that's relevant for me
fulfillment as well
totally I what's with that with the
archetypal psychology stuff um that at
least at least when I was I didn't
notice it went back then anyway it's
maybe I could I can see it now but I
don't I didn't get the sense that they
excavated the the Heidegger connection
watch out of right not as not as much as
they should have so part of what I was
trying to do was use Corbin as a way of
doing that use the Heidegger Corbin
young connection yeah and also the
Heidegger Tillich connection and the
Matilda keung connection I was trying to
get I was trying to like I was trying to
constantly around young yeah and that's
also why I did the and just uploaded
that thought the dialogue with Anderson
Todd about young yeah cuz I like the
thing that I liked how you highlighted
the danger with you yes you know it
depends on what where you're coming from
like you can read you them and from a
certain perspective and get something
really like manic kind of yet here again
right you can that's definitely the case
I didn't get to talk a bit about
Wilbur's critique about young the pre
trans fallacy I think that's an
important thing to needs to be discussed
yeah yeah there there there is that sort
of danger I think that's the right word
trying to get trying to get all those
guys like sort of talking to each other
and then talking with the argument of
the course that was that was kind of an
exhilarating challenge trying to figure
out how try to get them to all talk to
each other and sort of what is it one of
the possible connections that would help
I help other people gain access because
I I try to present them like I said as
the consolation the profits of the
meeting crisis and that it's it's best
to understand them in that in that
fashion rather than seeing them as
isolated figures right and plus I would
I would look I mean that's part again
when I had the discussion with Anderson
I would like to bring young back into
discussion rather than just like just I
don't know what just being venerated I
don't want to be too harsh sure but but
that's that's part of what I'm trying to
do yeah yeah so I mean that's why that's
what an Anderson and I talked about this
a bit but that's why I talked about it
also in the series
you know boobers critique of young which
is part of the danger they k20 but like
there's a there's a sense in which the
intrapsychic
can become so captivating that you lose
the existential in a powerful way
yeah and that's part of Tillich's
critique too and I understand argued I
think quite cogently that that's that is
not that is not correct of young towards
the end that towards the end of his
development and is thinking right the
right the it becomes progressively much
more trans ejected and existential and
not just intrapsychic yeah as you move
into them into the later young me
so Anderson with uh he enters a talk
like he would be made maybe he made a
very good point about that he also did a
very good criticism of my take on young
and the divine double which I thought
was correct so that was some good self
correction yes what was the correction I
haven't watched it yet okay so you know
in this series I talked about you know
the divine double because we need this
we need the inactive symbol in order to
afford aspiration because proactive
rationality is constitutive of
rationality I think that I like that
argument I think it's a good argument
but I thought it was between the ego and
of itself that's actually a mistake
what Anderson pointed out was no no no
no right the divine double is actually
the anima or the animus right it's
because the divine double has to
actually stand it has to mediate between
you and the self between the ego and the
self and if you think about it that
actually maps on to the divine double
better because the divine double is
actually between you right in the
gnostic it's between you and and God
right and the ultimate right right and
so so it's like if you'd allow me or the
language the soul right looks looks
towards you and calls you right but it's
also being called so called forward
right and so you're both moving together
so that's why right the divine double is
huh right well it's a sacred second self
it's your--it's right but it's sacred in
that it's not only affording your
aspiration it's well it's doing what we
talked about right it's it's it's giving
you a place to stand but it's also
prospecting you towards what it's point
what it's a symbol for itself right
so it's it's this interesting thing
right you're you're enacting a symbolic
relationship with the sacred second self
but it itself is in a symbolic
relationship right to
the fountain intelligibility right in
his transparent yeah
or translucent at least and loosened
right that's that's amazing
so I thought that was an excellent
critique so that's afforded some self
criticism like of my of my take on you
and I thought that was oh yeah I thought
that was really I thought there was a
very germane criticism that he made
right totally
I appreciate your um what you said about
I found myself sunk into the experience
or imagining the experience and when you
say when he talked about getting them
all talking to each other yes like that
that I would imagine I am yeah I'm
really curious to like we should we
should just like do make sure that we do
the sacred geometry around the same time
so we can talk about our there about it
but I have a feeling I would like that
that would be helpful to me thank you
like it's like because what some of the
questions I've had is wondered about
when you talk about like yeah when I'm
working on this project with somebody
right like with Chris and with the
different people with Leo when you what
does that look like like when you when
he like you go to his house do you like
brew coffee do you drink beer do you
like do you write emails like are you in
questions like this that's mostly I mean
so when I work with Chris or Leo or
Anderson they usually come to my place
the apartment and we hang out usually we
need to set aside a big chunk of time
right so we often talk about it as a
marathon session like four or five hours
to and and then and then it's sometimes
you're writing sometimes like you're
actually generating text at some time
you you pull away from the text and you
enter into discussion and reflection I'm
often sort of pacing around the room
although although although that's with
Chris or Anderson although
with Leo it tends to be a little bit
reversed except when we're writing
usually Leo's at the computer but in the
initial stages all usually being a chair
and Leo is is facing around very
dynamically but when we sit to write
then you usually Leo's actually at the
computer and then we switch roles and
there again there's that there's there
something about you know it's the
Peripatetic thing that the walking
around the inactive movement is somehow
in touch with the stoah stoah was the
place where the Stoics literally walked
back and forth right and so there
there's all of that going on typically
and then and then you know and then
there's there's usually think it's taken
back into some text and then you do the
more analytic reflection on the text and
you come back together mm-hmm to do the
project to think that it's you might
differently with different people really
bonded don't you with the people that
you work with
oh very much I mean the man is so
immersive in so many ways and I bet like
it the relationship that you end up
building is this really really rich it
is it is in there and they're different
cuz you work differently with different
people yeah so like for example when I'm
working with Leah we'll turn to sort of
sentence by sentence construction
whereas with Chris well you've seen it
Chris has a lyricism mm-hmm yeah you
don't want you like you don't want to
you know blade you don't want to crush
the butterfly right so typically what
happens is Chris and I get together and
we'll do well right in sort of will
write the argument and I usually play
the leading role there then he goes away
and when he comes back there's all this
text that so rich with his lyricism and
his and the police this right and then
and then we were and then we read
through it together and sort of edit and
riff on it
so saying Oh interesting so if you have
you
yeah you have to adjust sorry I
interrupted you you Pig
you have to adjust to the person you're
working with yeah the geometry again
exactly exactly exactly
yeah it's so interesting to look at just
what that of like what that did what is
the difference that makes how do we know
to be different with each other in that
way right that's very very interesting
and what are we tuned into in responding
differently to different people that's
one of the things I've I've yeah that's
a good question I it's the way I mean
part of it is you know you think about
planning you know all that all that
tacit stuff all those patterns that
we're picking up passively there's that
there's something about sorry this this
is very joyful there's something about
the way you get the alignment
you know the alignment between the kinds
of knowing within you and when that's
when that's working and the other person
seems to feel that working well then
whatever it is that you've been doing
between you that's got you know what
Chris and I are talking about this in
the dialectic right but you're trying to
do there Sensibility transcendence
you're trying to fit yourself to the
other person horizontally but that's all
that's that's always an interplay and I
use that word deliberately that's always
an interplay with this vertical
alignment between the kinds of knowing
so you're getting the deep understand
make within that that's interpenetrating
with the deep understanding without and
it was two sort of playing off against
each other
uh-huh for me so you sort of play around
with yeah different ways in which you
sort of reconfigure yourself and and
then when you get for me when you get
that sort of phenomenon logical sense
that oh wow there's the inner alignment
and he or she seems to be now glowing
right and there's a and then then that's
how and then when you start to do is you
start to tack on that you start to get
the sense of okay keep finding that okay
how do I get back now I can go over to
here oh that's too far that's breaking
something
you get back and you get like it's like
almost like like like a martial art
you're getting like how what's that
what's the space in which I can move
around with this person and maintain
that vertical horizontal integration
right got that just that just to think
about just that just that sense like in
some way we're doing that without even
having to know that we're doing that
right I don't think we can do it totally
in a knowing fashion I think it
permeates and impregnates our capacity
for knowing yeah yeah this is part of
what Plato is trying to articulate with
the mythos of recollection but if you if
you don't have if you don't have this
already already operating easier then
you can't recognize it you can't
recognize it's so interesting because I
think about that sometimes with um you
know with
doing these because we just when we just
started off doing circling we would we
would do these three day two to three
day courses every every couple of months
or so and and then when I started
training people right inside of like a
year-long container that was we that was
like that was a totally it's not and
it's it goes beyond what's the fact that
we had more time together yeah there is
something that goes on that seems to be
more of the it seems to be more
developmental right whereas the weekends
a weekend course you can you can witness
like transformation you can witness
people have a deep perspective shift
right however in the year-long
there's something about I haven't think
about that there's some teacher there's
a teacher that'sthat's that that no one
is anonymous through the whole thing we
talked about this explicitly like a Tai
Chi Chuan I tell people that you you'll
have an external teacher me yeah
that will help to give birth to the
internal teacher that eventually will
make me up sleep yeah that kind of thing
and of course you you it's again this
this weird paradox of self creation you
you can't make the teacher right but you
can't just receive the teacher either
yeah kind of what a kind of one of those
will work again yeah I think part of it
like I have a similar experience when I
get to teach people over years and part
of it is if you've if you've entered
into a more academically appropriate
kind of intimacy with them I want to use
my words carefully here right but if you
do that what what happens is I think you
get what we've been talking about you
don't just witness their transfer their
transformation permeates into you and
you the way you know yourself is being
changed in the way your knowing them and
that's that's part of that's part of
that's part of the difference there
right yeah so it's it's like it's in a
certain sense there's a way where I
often to think about that like in some
ways you know the content of what like
will be up there teaching something
let's say right so on one level like
what we're teaching is they're learning
it right frontal yeah but there's this
other way in which the way that they're
sitting like the distance between each
other the the the the the values that
even have it buddy like come together
like that that somehow organize in the
background right doing did that
participative deep participation with
each other and all these ways that are
like that are autopoietic itself right
in that way it's the same kind of thing
it's like you walk out with a with an
accent but you didn't yes yes yes that's
well put I like that metaphor that yeah
that's that's exactly right
or a bit of a dialect even huh but
there's some thing I've lived between
dialect and dialectical here but
but yeah there's yeah you definitely
have that that's a good way of putting
it
it's I mean part of it is human beings
are terrific you let me there's
something about making their - oh I
think there's I mean cuz there's an
imitation right there's there's
reciprocal imitation there's a
reciprocal internalization going on and
and then when we internalize somebody we
inhabit our mind and body differently so
that we inhabit the world differently
and there's all that habitus want us
change and so and then of course there's
also the issue that you know human
beings are terrifically complex right
and when systems are very complex it
takes a lot of time right in many
dimensions before you can get at the
deeper more hidden variables behind what
they're doing that just takes a lot of
time right I think about like if you
were trying to figure out how a jungle
was operating okay like if you spent the
weekend with the jungle how are you
you've got you've got to walk through
the jungle and you've got to go to
different places in the jungle you've
got to move around it like it's like
getting that the diversity and the
amount of data you need in order to get
at the deeper variables that just takes
up a lot of time and a lot of difference
totally totally and then in that and
that's why I'm kind of like the the like
that's why I don't think I can I can
really I mean I still do some weekend
courses and stuff right but but the ones
that are just so satisfying are those
watching somebody through a year right
no I think I think it's right what what
seems to be what seems to I where I
first noticed that difference right was
I think it I think it may have something
to different do with that difference
between transformation and development
raising like
I was sitting I think it was the last
course of what the first year that I was
doing this and I was sitting up on it
was like getting aloft kind of space and
they're in we're on a break and I'm just
sitting relaxing on the stairwell and
I'm just kind of just watching people
just intermingle yeah and it's
interesting because I just started to
tune into how like somebody and how they
were just responding to somebody else
right and just kind of just watching the
way that they all their micro movements
and their pre sponses like their
immediate their immediacy how they were
in the immediate sense and I started
thinking about like well what what did
they come here for right and in so many
cases I was like oh my god like they did
not only if they did not only a big not
gotten what they came for but they've
gotten it in such a way that they don't
even notice that they're responding
completely differently right right okay
make it like they can recognize it if
you point it out and then it can see it
but I could I could tell in the pre
reflective immediate sense of how they
showed up for them over that period of
time and I was like I have a feeling
that something like development it is
and I think well I think it's like you
know how do you develop a taste in the
old sense of the word like the taste for
classical music we talked about this the
three senses of appreciation yeah right
so yeah it's how that works is well I
mean it's it's it's one of the central
issues for both development and and and
trying to understand aspiration what
like it's intriguing how people
like how they exist it's like it's like
what narrative does it how we we become
temporally extended agents right
aspiration does something similar but
it's like it's not temporally extended I
don't know what the what the dimension
is but we what's intriguing to me is how
people extend their identity into what
they've become
right because of course there's lots of
times when change is forced upon us and
we don't extend our identity into that
we get an illness and oh right like I
don't identify with my illness or
something like that but like how do
people do this is it like they try to
get a stigma I have to do the cognitive
scientists like what would I do I'm
gonna get a machine to go through self
transcendence and do this weird thing
where it established a non-logical
identity between its current self and
the self that had transcended that's
that it could say it could say with
conviction I have gone through
development I have developed and
transcended my preview I was before yeah
in that rather than experience it as
some logical chaos they like narrative
allows us to do that again in ways that
are kind of still obscure like the way
we can point to a picture of a
one-year-old and say there I am like
which is just a bizarre thing and we
take it a second nature because of the
way we practice with narrative so much
and I think there's something similar to
aspiration the way when people are going
through this process and they become
like it's like that person is right it's
not only that she or he or she is prema
is it a pre reflective state but I would
say right their identity is already
growing beyond their self authorship
yeah yeah and that's the process on
their self yes that's what really really
intrigues me it reminds me of what court
talks about temptation I mean the
symbolism of evil he says we feel like
we're being tempted by something other
than ourselves but this goes back to the
kirko Guardian thing but
once we give it to the temptation we
feel that we tempted ourselves like it's
this weird there's this weird non like
there's right and somehow our identity
extends in ways outside of our it you
know our ego self authoring in this
really interesting way and because what
what he or she was doing right as she
was extending identity and internalizing
not in any way that was being done
deliberatively or like I say in a self
authoring fashion but her identity is
absorbing and extending and then she's
gonna discover right how her identity or
I think it was you said it was her you
know grew but what does that mean you
know that's like I know it's like I'm
chills or something yeah yeah and how
does it wait what's being like what's
what is the intelligibility that that
self-organized itself in that way like
yes yes there's something so much about
stuff that's like the way art the
machinery how would a possible with the
machinery it's just it's like there's so
much I mean that's what I spent so much
time trying to unpack as much of the
machinery as I could in the series to
try and give us as many but and I never
have made claims of it being sort of
exhaustive or anything like just because
it's I think we need all the tools we
can bring to bear yeah that issue that
the quiet I mean the question the the
question that that it verges on a
mystery of what's actually a forwarding
that's going on and what's affording on
what's going on in self transcendence
the selfs transcendence is so essential
to overcoming self-deception and so
essential to mattering right and right
like that that's all that has always
deeply intrigued me right from the very
beginning when I was reading Plato and
Nietzsche in first-year University a
long time ago in a galaxy far far away
I think that I was like that that issue
is always always like it's like has like
oh I feel I hope that I've helped to
elucidate that issue a lot I hope but I
don't I don't feel that I well there's
no way in which I it's comprehensive or
complete or anything like that but that
a capacity for like I can say that we
reach beyond ourselves but we don't to
call ourselves but we don't to become
ourselves who we weren't right
[Laughter]
totally and that there's a quality of
there's an element of that we kind of
arrive here with the with that going on
yes yes
like the intelligence the intelligence
pressed in that it's just so it's almost
it it's so wondrous and so mysterious it
almost hurts yes so part of it part of
the I really guy I just want to say I
just really felt like there's like a
moment there's a moment right there
where I just thought were you just like
what is this I felt like in the center
of life like like why we do anything at
all like well that the core yeah what's
adalah is what it felt like to me sorry
I didn't hear it just felt like it was
like at the set it was it that mystery
is like it that in the wonderment that
it evokes right yes very much
like why we're doing any of this stuff
right and somewhat and I think we talked
about this and I don't know was you and
I individually or when we were in the
four-way discussion the how to how to
elucidate that scientifically while
maintaining a proper existential
reverence towards it that's not a doctor
it's a really challenge big thing for me
I step back and think about that
periodically so you know something it
has to do with focal a lot to do with
like this sense of going back and forth
between the theory and the theory for
sure there's definitely and and and and
the the talika noted the notion for
Tillich of the todas detention detention
that is never resolvable and so the
point of processing is always always
needed i think i think that's helpful
but like for example like part of what
you know part of what i've tried to do
is you you know well you can understand
self transcendence in terms of a process
that complexify ours if when it
complexify as it gets emergent functions
and those emergent functions exhaust
existing machinery and all of that sort
of takes a little bit of the mystery
away in one sense but on the other hand
right it shouldn't it should be well no
no because you should still see like
well what is like your commitment to a
way of talking and being and thinking
that afford such emergence is still a
task that falls onto you
right and that's important to me because
you see you see this as kind of like
what i'm seeing what's going on in rebel
wisdom and and and and on a lot of the
dialogue there's this constant
indication of like of being open to
emergence right and and that's the so
having done that that theorizing i just
did with you does not remove yes but
what what's what's the existential
responsibility
what's the reverential attitude i need
to bring into existence so that i can
yes properly open and affording of that
emergency that's what I mean about
trying to get the two to talk to each
other
appropriately because it seems I mean I
know that the last time you and I had
talked we were talking a lot about that
like the proper place for propositional
knowing yes I kind of felt like this I
have exist this sense
well like I guess a really good
proposition is it allows you to UM to to
have it's like it's it's correct to the
degree that it has what you're looking
at to be like render more of its mystery
right that it's mysteriousness right and
it's made it like that I think that you
had talked about what point you talked
about like oh that's it
it's a deeper pragmatism that's the one
that that yeah James yeah I think so I
think that's what James was on about I I
think that you know James is struggling
because he I think his notion of
usefulness is basically something like
relevance and and then he's trying to
get viability around that and then and
he tends to sometimes think that that's
the same as truth and I don't think
that's quite right because viability has
a sense that there's something beyond
your desires and needs that you have to
be responsible to and you know and the
pragmatist need to see a little bit more
what why is something not viable yeah
like if you want it why is it not viable
to you something else is at work that
you are holding to and responsible too
right yeah so yeah but I do like that
idea
about how a proposition like part of
part of a prop I mean it depends whether
or not we're making the knowledge planes
that we're trying to afford
understanding with our propositions
because we do different things with them
right but unless state insofar as we're
trying to do understanding and that
links up with the hermeneutics right
well then you know the proposition isn't
just in its semantic content its how
when you drop it into the pragmatic
sphere it right out of all of its
potential implications some are deemed
significant or relevant and in you grasp
yeah the relevant implications right and
right and presumably if the person has
some wisdom in their knowledge pursuit
that's going to shift away around a way
that we just talked about James's notion
of viability which implications are
going to be viable and that's going to
be some sensitivity to your existential
mode and the way in which you are
coupled to the world yeah yeah so I
don't know if that's helping but I'm
thinking the idea that again the degree
to which a proposition discloses couples
you to the world in a way that leads you
deeper into it more ontological depth
perception but I think it's bound up
with again this idea about how the
propositional aligns in its grounding
procedural knowing which aligns and
grant or grounds in its aligns to its
grounding perspectival knowing which
then Alliance and grounds in its
participatory not knowing and so that's
yeah that that's how I cuz I mean I
remember saying this in my ha I'm the
dialogue I had with harm zone that you
know you really truth is only grass ball
in transcendence if we don't take truth
as a property in propositions but as an
event heidi areum said right it's only
in the overcoming of self-deception or a
limitation that you can realize that you
were deceived or limited it's only in
the transcendence that you know right so
the truth is never a place you laying
and it's always something you see in
transit right yeah and so if a
proposition is affording that transit
both within and between I think that's a
totally and it's something about like I
just I I'm imagining - it's like the
culture it's like the it's like the the
community ah right like the community
very much very much like what is like
what is the community is it are are
people relating to each other in
cultivating a sense of wonderment right
about what they're doing so like when
you go like if you're a scientist and
you like you go on lunch like like are
we like are we just doing for
or are we no no never never that was
Pilates point that's right it's also
personal not theoretical knowledge is
always situated within the personal
knowledge yeah it just seems to me that
that so gets a vote well gets evokes in
a lot of places but like it can really
be a vocht in relationship right oh very
much I think so
like that's right talked about like you
do like you do most of your writing with
other people and like we were just
talking about the way beat you guys you
were oh yeah it has to be it has to be I
think the best work is always done that
way well at least it is for me I should
get going soon guy hi I don't mean to
disrupt well we never finished these
conversations we just abandoned them
because of other constraints yeah but I
should get going
however it's just I always say it's like
they they live with me the conversations
live all very much with me and and and
they like they inhabit me as much as I
inhabit them Oh totally it's like you're
there's a way in which I can almost like
feel each one of your faces around just
like there's a way as their figures in
my in my mind and apart you know Chris
talks about the way the way you know
people are characterizations of sets of
propositions for us they bring character
to it and and right and it'll definitely
the case yeah very much yeah that last
that last conversation with Chris I had
was really been thinking about that a
lot like yeah that was a great
conversation I try to point people to it
yeah all right John awesome very good
yeah very good talking to you god I
missed you
it's good to talk to you again okay
let's let's do this Pratt let's do that
project and do everything that we were
just talking about yes very much
yeah I like that idea yeah I'll discuss
it with Jordan next time I see him in
with Chris as well okay