all right here we go brought to you by
my sheets buying my sheets no brought
brought to you by Jack Murphy live.com
hey everybody it is Jack Murphy and I am
here at the one America News
headquarters headquarters studio Bureau
Bureau in Washington DC with the one and
only Jack the sobic Jack how are you
doing you know I'm doing well it's it's
it's interesting to say cuz I'm not
actually the one and only anymore
because I've got I've got Jack for sobic
jr. now I've got a much that's right so
it's it's amazing you know having your
first kid because it's like the future
just coming at you right so I'm
competing with him almost already how
much can I get done before it's his turn
to take over oh man those father-son
narratives they stretch out for a long
time watch out they do did you did you
change your name legally to Jack Pacific
senior well so my legal name and I guess
we're gonna Docs myself doctor do exit
are you sure I'm sure
oh my gosh or my legal name is not Jack
what is it John get out of here I'm a
jack John mine too
I'm a jack - you're a jack John I'm a
jack John I never knew you were checked
on every well I'm actually a John job
jack weird yeah no John Jack no it's the
same thing it's the same thing but you
go by Jack so you're Jack John that's
exactly right my group my grandfather's
name was was John Murphy that's an
awesome name and everybody called him
Jack there you go so here I am Jack so I
was the so I'm John the third oh my god
oh yeah so is baby Jack baby Jack where
is he gone the fourth he oh he is John
the fourth oh oh absolutely kidding me
this is exclusive breaking say he's on
the fourth but however comma however
comma I'm the first one who's gone by
Jack Isis right and then my grandfather
because he was the first Pacific born in
America at least male and so he was more
of a yawn Pacific but it's John in
English out of the anglicized kind of
version so I'm the first Jack so that's
why I can say he's Jack junior not
juniors he's the second John the fourth
so he is Jack Jr and John the fourth
from where he from where's your family
from Philadelphia no no the background
Oh
from bullying fertile horns so John the
fourth from Poland oh yes sounds like
he's got big things in his future many
many things that the if the Ottomans try
to cross the gate again we're gonna be
ready
I think Pope like Pope he's got a good
Pope name it's a very good Pope name
it's a solid and and we need a good you
know us Catholics we need a good Pope
right about you know well I don't know
enough about that to comment sensibly so
I'm just gonna sidestep that one about
the Pope but I just want to say thanks
for taking the time to do this you know
we've been talking about doing this for
several months and you and I met for the
first time can you believe it now it's
been like three what three years almost
maybe more we met at the deplorable so
what was that like January 2017 I
suppose yeah January 2017 so it's been
about two and half years what was going
on three right it seems like but it's
it's interesting when you think about
the amount of stuff that's happened
between now and then that feels like it
was two lifetimes ago on through two
lifetimes of stuff but when you look at
it on a calendar two and a half years
that's like that's like you know not
even high school was like well right I
would have finished one year of college
in that time right well you well I think
that's that's a lot about what I want to
talk about today which is sort of the
all the stories and the processes and
the transformations and the growths and
the experiences that you've had over
these last few years because you know
you didn't you didn't wake up in 2015
working as a news correspondent or I'm
not sure what your official title is
here but you know working on television
and talking about politics all day and
interviewing people and working behind
you know behind the scenes and out front
politically speaking as well and so you
know how where were you what were you
doing 2014 2015 2014 2015
I spent a significant amount of time
deployed with the United States Navy in
an intelligence capacity to various
points of the Asia Pacific Theater under
the PACOM command working with
intelligence collectors signals
collectors and studying our adversaries
and opponents in that arena
trying to understand and continuing my
understanding of asia-pacific and
relating that information back to
military leaders and political leaders
here in Washington DC so you you were in
the Navy as an intelligence I don't know
what your rank was but until himself so
you're an intelligence officer in the
United States Navy that's right and when
did you when did you get when did you
enlist or sign up her I originally
enlisted 2009 2008 yeah okay and where
did you where did you go to college went
to college at Temple University
Philadelphia okay nice so you went from
Temple straight into the into the Navy
no no no I did everything backwards I
did my whole life stories backwards you
know I did college and then I then I was
like volunteering on campaigns and stuff
I was like your typical you know basic
bro college Republican guy for a while
then I had this really interesting
opportunity to go do my last semester as
a study abroad in Shanghai in in China
so I went and did that
what year well here's a that's 2007 okay
so 2007 I got moved to Shanghai and it's
my last semester and my mother was very
upset because I only bought a one-way
ticket to Shanghai and she goes you you
are gonna you know come back at the end
of this and I said well you know I'm
gonna graduate and you go visit you know
different countries in the area check
out Vietnam check out Philippines you
know travel around trying to see what
it's like I ended up not coming home for
two years nice perfect well I didn't
move home I did visit once or twice and
really Christmas and all but I and then
you know my family came and visited me a
few times as well but I ended up staying
and living and working in China
essentially for the American Chamber of
Commerce in Shanghai for about two years
no kidding yeah and then it was after
that that I moved home during that time
I acquired Mandarin language ability so
I could me how Sammy young haha I've
exhausted my I'm very wealthy very well
that's all I got I'll be with you so you
know really focused on on learning the
language learning the culture learning
the history the politics the business
trying to help you know our businesses
you know US businesses get in I worked a
lot of companies a lot a lot of ones
that people know I know I max her she's
Disney I worked at Disney a lot I helped
actually do some of the really initial
plans for the Disney World Shanghai that
just opened a few years back but this is
you know going way way Wow and because
at the time the Shanghai part of the
Shanghai Party Chairman was who he was
you know we ended up getting to meet him
a few times and then he's going on to do
bigger and better things on the Chinese
side so during that time period
the Shanghai Party Chairman was a guy by
the name of Xi Jinping and now he's
going on to become the president of all
of China Wow yeah
so you had direct interaction with him
limited direct limitation yeah more more
with his staff and it's kind of his
entourage
right you know I used to think of him as
sort of the the Chinese Tony Soprano
he's very much like powerful guy you
were back then you knew he was he was on
his way to the top I can't I can't
imagine the power structures and
dynamics and institutions I mean it's a
when you think about a just the sheer
number of people there and I know it's
not divided up evenly but if you think
about it there's like a thousand cities
with a million people in China which
which there isn't but like imagine each
one of those cities which each layer
each of them were their layers of power
and authority and gangsters and pours in
in China if you're one in a million that
means there's a thousand people like you
right and Shanghai itself has 25 million
people in it choose one city geez it is
their largest city and it depending on
how you counted it's the largest city in
the world but it's you know having gone
from living in the largest city in the
world for years
I enjoy my space now yeah my personal
space like I'm gonna Lake now I love it
I can imagine so what I just like a
total tangent real quick like young guys
who are listening to this if you have
the chance to study or hotman
absolutely go do it you have no do it
you have no chance no idea of what could
come out of it and then on top of it you
know spend as much time as you can
traveling at that time of your life
either between high school and college
or middle college or right after college
because I'm sure Jack you can attest to
this after you come back from that time
period there will be fewer opportunities
where you can just go do it
the hell you want to do in your life
without any baggage or responsibility
you're in this you're in this great time
in your life where you know you're 20 is
of the time you want to invest in
yourself the more work you put into your
20s the more dividends the more
investment returns you're gonna see in
your 30s 40s and going forward right and
so the 20's are that time you know learn
a language see the world understand how
things work break down your preconceived
notions of what life is about or what
everything is about you know and even if
what politics is about you know I looked
at it and I constantly say this to
people is you cannot understand what the
United States of America is until you've
spent a significant time outside of it
and I don't mean just like you know oh I
went you know snowboarding in Argentina
for like a weekend you know I've been
seen the world no no I mean like really
being in another country experiencing a
completely foreign culture and
understanding that there are looked at
this way the majority of people in this
world do not live in the United States
and they have vastly different opinions
about how humans should interact
government should work how lines
performed how Lions would form yet one
thing one thing in Shanghai I'm telling
you I had to learn that really fast is
that you know the the subway rolls up
and and it's just a brawl it's just a
straight brawl and you can either you
can either you know sit there and take
it or you can start dropping bows yeah
you got to get in there I mean I myself
I did study abroad I studied in London
but then I used London as a way to just
travel all over Europe and eventually I
made it to six six out of seven
continents Australia's the only one that
I haven't been to yet I was fooling in
Spanish at one time you know my kids
still think I am every time we talk to
somebody in public well we were actually
just in Cuba so we had I had a chance to
flex my Spanish skills in front of them
there and I think I've been to something
like 40 countries and by doing that I
mean it gave me such a valuable
perspective on the world that when I see
guys our age begin to travel and they're
like oh yeah man you know I went to
wherever in Europe and now I'm beginning
to understand the world Mike
you know you really if you had the
chance you know it's best to do it as
young as possible and you know for you
jack obviously that paid off big Li as
it were because not only did you take
your experience in China turn into like
a job there then you acquired skills in
China brought them home and turn that
into another career so what happened
when you came back
alright so essentially I got back and I
decided you know it almost made me more
patriotic in a sense that I understood
America better I wanted to do something
for my country I wanted to get involved
in a way that would put me you know more
hands-on on some of these international
issues the rise of China right you know
and joining the military I felt was a
was an interesting way to do that the
Navy was the one that had the most sort
of international footprint
you don't really I mean we have Air
Force Army and Marines throughout
obviously the world you know obviously a
little bit more than I think we should
probably and but the Navy is really the
one that conducts a lot of diplomacy for
the United States and that's what
attracted me to Naval Service and you
know from the start and that when I
explained it that my skill said they
said okay you were gonna be over here so
how did that work I mean you just go
down to the local strip mall in suburban
Philadelphia to the recruiters office
and walk in I literally did literally
did the the so and this is to that to
your point and when I said earlier that
I did everything backwards my life
series backwards is I had was the first
person in my family at least of this
generation to serve in the military my
grandfather who had passed on was World
War two no idea what I was doing I
didn't even know the difference between
enlisted and officer at the time right
and so because of that I thought you
just walk into the Navy obviously join
the Navy right and this is something
that I'd really try to stress when I
speak out to people especially because a
lot of people come out to me and they
say they're thinking about joining the
military what should they do and I and I
I tell people there is a four letter
acronym you you need to learn and it is
called ROTC ROTC is the
way that's your cheat code into the
military it you do that concurrently
while attending college so you finished
college with your degree and a
commission in the military so you're
conducting your basic training during
your college summers and depending on
the program that you go into you might
even start at an advanced level so you
might be twenty-two but you're coming in
as an O - as opposed to an o1 if you're
just coming off the street and that's
that's that's two years of rank right
there rank n pay got it god I I'd to
enlist in the Air Force when I was like
18 or 19 I was deciding between no I was
like 20 this is how I ended up studying
abroad I wanted to get out of town to
get you and I was I was looking between
a fishing boat in a in Alaska joining
the Air Force or going and studying
abroad and when I went to join the
airforce
they told me that I was too fat Jack do
you see cuz I know you now and you're
like like the one word I would never use
describe use fat they said I was too fat
and that I that I had to go lose weight
before I could even sign up I was like
but dude I got a 99 on my ass fat yes
across the board
yeah like well you're still too fat come
back later Wow I was like forget this
I'm going to London but anyway so you so
I so I ended up enlisting I and I did an
enlistment for several years and then I
went on the officer side even though I
had finished my degree prior to that
which is right as anyone will tell you
is the absolute backwards way of doing
anything but was that hard was that hard
to be enlisted with your degree knowing
you're gonna you know ultimately end up
as an officer or how was that experience
like you know at the same even though I
do say that I really really respect the
work that the enlisted folks do and that
the fact that I got to do that as well
and understanding I've seen both sides
of the coin now and understanding that
the at the officer level your manager
right you're you're managing the people
that are doing the work so if you want
to be a technical expert if you want to
have your
hands-on in you know sort of doing the
job that's all on the enlisted side the
officer level it just doesn't come up as
much so being in intelligence that's
what got me to Guantanamo Bay in 2012
and being able to work in the detainee
interrogation operations and really be
involved in all that that had I've been
an officer at that time okay maybe it
would have been down there but it would
have been in a managerial capacity right
sorry so let's go from enlisted to
Guantanamo Wow how does that happen and
then describe for me also like what it
was like when you first showed up down
there because I take it take us to the
point how you end up because that's not
China
Cuba's not China I'm guessing people you
know Afghani the Saudis whatever who
members in Guantanamo but they're not
Chinese how do you how do we grow yours
are though how do you get how do you get
from Philadelphia enlisted to Guantanamo
yeah so a great example of how you know
when you join the military or the
government or you know any real major
corporation organization you're just
kind of a number so here I am a guy
who's got you know three three Mandarin
ability spent years abroad in China and
they say hey we need somebody to go to
Guantanamo you and there you go there
you go and you're and it's pretty much
it's pretty much just like that so there
was a there was an army unit that was
deploying down and they needed plus one
is I was nice to at the time
it's an e5 for anyone out there who
understands military ranks and the Navy
came up they went to the Navy the Navy
needed somebody you know the bean
counters sifted through all the people
so when you're in a deployment capacity
they look for you know you have to be
what's called mobilization ready
and so mobilization ready means you have
the requisite training or you can get
the racial requisite training which
actually did need to do training in
route in Arizona
you've got you know all your shots your
medical is good you don't need any major
surgeries coming up or anything your
physical fitness is good that you you
sort of MIT meet all the all the boxes
you know check them all off that are
needed for you to be able to mobilize to
conduct that deployment and so I had
everything
except for what was called a joint
interrogator analyst course and they
said well we'll send you the course and
then you'll go to Guantanamo so that's
how it started and so fall of 2012 I'm
there in on an army base in on the
border Sierra Vista Arizona conducting
essentially a two-month course straight
from there I fly to Norfolk Naval Base
hop on a sort of a charter flight and
then from Norfolk once Jacksonville from
Jacksonville Cuba tell me about the
training that you did so the true what
do they train you in to send you to
Guantanamo Bay where if you're just part
if you're a general public like I am and
your perception of Guantanamo Bay to me
it sounds like a medieval dungeon right
with the worst criminals in the whole
world
chained up to the wall beards down to
their knees piles of like skeletons in
Chains you know for the other dead guys
that that died in a Cell like to me it's
the scariest craziest place on the
planet basically so what do they train
you first and before he said they said
you down there and then and then tell me
what it was like arriving literally
arriving yeah yeah so it's about your
view of it it's like that's you're not
completely wrong but that's like a
funhouse mirror kind of version of what
it's really like right I mean they do
have the beards right but that's for
religious purposes that's not because of
solid shape they they want the beards
that long you know it's actually the
measure my fists you know how many fists
is your beard you've got like a beard
beard and a half yeah a fist and a half
I got I got a summer beard right now
yeah it's like a fist and a half years
yeah that's so you'd be you're you'd be
okay like they'd be cool with you I'd
fit in yeah well I mean you know for
other other reasons you wouldn't but but
for the beard yes and the list is long
it is and you know it's a devout Muslim
al Qaeda members right so the training
they give you is essentially this idea
of how to debrief someone through what's
called rapport building tactics and what
do I mean by that
so there's this Hollywood narrative of
interrogation which you know you can
really thank I guess Gianna Hospital and
George W Bush and Donald Rumsfeld for
skewing and is that everyone thinks of
the CIA's version of interrogation as
what we do right but I was military
intelligence so their stuff was enhanced
interrogation of waterboarding stress
positions you know really extreme kind
of tactics us guys in the military and
uniform we don't do any of that stuff
our version of interrogation is form a
relationship with this person build a
connection with them one on one and then
through the course of that connection
through the course of that relationship
over time hold conversations with them a
series of conversations with them that
you can use this all in classified by
the way you could you can go look this
up it's also in how to win friends and
influence people oh is it good it's like
the generals yeah it's the same idea and
then through the course of that
manipulate the conversation in certain
ways where you can get the information
that you want so you know classic
example that we would use is you know if
you're trying to get a number from a
girl at a bar right or I guess these
days you might even say her Instagram
page does anything and and there's the
example I always used so if you're
trying to get a number from a girl at a
bar you're not just gonna walk up to her
and start screaming give me your number
tell me tell me what the digits are you
know that it's not gonna work very well
no right and and if it's the kind of
girl who does respond well to that you
probably want to call that number right
exactly or or you know to keep the
analogy going it could be could be fake
right exactly be fake we have many other
things right so you want to go up to
them and maybe you tell an anecdote
maybe you make some quippy reference to
something that's going on in the room or
you start people watching what you know
you do anything you can
to sort of sideways get closer to them
talk it up to them you know some people
use pickup lines but I don't I don't
recommend that these are this is what's
called an indirect opener yeah it's a
wren direct up exactly and you and at
Guantanamo Bay for example obviously you
know they know who they are and they
know who you are when you you know when
you're walking it so it's not you know
you don't is not as indirect in yeah
right but so throughout the course of
the training its role-playing so it's a
lot of role-playing of you know it's
it's role-playing it's all recorded by
your teachers and if you screw up it
will be played on the you know you know
on the video for everybody else to see
like why did you screw up so so my very
first one that I did in training
actually I've been told this story
before at least outside of the military
I've been said of publicly but I can so
I I had this teacher instructor he'd
been dia and CIA and whole bunch of
stuff and he eventually retired and
thought that'd be a fun thing fun job
for and day was a contractor and so I
get in there and I say and a you might
get the reference you might not but and
I said hello first I would just like to
get to know you I wanna ask you bunch of
questions and he'll have them answered
immediately
who is he daddy and what does he do is
that your best Arnold I think it's yeah
it's it's pretty terrible Arnold but but
I'm sitting there and this just looks at
me and because I knew the instructor had
been making arm Schwarzenegger jokes in
like the class earlier and and I knew
that he was a Fed so I make the
instructor crack up laughing right
ideality cuts leg off and he's like PO
sobic you better knock that crap right
off or I'm gonna fail you right you
gotta be serious about that say hey you
said I should try to make you laugh so
exactly and I did and so he actually
he's got a point there he's like but you
gotta take it seriously so do you think
that this training has helped you in
your life and I'm gonna I'm gonna say
this to you as a compliment
you demonstrate that type of skill in
your interpersonal connections and
contacts I've seen it with other people
I've seen it with myself everyone that I
know that knows you walks away with the
sense oh so he's just what a great guy
what a lovely family what a what a what
a nice Pleasant interaction I just had
with them and I'm not saying it's
contrived by any means I'm just saying
it's like internalize right I think that
you're excellent at rapport building and
it probably pays great benefits and
dividends and what you're doing today do
you think that those skills were
something that you picked up there that
you carried with you was it something
that you were born with her you just
naturally charismatic Jack I think
there's a little both I mean III think I
know my father worked at a he's actually
a psychiatric nurse so he understood a
lot of that basic psychology stuff it
was not came very natural for him so I
kind of saw what he was able to do and
he's also the same way he's very good at
open getting people to open up he's very
good at disarming people he's just
really charismatic guy not always to me
but you know I'm his punk kid Jack bond
it's a punk but it so it's something
that I saw from my father and then I
kind of learned how to do it as well and
I just I don't know I sort of found that
it's it's a great way to make
relationships with people it's a great
way to you know just be polite to be
nice to other people to to act you know
active listening is something that is so
lost in our our digital social media
agent active listening is is when do so
many times you know that let's say
you're in a you know Facebook comment
war with someone and or you know a tweet
battle and all you're waiting for is
what am I going to say next what am I
gonna say next well active listening is
a skill that teaches you to actually
listen to what the other person is
saying with an open mind and you can
even repeat it back to them at times and
you're letting them know that you've
heard and internalized what they're
saying and then you you can pick up
things that you may
we've completely missed if all you're
thinking about is how am I going to
respond what am I gonna say next what
should I do act through active listening
techniques you can actually learn to be
a better you you can learn to interview
well for jobs you can learn to just have
better interactions with your peers with
your superiors if you know if you're
working at a job at a company or
something like that I mean these are
skills that everyone can use to have
better success in their lives
definitely a politician comes to mind
that seemed to be very good at that was
Bill Clinton and I remember his I'm
gonna wake up bird day thinking to you
right in his famous lines were always
like you know I feel your pain I feel it
might slip a little bit because it looks
a little painful it's like what's so
painful after it doesn't like my lip I
just totally random how crazy is is
seeing those did you see that clip from
him from pulse with Paul Tsongas that
was floating around the other day anyway
just seeing Bill Clinton campaign Bill
Clinton he's younger he's younger then
than I am now
good grief he was just a baby back yeah
that that guy in terms of politics right
I'm just saying the politics of it it
was was incredible skill set in terms of
being able to work a room being able to
talk to people being able to connect the
people on an emotional level I don't see
anyone in the current Democrat field
that has that Oh God in fact they're all
just horribly abrasive and they're not
active listening to anybody so one of
the other things about active listening
that I want to mention is that it of
itself is persuasive like you don't even
have to if you actively listen and you
can like send your energy back across to
the other person oh yeah show them that
you have actually heard what they said
you can be more persuasive in your own
with your own positions by allowing that
sort of personal energy exchange in that
connection
another one is mimicking gestures
physical mimicry mimicking and Jack and
Eric and mimic mimicking tone mimicking
syntax he's pacing right so it's this is
all kind of confined codified in what's
called pacing and leading yeah right so
when you match someone's
tone when you match their mannerisms
they instantly feel much more at ease
with you and so a lot of the times when
I'm doing interviews for one American
news I'll conduct a pre-interview with
that person before it goes to air where
I can and I've gotten it down to rec and
do this pretty quickly now even if it's
someone that I haven't met before within
a few minutes I can kind of get a sense
of what their style is and then I try to
you know in my own Jack mazovick way you
know match it or bring my energy to
their level and so when they go into the
the actual studio of course lights on
there's cameras there's microphones but
when they see someone who puts them at
ease it puts them in a place where
they're able to open it up more and I
think you get a much better interview
that way
ya know no question about it so it's
it's fascinating to me that these
communication skills are just so
prevalent and useful everywhere and
necessary everywhere and it's like one
of those things like sales and
accounting everybody should learn a
little oh yeah a little bit of both of
those no matter what your job is gonna
be because basically everything is sales
everything has some accounting in it and
everything everything really does boil
down to communication especially today
in our world of competing narratives and
storylines and the the power of the
message and of ideas and so continue on
with your story though would you please
cuz I want to get and we'll say this for
the one bit that's a little different is
in the interrogation mode so all of
those are positive communication skills
right yeah and but they also give us the
option or give give the the
interrogators the option of sort of
committing negative communication with
people and so depending on the type of
person that you're dealing with one of
these are called approved approaches one
of the approaches they might so they'll
also do the flip side right so like you
know the expression buttering somebody
up is is something that we all know well
you could do something like buttering
someone down right it's just kind of
like nagging in the PUA community yeah I
know right well that'll be after the
show
that you know you sort of say you almost
sort of put someone down a little bit
right to get them into a defensive
posture because sometimes when people
are put in a defensive posture so you
have somebody very prideful and then you
attack their pride you attack their
achievements you you question them right
you you ask them critical question is
skeptic because of that pride they're
gonna respond in a defensive posture and
to defend their pride right defend the
reputation and in doing so who knows
what information would spill out along
with that right and when you go into an
interrogation and I still want you to
give me a description of what it's like
to walk up to Guantanamo Bay the first
time but when you walk into an
interrogation do you do they give you
okay today we're buttering up today
we're buttering down yes
you know what say the idea is you would
and I can't get into you know the
specifics of that of the operational
details but it's it's agreed upon
beforehand it's it's sort of like you
know there's a team manager and you need
sort of say and there'd be a you know a
series of these that have gone on and
you actually have a psychologist on
staff that you're do you work with who's
constantly watching who's constantly
observing your behavior or their
behavior so that you're getting profiled
while the detainees being profiled - of
course and then so they try to match up
people's personalities ages genders
races with you know different people to
see what works and what doesn't because
a lot of a lot of it it's just the
messenger - right right so with
depending on the age you might get
someone who's very young with someone
who's very old you know you've got like
a student teacher kind of relationship
right or you might have the reverse mate
if someone is old very young so the
student-teacher angle goat that's it's
almost like like a mentor or like a know
sort of thing and so it's it's basically
agreed upon beforehand you have to have
a plan you you have to have a plan and
legally you actually need that as well
that it needs to be written down and
obviously because of the CIA's enhanced
interrogation plan a lot of laws were
passed congressionally to control what
gets done on on our end even though
nobody in military intelligence was
involved in that
so legally speaking it has to be down on
paper what's going to happen prior to
then a it's all recorded during we can't
even touch that recording we can't watch
it afterwards that's it's all preserved
so that's that's that's out there it's I
think it gets it gets sent out to
somewhere in the NSA and then after
which you know you do like a full-on
debrief with your you know what went
well what was wrong what screwed up what
could you have done better
were there any leads that you picked up
was there information that you picked up
that kind of thing so that is an
interrogation session right without any
of the you know details of it as far as
arriving for the first time see thank
you so you get to the island you uh
because I was just there man I was just
in Cuba I didn't get to going on the
other end of it though absolute no
that's the thing so you were on the base
and there's a big bay obviously going
some of a and you know we can't go off
the base there's no even after Obama and
Kerry kind of reopen the embassy there's
no Status of Forces Agreement so US
Armed Forces still can't go off so we
used to have this joke to say you know
Guantanamo Bay Cuba close but no cigar
and it's not on the east side of the
island I guess on uh south east south
east south east so towards like
Dominican in Puerto Rico over there and
then and even Jamaica is not too far you
arrive on the west side of the bay you
land there you then take a ferry over to
the east side of the bay and that that
ferry ride is about about 30 2530
minutes as you're crossing over and it's
it's like any other military base when
you first arrive you know there's a shop
at there's you know a little little
housing you know my house was
essentially a shed it was kind of like
an aluminum shed and when I say house
it's not house maybe it's a quarter
barracks yeah quarters so I shared I had
a bedroom which is maybe 10 foot by 10
foot and which was linked it is it's
essentially a like a conex box almost
shared with another guy and then there's
a in the middle there's like a shared
toilet as Angela
as toilet and shower that we would use
so like you would walk through that and
then you could walk into the next room
over so it was a 2-bedroom 1-bath
two-bedroom on the water
he's on it's really arid too by the way
yeah so that that part of Cuba it's
actually considered almost a desert
because of essentially a lot of there's
a lot of mountains on the other side of
the bay that block a lot of the
precipitation coming through and so we
it's we get cactus we've got rock
iguanas that'll grow up to three four
feet running around all the time
banana rats which are these huge rats
that like like probably the size of like
small dogs that just run around the
night yeah and which is really fun
because rows are our movie theater was
outside on a sort of repurposed baseball
field and the theater and the banana
rats would know was it just like a
projector basically oh and a big screen
but we would get first running stuff
which is cool so the banana rats would
know that that's where all the people
were eating so whenever the yeah well
you call them banana rats not because
they look like bananas and they don't
eat bananas but because their feces
looks like you know the bennetto you
remember runts like the candy runts oh
yeah yeah I remember the banana ones
that's exactly what their feces looks
like wow this conversation took a real
turn just little puff piles of those
little runts bananas but if he sees was
not on the pre-approved word list yeah
so so you knew at some point during the
movie the banana rat tribes and the
families would like just swarm in to get
all the popcorn and everything up and so
you'd you just be waiting for it but was
really cool because of the projector and
the way the light would play out you
would actually see the shadows of the
banana rats as they ran across the
different aisles in the theater like
projected up on the screen well it
definitely fits in with my experiences
so that's so that's life right over on
the base but everybody wants to ask
about the detention facility so yeah man
tell me that it looks like the prison
where Cersei kept that woman from the
islands what was her name and remember
she chained her up across from her
daughter and she's like I'm gonna let
you sit here and watch your daughter die
and decay
and I'm gonna feed you so you have to
stay alive and watch that happen you
didn't watch the showed no it's I mean
it's more like do you ever watch
anything scared-straight
shows yes there's more like that my dad
my dad made me watch you know he made me
watch you watch it yeah it scared me
how'd it go into prison I don't wanna go
there so know it that's that's more of
what it's like that's more of what it's
like it's all indoors it's it looks like
a modern prison it's actually it's based
off of Supermax of Florence ATX and Cal
in Colorado okay
that's the it's the same design as the
foreign side EXO if you've seen any of
those that's that's what it looks like
I'm so disappointed I'm sorry sorry so
what's amazing though is you know that
picture that everyone's always seen of
the detainees in orange and their heads
are down and they're outside and there's
like chain-link fence and everything
yeah right yeah you know that picture it
I know and I knew you knew that picture
without even me asking you before prior
to that is that the picture because I'll
say the Guantanamo picture right do you
know how long they were actually held
like that enough time to take like 20
shots about an hour yeah that was the
first batch of detainees that ever
arrived at Guantanamo and they were
waiting in processing and so they were
held like that I got it for about an
hour before they were moved into the
facility right well that's a that's a
great example of the way that single
moments and time snapshots get
transmitted around the world used over
and over again to tell stories and
changing narratives manipulate people
start wars get people elected etc you
know you know a little so we're gonna
definitely circles so circle back you
know walking up it's it's all blocked
off you have to go through you know
numerous security checks before you get
in I mean if there's not a moat I don't
really care so there kind of is and that
mode is called the Caribbean Sea oh so
the the facility itself is right on the
ocean so I mean it's there's a detention
facility and you can see on Google Maps
and there's a detention facility and
then maybe a hundred-yard less than a
hundred yards maybe maybe 50 yards and
then there's
a sheer rock face and then just waves
dang and then just just open ocean after
that so if you're in the top level of
the facility looking out one of the
windows you can actually see the ocean
oh okay so view and as you can imagine
they use that as sort of like a reward
for good behavior huh
yeah it's room with the view tell daddy
what he wants to know and I'll let you
have the good room I'm not necessarily
that more like just just good behavior
in general right right so you know not
reward for providing information but
reward for did you follow all the rules
how many demerits do you have did you
put your dish in the dishwasher did you
put your dish in the dishwasher did you
did you get in any fights with any of
the other detainees because there's a
lot of it's communal living right
there's there's two facilities one's
communal living and then one is more a
single cell and then that is also
separated by the other house this idea
of you know good behavior right and so
it it looks like any other modern prison
that you've seen with one notable
exception one extremely notable
exception is the fact that everyone in
there is the same religion and everyone
is in general in a general scope from
the same part of the world right I mean
obviously there's difference between
Arabs and Afghans and Pashtun and
everything that complete difference
between all that obviously with you know
regional you know regional differences
but everyone's in general from Middle
East LaVon right compared to people's
perceptions of imprisons in America
where you've got like all the black
folks on one side all the whites on
another and the Latinos on another and
yeah it's you know that kind of stark
difference is that we can easily relate
and then also the you know the the
issues that arise you know you've seen
countless documentaries about sort of
the rise of the the in prison gangs that
then sort of form and the the rivalries
that happen that does happen inside
Guantanamo but it's not as stark because
of the cultural similarity so it's not
so I mean like like the like the Saudis
hate the Afghans because they consider
them to be like Hicks you know but then
the Iraqis don't like the Saudis because
the because the Iraqis will say like
oh you know we had you know you guys
just a bunch of Bedouins who you know
happen to have oil and so you're you
know you're rich but you're still living
in the third you know third century
whereas we had Babylon you know right we
had the kingdom of uh you know and and
so there's there's a lot of that sort of
nationalistic rivalry that still goes on
then the bigger the bigger switch in
terms of all that would be sort of the
more hardliners versus the moderates
in terms of radical Islam so in terms of
do they you know are there are people in
there that are still fighting the fight
that are still waging the war right so
there even though they've been there you
know ten fifteen years they're still
waging war on the United States from
their perspective of radical Islam and
but there are also other ones who have
decided that you know perhaps radical
Islam wasn't the best choice to make
with their lives and and they've really
moderated to the point of of saying look
you know I still believe in Islam still
Muslim but I don't believe in you know
killing every American that I see right
well neither you nor I elected to put
those people there nor can we elect to
get them out of there so we'll leave the
judgment upon that sort of side and
that's and that's kind of actually one
thing that would come up is sometimes
you know they would they would say you
know you know where are we put in here
and I said look I I was ordered here to
write you know what was your biggest
takeaway you think from that your
experience there Wow is that because you
know jack not everybody who's listening
to this podcast was an interrogator at
Guantanamo Bay
well I wouldn't specific irrigator but
interrogator operations because I was in
I would say certain things
what's blue and and I want to be precise
to so just that and this is gonna sound
weird but I'll put it this way that
there are people who may be vastly
different from us who may have even
joined organizations to called al-qaeda
but you can still find common
nowadays with them and that they join
these organizations not because they're
crazy you know in this which I think is
this this knee-jerk response to say well
that you're crazy you're crazy to do
something like that and see it is crazy
obviously if I play you know planes into
buildings but to understand that they
have a logical rational in their you
know their own sense they have a self
rationalization that brings them to do
these things and only really by
understanding what that is and it's you
know it's an ideology by understanding
what they believe through what they say
is the only way you can actually
understand what the situation is so for
people who just kind of paint with a
broad brush and say everyone in that
part of the world is bad that's not
right or to say that you know everyone
in that part of the world is just crazy
and backwards and everything that's not
right either but to understand that
there's there's more going on under the
surface than just adherence to you know
whatever Osama bin Laden says and try to
understand the ideology that's driving
and motivating this I found that very
very interesting and so I think it's
it's one thing where I say to people
look when I in in my public career now
when I'm talking about radical Islam I
have a perspective on it that's very
hands-on right more so than that and
probably it you know the college
professor or someone who's never spent
time listening to the things of these
people say right that's fascinating and
it made me actually just think we're
gonna talk about this in a little bit
William Lynn's book fourth-generation
warfare and then thinking about how like
you said radical feminism radical Islam
in my mind I was thinking radicalized
Islam and I was yeah and I was thinking
about for generation more fair William
Lind and the stories sort of fables I
guess that he told in there about how
American behavior can actually create
these exact people that are living now
in Guantanamo Bay his book is fantastic
I highly recommend it to everyone and in
fact I modeled my book for tea warfare
off of his book for generation warfare
but the cultural
understanding that he puts forward in
that book is is it's it's not
comprehensive but it's a great starter
for anybody who wants to get into that
space right I and I highly recommend it
for anybody for everybody fourth
generation warfare William Lind on
Casilla distill the house I think
because it's just a great way to
understand it's sort of a foundational
piece and trying to understand the world
today and how the future of warfare is
going to look and how we're perhaps
already in the middle of a more advanced
sort of 4G sort of civil civil conflict
here I wish I could guess it's I wish I
could give that book to every leader in
the United States right every political
and military leader and say please just
just die and don't just repeat what this
says understand what this book means and
understand how there are things that you
may think are good ideas and there may
be policy or foreign policy outcomes
that you're looking to achieve but
you're going about it in a way that's
actually detrimental to your interest in
to the interest of others because of the
what essentially fourth generation where
I talked about as you say why don't
someone just say it yeah the way you go
about things is almost more important
than your intention very well said
very succinct so in the book Lind goes
through an example of operation David
and operation Goliath and what the
different outcomes would be an operation
Goliath is like bringing the most amount
of weaponry to bear you know in a
certain point and like flattening cities
and rolling through with tanks and all
thing and then the soldiers are you know
marching with you know be helmets and
armor and just showing everybody how
tough they are and real like world war
two style just just marching across the
country you know and conquering as you
go right even like World War one even
right right right and then and then and
then the the operation David is about
you know how to integrate yourself sort
of into the culture and society that
you're occupying and like how to achieve
your goals without dropping you know
Moab's on villages just because you
didn't like what happened there like one
of the examples that I really liked was
a instead of having like a huge base
outside the city like have have your
guys like actually quartered within the
city
then B was like instead of instead of
dropping you know bonds to kill a guy
you know higher like the local gangster
guys to do a hit job or something
exactly like very small sort of it's a
whole perspective change in terms of
lining up on either side of the field
and shooting at each other or destroying
everything in your path or like
realizing that you need the people there
to support you and you need also to have
something left to govern at the end when
you're done and and their whole reason I
brought this up just now is because
operating as Goliath you do definitely
radicalize people and create more
enemies whereas if you go about it in a
much more empathetic and sort of
socially aware way even it's more
surgical and you then have you create
less enemies and less conflict and one
of the things that that I actually talk
about more in 4d warfare which in my
book I take the David versus Goliath
paradigm and that's that's the way he
puts it as so eloquently said whoever
read the story of David versus Goliath
and identified with Goliath
did you always identify with David who
you are hoped for and oh I have to win
right or hope for you right it doesn't
make any sense
yeah it's literally and what you say
that the United States is perceived as
Damon or Goliath around the world Chuck
and this is something this is key this
is so key to everybody listening to this
in the United States that doesn't
already understand this that the rest of
the world for right or wrong right they
perceive us as Goliath pretty much every
country on the planet even our allies
view us as Goliath and they're not
necessarily wrong if you look at terms
of the way that we make demands of other
countries the way that we influence
other countries countries kill everybody
right disrupt entire regions right right
right and the way that we oh we could we
call it intervention under for
democratic purposes a nation-building
but to the rest of the world we just
sort of look like we've invaded because
we felt like it and we want something
and we're just shooting up people and
that's created a perception of the
United States where you know under
george w bush we had that perception and
the people thought obama would change
things and then he
sort of continued doing it the invasion
of Libya which really doesn't get talked
about very much this changes perceptions
around the world and of the United
States and you know as we said now not
to get into current events but people
are talking about Iran you know doing
doing something there and so
understanding that and this is a big
problem not a problem but a big
situation or a big circumstance that has
changed since warfare has gone on from
world war two to now is the rise of
first the mainstream media and then
second of social media so the
understanding that something that's done
in a small capacity right you mentioned
Abu Ghraib earlier I mentioned the photo
of Guantanamo even if it's something
that only happens for one second if if
that moment in time is captured and it
makes someone look like David and make
someone look like Goliath that can be
amplified around the world faster than
any response can be met or any and and
no explanation is ever going to be power
more powerful than that image no
explanation is ever going to be more
powerful than that first narrative that
comes out right do you do you think that
social media and you know 2019 media in
general will make it harder to bang war
drums and and rally people behind the
cause of war it will change it because
there are ways that you can manipulate
social media that governments could
manipulate social media that I mean
think of a franz ferdinand ferdinand
situation right so Franz Ferdinand was
the was the Archduke he was assassinated
when it but then the lead-up to World
War one and so that that kicked off this
this series of you know secret alliances
that led to World War One happening so
you got one instant that sparks an
entire world war and wasn't really the
whole world but with social media you
could still have that same effect you
could easily have that same effect with
a 30-second video depending on what the
video was and who it was and what was
happening I think absolutely something
like that could happen hmm you know you
don't think that now that there's a
million competing narratives in people
like yourself and some of our friends
that have very large platforms that can
drive narrative that contrasted to say
world war two or even the Iraq war the
first Iraq war when the New York Times
in the Washington Post basically had a
virtual monopoly on the information flow
they were able and I don't know if it
was a conspiracy but it probably was
they were able to work with the fake
intelligence information and tell us all
that there was weapons of mass
destruction and everybody you know who
had half a brain was like al-qaeda
nuclear bombs met weapons of mass
destruction Saddam Hussein holy of
course we need to go to war like they
made perfect sense but there that was I
can't
what was that Leon 2002 or three or
something that was two into three it was
a second one yeah so it is like wow
today there would be a million competing
narratives so there will be a million
independent journalists there made
million people spreading different
stories so do you it takes a lot I think
to rally a country into sending off you
know 500,000 people so it's what's
interesting about it is now with social
media you have the democratization of
information and the ability for one
controlling narrative to be out there is
is lost there's there's so there are
your right in that sense there there are
competing narratives now and you know
there are things that we can see I mean
look there's always going to be
competing narratives but now because
you've got so many competing narratives
if there is a situation where they say
you know this country is spiraling
spiraling out of control right you know
country X let's just you know take that
of it so but then somebody in country X
pops up on Instagram and says hey here's
a birthday party I'm going to right now
and it's a good fun party and it's
really a good time and we're just
enjoying life and we're human beings
just like you guys and you show that to
people in country you know a well then
country all it's it's very hard to
demonize someone in country X if you can
just see them hanging out and having a
birthday party and this is something
that you know I learned he humanize
dehumanize right and so this is
something that I experienced from having
traveled around the world and spent time
in other cultures is like people are
people are people wherever you go indeed
I think they're all they're all gonna be
people are gonna think differently
they're gonna talk differently that
might look differently but they're gonna
be people you know they're gonna go to
work they're gonna care about the kids
they're gonna worry about what they're
eating tonight
they're gonna have the same type of
interpersonal problems that you see
around the planet and everybody's kind
of just trying to get through the day
today would you say that the Mogga
wing of American politics is the
anti-war wing of American politics I'd
say there is a linkage between the
anti-war groups and and markers Mogga is
definitely the most anti-war coalition
that the right has ever had in in
American politics and sort of it's sort
of anti intervention and you saw this
again and again over the course of the
early Trump administration that there
would be times where neoconservatives
would be pushing for war the media would
be really beating those drums of
someone's attacking children and we have
to do something we have to get involved
and you would see a lot of people in the
Mokka community saying is is war the
only way we can respond to this do we
really know what's going on should we
immediately jump the gun to launching
missiles or invading when there's a
nebulous situation and we're not sure
what's happening not referring anything
specific but right you you you've seen
this sort of narrative play out again
and again where a lot of folks in the
manga community turn things around and
they say and this is this is I think
quintessentially the reason that that
Donald Trump was able to stand out so
much in the election and really win over
even in the general election right not
so much the primary which people talk
about the general why did he win the
general is because he said I want to
care about the American people and their
interests first and that was something
that nobody had said in politics for
twenty thirty years of saying hey what
about our inner cities what about our
infrastructure what
about our the wages of American workers
what about these jobs that have been
shipped overseas and a lot of these
things we didn't used to think of them
as political issues right we used to
think of political issues as you know
you know should we own guns how many
good should we owe and how should we get
guns
what's going on with abortion and should
we have that and you know these are the
traditional areas of sort of left versus
right debate but when Trump came out he
started talking about America versus the
rest of the world type of things and
that was an entirely different framework
than anyone had ever entered into before
and I think that because of that there
were people who it fit very much in line
with a lot of the anti-war crowd who
also would make that same argument to
say this this war this intervention this
nation-building situation doesn't serve
the needs of America right it's not
necessarily just like a strident
anti-war position it's more like all
these recent wars have been really
stupid and dumb and lots of people died
and what good has it done for America
why aren't we just a little bit more
careful with our decision making my I
was just moving forward right one of my
one of my best friends in the whole
world just yesterday got back from
Afghanistan his second deployment
they're spending it to spend another
year there and remember I asked him just
you know we got to talk on the phone and
I said you know what what would you say
the goal was over there what were you
doing right you know I mean obviously
not to talk operationally but he said
yeah we're just kind of delaying the
inevitable I mean that never will pull
out right the inevitable pull out and
the eventual takeover by by the local
populace those take back over the
country and the idea that America is
going to be able to fundamentally change
a country that has existed in the same
state for thousands of years it's it's
it's foolish right Alexander the Great
could not you know quote unquote fix
Afghanistan right right and then
eventually moved on it's so funny that
you just said delay the inevitable which
is return the country to its people and
like
saying that out loud really struck me
because I feel like there's a lot of
people that would hear that sentence and
think it's a failure like it's a failure
that the inevitable is that we're gonna
pull out and return power to the people
who do you think of all the
preconceptions that have to come before
that that statement yeah that we should
have the say over who controls another
country versus look I'm folks I know I
joined the military I was an
intelligence officer
I'm all for quote-unquote getting the
bad guys if there's bad guys that need
gotten let's go do it
we've got Navy SEALs for that we've got
a fantastic military for that if there's
another military in the world that's
threatening us that you know I feel bad
for them right but when you take that a
step too far and you start just go
around looking for fights and you're
looking at people that you know don't
really pose a threat to us and saying oh
we have to fight these people just cuz
that's when you get into issues right
yeah I I don't know enough about Iran to
have a real legitimate opinion on it
other than I just can't see anything
good coming of like dropping off you
know 500,000 troops and again so to the
extent that we don't go to war with Iran
I think I'm gonna be pretty happy about
that but uh let's let's get back onto
our narrative track here let's move on
with monk Guantanamo you're back to the
you're back to the United States it's
like what what year is it where you're
back in in in America and when do you
start getting started with Twitter when
do you start getting involved in social
media and sort of take us through that
transition so I'd already been involved
with social media and we are going to
talk about this we're totally that's
because a lot of people say where did
this guy become from there's an article
you know kind of another you know attack
article this one from the far right
coming to attack me the anti-semite
crowd doesn't like me very much
and they were saying who's this guy po
sobic where did he come from well I
started my Twitter account in April of
2012 and had nothing to do with politics
still in the military still kind of bhai
that curtain of the intelligence
community so I didn't want to be out in
public too much so I just started a
Twitter account to clown on Game of
Thrones and when that show took off you
know I'd read the books when I was
younger so I started a Twitter account
in a blog called angry G ot fan angry
Game of Thrones fan and it was just it
was a joke account
it was satirical and it was just sort of
making fun of the TV show from the
perspective of like a really obsessed
book fan you know all capital letters
screaming at everybody all the time and
it really took off it actually really
took off and so it became this sort of
hobby of mine
and I got to got to go to you know some
cool events got to meet George are
Martin have breakfast with him the the
creator of the series no kidding all
through all through effective use of
social media all through social media
and then and nobody even asked you know
what you know what's your Clark Kent job
what's your real job you know how are
you making money well you know a just
doing this for fun and you know there be
times where as example I they sent me
down to Fort Huachuca
for another round of training a couple
years later in the human intelligence
realm and I George our Martin lives in
Santa Fe and he was doing an event in
Albuquerque one one weekend while I was
in Arizona so I kind of looked at the
driving distance and I you know it kind
of said it I said hey you know if I if I
leave on Friday I can make it to say
yeah you know it's a Albuquerque by
Saturday morning and that's and that's
what I did I just drove up through the
desert and and there I was in in
Albuquerque and I realized why they say
film Breaking Bad they're right I was
recently in Albuquerque myself I guess
last fall and hope man oh yeah it's
everything no like the show like that's
that total tangent but right it mean
that Albuquerque is like you watch
Breaking Bad you've seen Albuquerque
they're not they're really not
stretching things there yeah in fact
this podcast equipment made the trip all
the way to Albuquerque as well to where
I interviewed dr. Jeffrey Miller and dr.
David lay that was a very good time in
fact dr. Jeffrey Miller was the podcast
episode number one for us so anyway so
now you're you're rolling with your Game
of Thrones account
the elections starting to gear up and
what happens Jack how how do you go from
tweeting about the Nights Watch and how
bad the show sucks compared to the books
I was way ahead on that by the way 2012
I was telling people the show sucked and
it took everybody else until season I'm
just saying one of my most popular
Twitter threads the last few months was
my conclusion and summation of the show
and how it was fantastic the show was
great
it ended Stark's won and it was their
Redemption story about like not being
naive and realizing that they got eggs
you know wield their power because
there's evil out there they're not
saying that the existential narrative of
the show was bad I'm saying that the way
they made the show was bad oh I say I
say yeah the technical aspect okay well
let's not get too deep into that no but
I want to do I want to hear the the yeah
the transition the transition so and
it's well it's intrinsically tied to
that right so 2016 the Game of Thrones
show put it this way if Game of Thrones
hadn't started to suck so much I
probably never would have started a
political Twitter account right so
amazing about world works and it's it's
just true though and I go back to that
thinking about it all the time like what
if I had never you know what I still be
in the military would I still be doing
that so 2016 rolls around and I find
myself on another deployment around the
world Asia Pacific Trump's running
I like everything that's going on really
appreciate it had gone to a couple of
volunteers things with him in 2015 in
the DC area Northern Virginia area and
decided I wanted to get involved but of
course Navy had other ideas and he said
now we're gonna send you over here so I
used to spend my free time whether I was
on a ship or was on shore when I was off
duty I would hop on to Reddit and I
would go on to actually write at the
Donald and I was helping out people back
home cuz I'm out of Pennsylvania
originally and know a lot of people in
Pennsylvania politics and I found out
all the people I knew who were running
his Trump delegates and I said I want to
help you guys volunteer
I want to get people going in so I'm
sitting there on the other side of the
planet volunteering for the campaign
essentially through the internet and
through social media so that started
taking off then I was doing it on my
Facebook page as well just putting out
you know no volunteer content and
eventually I got contacted by a group
called citizens for Trump that said hey
we understand that you're not really in
the US right now are you gonna be back
are you gonna come to the RNC and I said
you know what I actually will be
arriving back so I did a six-month
deployment January through end of May in
in 2016 I was I wasn't even in the
country and by that time I got back to
the US so I go to the RNC and this is
pivotal in the story and we put together
the biggest rally for you know Trump
supporters that it's outside of the the
official event so we had about a
thousand people there on the lawn right
of the banks to the roof and how did you
how did you like organize and promote up
mostly through Facebook Roger stone was
a was a headliner of it we got Milo out
there diamond and silk spoke absolutely
this was through citizens from scissor
Trump yeah is all citizen for Trump
which is a volunteer effort and that's
eventually where because Milo came he
introduced me to like Mike Serna vich
and his whole crew that he had kind of
rolling with him so that's where I meet
him that's her meet a bunch of other
people Jim Hoff we then go to a party
with with Jim Hoff and it made me more
people there and all through that time I
hadn't really been using my Game of
Thrones Twitter account in 2016 because
the show had become so diverted from the
books and that the books didn't really
match up to the storyline because the
books aren't finished yet and so I
wasn't really feeling the Game of
Thrones blog anymore and I was kind of
checked out of it and I was talking to
all these guys about how I had this
account I had like 10 thousand followers
on it and they
said you should just you just make a
twitter account for you know for this
stuff for politics you should just you
should just do that you know and I
thought about it and I said you know
okay maybe it will so about a week after
the RNC I I can still remember when I
went and I just I went in and I deleted
the angry G ot fan and I wrote my real
name on there and said alright I'm gonna
I'm just gonna drop that act clothes off
that blog like and now I'm just gonna go
and be me that's amazing
so as of the summer of 2016 when the
Republican National Convention is going
on
you're helping promote rallies you're
there with Roger stone and Milo imagine
Alex Jones was probably even there yeah
and I mean that you describe the RNC as
to me once as the Woodstock Trump stock
Trump stock that's it and for all of our
guys who are in their 20s listening they
have no idea what that means but that's
okay
and so even at that time you don't the
read about it you still you still
haven't really fully utilized your
social media at all and now you've got
one of the more powerful Twitter
accounts in politics so what happens how
does how do you go from 10,000 people
who are listening to you because you're
talking about the night's watch and turn
it into almost a half a million I don't
know where you are right now
half a million ardan political
supporters plus also virtually all of
mainstream media who keep up on what
you're doing it's such a cetera how do
you how do you do that so we're kind of
fast-forwarding here a little bit but
it's and just to say in a quick way it
was really going to the rallies on both
sides both Trump rallies and Hillary
rallies and then people forget about
this but they tried to downplay the idea
that Trump had a lot of support and
going to those rallies and showing the
sheer size the crowd size of the
pictures that I was seeing and posting
those people were saying I'm not getting
this anywhere else I'm not getting this
because people would go right but they
weren't posting on social media they're
just you know share a picture with their
friends or sharing on Facebook which is
more of like a closed sandbox
environment whereas
there's an open sandbox that's a
videocam term right and so basically
what it means is on Twitter you can
share something to everyone
whereas on Facebook you're only sharing
something essentially to people that you
were friends and family with and have
closed network so it's a closed network
and so by doing that on Twitter really
got picked up I eventually got a you
know sort of asked by Bill Mitchell if I
wanted to be a co-host on his show in
the early days I remember yes well I
that's my first like political media gig
was was with Phil Mitchell and I was
doing I was breaking down the story of
the the Access Hollywood weekend and how
I had heard through the grapevine that
they were trying to get Trump to
actually step down that weekend they
wanted him to drop off the Ballad and
pence was gonna be sort of anointed by
by Paul Ryan who's gonna fly out to
Wisconsin because they were but they
were both in Wisconsin now that weekend
and you know that was sort of my
breakthrough story at least and I didn't
even think about it as like journalism
it was just sort of a story that I had
heard and I said well I'm just going to
tweet about this so I did it would have
mounted to a tweet thread in 2016 and
that got a really picked up that got a
lot of attention going to rallies going
to Hillary rallies as well and talking
about it and just sort of being along
for the ride of 2016 you know the people
call it the great meme war that took
place and being in the fight right and
that all ends up with the deplore ball
by the time the deplorable I've got
about 50,000 followers so deplore ball
sort of the end of 2016 in a way the
inauguration even though it's actually
in 2017 and I never think of it but
nobody thinks of it nobody thinks of it
that way it's the end of 2016 that was
the you know the victory and then I got
called by rebel media actually and a
rebel media reached out and they had
seen me because Lauren southern was
there covering it for rebel and I had
given a speech at the deplorable wearing
a big white tuxedo I was just gonna
comment on that you look fantastic that
night I look fantastic everything but no
I what I wanted to make an impression
and and so I I came up with a big white
tuxedo and rebel reaches out and says
hey that was a great speech you've got a
great
look have you ever thought about doing
this full-time
Ezra Ezra yeah a lot and you know and I
I just this is the first time you'd ever
contemplated rights politics slash
journalism slash broadcasting whatever
we call this thing in the 21st century
as a as a gig right exactly and you know
at that time I'm still in I'm still in
the intelligence community I'm still
working full-time there you know and I
was I was looking at gs-13 for people
who don't know what that means gs-13 is
is kind of like you're sort of the
considered like fully vested you know
really great and paycheck really great
benefits I mean you're locked in for
life and but that's outside of the
military you know right right that's on
the civilian side civilian side and so
I'm looking at this and saying I could
sit in and and stay in the corporate
government world and keep climbing the
ladder or I could take a chance take a
chance I could take a chance and try to
do something that could either be
massively rewarding or you know a
massive failure and I think I'm still
trying figure that out but but as row is
actually I think he's really great about
it and over the course of a couple of
weeks we we went back and forth and I
kind of I kind of ghosted him a little
bit about it actually because it was a
big decision but probably what what
ended up making the decision for me was
the fact that so I just mentioned you
that I was so think about my 2016 right
I'm deployed six months right I'm going
by the time I get back it's election
season so the election then the fall
happens I'm working my job full-time
spending my weekends you know
quote-unquote fighting the meme war and
using up all of my built-up so I had a
lot of leave time built up because I'd
done the six-month appointment so I'm
spending all my leave time all my
vacation time going to events going to
debates going and campaigning going and
you know just just following the
president and everything else you know
all around the country and I did not see
who a lot of people know is mine current
my now wife Tanya for almost that entire
year right almost until I guess what
November right you know the election
ends in November so that's tough we got
to a point where in our relationship
where you know it was sort of like it
was kind of like a make-or-break point
for us where because we had been dating
throughout 2015 but then hey you're in
the military they say go you go right
you know and six months apart which
Ben's becoming nine months apart and I
really was in this position where it was
like are we going to take this
relationship to the next level or am I
just going to let it kind of atrophy and
and and go off and I sat there and
looked at it and said you know I've seen
these guys in you know sort of this this
specific subset of the Intel community
that I was in we were doing a lot of
deployments a lot of high a high op
tempo they would call it operational
tempo and the guys who had done it for
ten years for 15 years for 20 years and
a lot of them miserable after climbing
the ladder you know and a lot of them
were divorced the kids hated them they
didn't have great relationships with
them and yet you know what they had done
some really high speed stuff they had
done some really cool things they had
gone on to great adventures but at the
end of the day they're sitting there
thinking you know at the end of the day
you're gonna retire from the government
retired from military service and
they're just gonna replace you with
somebody else right in that community
and I just I I met with a captain a
career captain a guy who actually was in
charge of a destroyer right and he was
talking Kincannon drivers I think he was
talking about we would talk all about
like how a heat why he didn't make
Admiral turns out a lot of politics
involved not yes
Yeah right I was like oh you don't just
earn that and and he literally just
retired this year and he's like damn you
know they really not what they do really
replace you and when they're done with
you they're really done with you yep and
then that's kind of it and now he's
figuring out like what to do next and
it's weird two guys in his late 40s or
whatever but he's like retired right
yeah it's 28 out yeah nice people and
and the sense that he that I got from
him sort of I want to say anger but
maybe a little bit of being just sort of
forgotten after essentially what is a
lifetime of service yeah I know and I'm
sure he's highly decorated I'm sure he's
done a fantastic service for our country
yeah
but when that day comes and you pulled
the pin I mean you're just a number
right right and even even at that level
yeah yeah and you know I had had a I had
kind of a mentor actually when I was at
Guantanamo I had a guy who was my senior
chief in the eighth and he said to me
said Jack look at the end of the day the
Navy won't tuck you into bed at night
right Navy's not gonna be there for you
were entire you know who's gonna be
there for your family right and Jack
junior dad had always stuck with me you
know that him saying that had always
been the way he said it it always stuck
with me it's like it's like he told he
was the one guy who told me the truth
right right wherever everyone else it's
hey you need the next rank you need the
next ribbon that you can get on your
chest is there's an old there's an army
saying they say no you never know how
much a soldier will work for a piece of
ribbon their chest you know that's
people people respond to positive
reinforcement and and amazing and
mind-blowing ways all right and so what
he said was think outside the system and
actually I was living I don't live there
now so I guess I can say this but I was
living on Fort Meade where the NSA is
okay and one thing that struck me while
living on that base was way he lived
there you had a daycare center there was
a hospital there was a high school there
was a college as a whole town and there
was a graveyard oh the whole town
and what struck me was that you know
this is this is a closed-loop rights
right this is a closed-loop of your life
you go you start here you're born you go
there do this you join you get out you
retire and that you end up and it's kind
of bleak it was kind of bleak and I I
just didn't want that circle that loop
to be my life and I had this incredible
woman you know who did wait for me for
all those nine months and the very first
thing I did after the election ended was
I said I gotta fix this relationship
I've got to go back to her and and
basically play it out to her that way
and say look I want to get serious with
you do you want to get serious with me
or not no and she did she did and it got
to the point where I I eventually said
well then let's let's do it for real and
I got out so I get out of the I get out
of the government service get out of the
intelligence community take Azra up on
his offer at that point I think I had
about 6070 thousand Twitter followers
but within the first couple weeks of
being at rebel media I was there what
they're White House correspondent I get
verified getting verified I mean I'm
sorry you know Twitter is a is a is a
two-tier system it really is I mean it's
it's it's like you know you're like a
second-class citizen if you're not if
you're not verified and it's it's not
fair but getting verified I mean it
doubled within the first couple of
months my following and it's just it's
just been taken off ever since and you
know now I said I'm at four hundred
ninety thousand right now the cusp of
half a million I guess and nobody tells
you right nobody tells you how to run an
account like that nobody tells you how
to go from being you know being a nobody
to a somebody nobody tells you how to
you know you know you know I don't know
if I'm famous but I have
in a sense we write definitely it's it's
it's not Fame like we remember growing
up we're like Fame meant everyone in the
country knows who you are and yeah I'm
down the street but like Jack sobic if
you walk down the street people are
gonna know who you are people will call
dude
I have 25 thousand followers I was
walking down the street the other day
and somebody drove by and yelled out
their car window Jack I did I did
actually just get recognized on the
train this morning ya know I mean it
happens to me
so like I know it happens to you plus
not only does it do you have like name
or face recognition like half of mass
media but you know people follow you
they've written articles about you like
they're paying attention I mean the
people are paying attention it's Fame
no kind of Fame and it's not I'm not
saying this is like we're like bragging
or anything but right it's in the
context of you saying nobody tells you
how to handle something like this nobody
tells you how to go from quote nobody to
somebody's that is that how you feel do
you feel like you went from a nobody to
a some somebody not diminishing your
prior you know self but like well my
prior self was behind the curtain right
I was I was in shadow I was the
cloak-and-dagger world you know I
couldn't be public right
you know and when I was in the
intelligence community and now suddenly
you're sort of thrust into this national
limelight warts and all and you know
you're you're held to account for every
single random thing you ever tweeted in
your life or posted and I can't imagine
what that must be like yeah I know and I
know you know and and you can turn
around and say well hold on wait you
know this was you know I was being
sarcastic when I said this said this
wasn't meant to take it seriously what
do you do and they don't ask you right
especially you know there's no context
and especially in this day and age where
if you're someone who's you know on the
pro-trump side there's a all the all the
incentive in the world that the media
has to demonize you to dehumanize you to
label eyes you and to you know create
this sort of like it's kind of like
being a zoo animal in some cases you
feel like when you're talking to some of
these people why did you do this and we
are now observing the natural Powe sobic
in his habitat you know and say no guys
you can you can talk to me like I'm on
the level
who
claims this but no no no really like I'm
just talking he's addressing us directly
he's resting is directly look at the
look in his eyes almost see sent in
thought that almost almost all I get
carried away well because because right
because and this this you know not to
get political but this is because they
have this this ideology of evolved
heightened progressivism and that and
because they view as their political
ideology as a form of evolution correct
and that if you are not at their level
of evolution then you're not it's it's
because you're resistant to it or you're
just not able to achieve the ascension
that they a lesser being right you're a
lesser right so you're lesser being yeah
yeah it's kind of like Aldous Huxley
right there's the you knows the theta
plus majors and then there's like the
savages so you're you're you're a savage
right which is true my keys well you
know a noble savage no absolutely a
scholar and a gentleman no a king and a
warrior a poet I don't know a media star
a social media star so basically if
Marcus Aurelius was in 29 G now Orson
Welles was involved so you go from quote
being a nobody to being somebody you you
begin to wield real power right when
when was the first time that you
realized that you had actual power in
your fingertips and your thumbs in the
phone and the Twitter app what was the
first time where and good or bad or on
purpose or by accident when it was the
first time you realize that what you had
created and developed actually had real
world power that could be utilized
probably it would be with the the
aspects and I read about this in my
first book citizens for Trump which I
named after the organization the aspects
of watching how we could come up with a
hashtag when I seen we I mean just you
know Trump supporters on the Internet in
general come up with a hashtag as a joke
as a meme right that hashtag goes to
number one trending on Twitter and then
candidates are being asked about that on
the campaign trail
about something that we had come up with
as a joke or something that we thought
was funny right and now now suddenly it
becomes a narrative you know probably
one of the the biggest ones was
Hillary's health where you know we were
attacked for it we were mocked for it
and then you eventually proven right or
you know about these new questions about
Hillary's health right and it was it was
kind of amazing to realize that oh and
then of course Trump winning right would
trump actually winning the election sort
of being this this huge underdog you
putting that feather in your cap
well uh put that feather in my cap in
the sense that we the work that we did
and I had so many people from the party
so many people from the community come
out to me afterwards especially in
Pennsylvania and say you made it okay
for me to realize I could like Trump you
made it no your example and the way that
you were just relentless in in your
support your advocacy and and you know
stalwart in your beliefs made me realize
that if this guy can be out there
publicly and taking the slings the
arrows the you know the shots across the
bow from everywhere right the right the
left the middle and and standing at
ground they said if this guy can do it
then I can do it and I think there was a
really big Trump
you know silent majority kind of thing I
think that's why his poll numbers were
so depressed that you may not say it
publicly but you know you gotta vote for
him you know vote for her go for it
maybe but in in the clip in that booth
in that in that in that voting booth in
a lot of those states that's they went
with out of the way they went and you
know Andrew Breitbart used to talk about
that he used to say you know walk
towards the fire and if you walk towards
the fire people will see you doing that
and they'll join you
hmm interesting so there were a couple
events that came to mind I started
thinking a couple of ideas that came to
mind as you're talking which is you go
from being like a social media hobbyist
to being a social media professional but
you know even though you got the job
rabble and whatnot the line of you going
from social media hobbyists just social
media professional wasn't exactly like a
stark change for you right like for
example if you're a nobody you go to
college you go to journalism school you
come out of school you go work at
BuzzFeed you start a Twitter account you
get verified like boom that account is
your like professional like social media
account and everything you know
theoretically that you put out on that
account you're saying should be judged
professionally should be part of my sort
of Canon you know my history my
political views etc and so there's a
very stark dividing line between your
private life and fun and recreation and
and whimsy and then public life
professionalism and seriousness but for
you there was sort of like a grey and
I'm for me too and I'm still dealing
with some of the ramifications of it is
there's like a great transition area
right it's like yeah exactly
it's like I was saying roasting because
I was kidding because we was just
talking to my friends because it was
just for fun
this isn't like I didn't write a book
about it I didn't like research all this
so like do you write and do you have
that feeling
every day every single day especially
when somebody brings up something that
from that period of my Twitter account
that I never meant for anyone to take
seriously because I was talking about
with my friends or interacting with for
people who don't understand internet
culture meme culture or just you know
private conversations in a sentence
right in jokes that to then try to take
that and dissect that and piece that
apart without actually talking to any of
the people that are involved it's it's
impossible it's frankly just impossible
for someone to walk in as a separate
entity and try to understand what's
going on and and that's I think I think
a lot of Russia gate actually had to do
with that because he had these people
who thought there was some sort of Tom
Clancy novel going on with really when
really it's just you know kind of like
normal normal business between you know
Don jr. and a couple of guys right right
right
was there a was there a moment that you
can look back on were you like
wouldn't have done that I wish I
wouldn't have said that or I wish that
came out differently where you're being
judged on the sort of blue check
professional capacity whereas you know
this was your prior behavior fun fun
Jack behavior or whatever is there
anything that stands out to you so you
know I didn't know you're getting at but
I don't know I don't know what I'm
getting I think and I think essentially
that the biggest and I will say this my
biggest regret in terms of social media
and getting into the conservative media
space because they didn't intend to
write alright this it was an organic
growth that happened over time right so
my biggest regret and then and also my
biggest piece of advice that I could
give to people is that if they are
interested in getting into this space is
find your image first and find your tone
first and find your your brand first and
and make that be a decision right and
then so everything that you then do goes
back to reinforce your brand and to at
least set your initial brand to be what
you want it to be so don't give people
the opportunity to brand you as
something else and if you do that and
you maintain everything around that
initial brand and here's the problem
right the problem is is that we live in
this world where you could be somebody
who's who is on a a private account who
is you know not intending to be
professional but the media it will Doc's
you they will target you they will smear
you a little slander you they won't even
ask you a question right and even if
you're a private person and they'll take
everything you say in the worst possible
light and they will will twist
things that you have said and that's
sort of the Media Matters formula
twisting something progress yeah oh yeah
I think progress is found about John
Podesta so you know take something that
you've said and twist it into this
funhouse version of the opposite of what
you intended to say right I've had
personal
with that for sure also experiences
around what you're saying around
branding and now I think a year or two
ago me would gag at the notion of social
media branding but you know I think that
we've all kind of can accept to these
days that social media you can take an
approach on social media that requires
branding and requires brand management
and brand care and and forethought and
for someone like me and someone like you
who's social media experiences were
deeply personal initially and not around
a certain brand idea or brand concept
there's a lot of risk involved in that
man and it's like which is you know it's
interesting to think is because
initially right when I did my Game of
Thrones thing that was a brand that was
all thought out prior to because I was I
was doing a character right right and so
that there was a specific voice there
was angry yeah he's always screaming
he's always loud that's that's me doing
a characterize versus me just joking
around on the internet as myself right
and so understanding that you kind of
have to come to social media in that
same vein and even if you're someone who
thinks well I don't I don't roleplay I
don't do characters I'm very
professional well guess what like your
version of your whatever your personal
perspective of what a professional is
and what a professional should do that's
still a character because you're not
just quote-unquote being yourself right
so that you're still playing a character
still playing a role and this is why
personally I think that my Twitter
account at least now has been able to
take off so much and be so successful is
because I've learned to become a self
actualized character in the sense where
I am myself yes I can connect
emotionally with my fans I try to engage
be as accessible and engaged as much as
I can you know with that many followers
but you know I do a lot of AMAs I do a
lot of hey guys what do you think about
this I don't know what my take is what
your you know what's your opinion and in
doing so you can be yourself more than
than this character but at the same time
you want to maintain who you are and let
that shine forward
before the other side can kind of take
things out of context and decide who you
are you know I remember early Mike's
turn abouts and I have known each other
holy cow 2019 damn near ten years now
and I remember when his Twitter account
was first taking off and even I would
read it and I'd be like what do you talk
about you talking about me who are you
talking about what is this what's going
on here and he'd be like dude no no it's
it's performance art right and it took
me a couple of years to even realize
what that really meant I mean it really
is performance art and now it's it's if
it's kayfabe if you know like you're
wrestling yeah it's kayfabe right and
now I have you know I'm divorced and I
know that my I know that my ex-wife
exclave and some of her friends they
follow my Twitter account all the time
so like I'll get messages later like oh
I can't believe you said that on Twitter
I'm like it's all true it's all real but
it's also not exactly it's not exactly
real life - it's like I would never just
sit in front of a room full of people
and just sort of act and talk that way
it's a very specific thing that happens
on social media right and and I I think
it's unfair to try to reduce someone to
it tweet yeah write that I'm gonna read
it though you tweeted this thing and I'm
gonna reduce you to it to eat that
that's not a person that's that's a
tweet that's a thought Twitter is the
it'd you know in many ways right and
that's that's a part of someone it's a
part of thought but it's it's not a
totality and it can't be and hopefully
at some point we'll you know as a
society understand that our social media
is an extension of us but it's not all
of us right exactly
I I am as authentic as I can be on
social media I think it's part of the
attraction that people find to my
account and to my storytelling it's all
100% authentic and true but it's curated
it's like you just sometimes you just
wouldn't say things in that manner or at
that time or for different purposes and
you can't judge a human being based on
their Twitter account which is what the
world has come to at this point now I've
always wondered you know because I've
had the experience of being profiled a
few times by but
on the left done by people on the right
and the one thing that journalists on
the left they always say to me after
meeting me in person or at least talking
me on the phone for the first time they
say well you were so much more charming
than I thought you were going to be oh
you were you were so different than I
thought you were and I'd love to I don't
even know how you would do this but I'd
love to know what voice they read my
tweets in in their mind prior to knowing
me right you know do you think I'm
screaming do you think I'm I'm I'm angry
all the time you know because like guy
I'm in on the joke guys or anything
right I everything this is
tongue-in-cheek you know 100% you know
everything I tweet it comes with a
little bit of a smirk a little bit of a
wink that's that's the that that's me
I'm because that's me and real life too
and yeah but obviously there's they're
serious moments and you could be serious
as well but you know to think that you
know I would would just say all these
things and be so incredibly serious and
staunch about it all the time no at all
yeah and it's also just projection by
the people who are reading precisely
yeah they want that to be like the
defining moment of your whole entire
life and the true single one definition
of who you are as a human being when I
think people that aren't experienced on
social media as creators they don't
understand that like in order to get
engagement on social media a lot of
times you have to you have to try 10
different things and though it's funny
it's not so for things hit you're like
okay now we'll go with those really
quick anecdote that just happened so I
happen to meet somebody and I was at
turning-point the young Jewish
leadership summit earlier this week
great great event really good speakers
having to meet someone on the side
talking to him and you know they knew I
was through Twitter and had never met me
before but we sit down reven coffee and
I say so what you know are you on are
you on Twitter then they say oh yeah and
I was happened to look at his account
and I could see that he's been on since
like 2013 2012 was a huge you know World
of Warcraft person you know really into
gaming and all of a sudden it just it
just clicked for me and so
like my my you know normal sort of like
wall kind of came down and said oh say
you get like you you get what Twitter is
because you've been on the platform for
this many years so you guys oh oh yeah
yeah yeah and you know and so the level
of our conversation rose to a new height
because we both realized that we could
teat we were talking to someone who is
sort of you know of the same group who
had the same experience we knew that
it's it's Twitter it's not real life so
it was really interesting to get to know
that person who just who can talk
Twitter and also who understood what
Twitter was like before 2016 right
totally changed you know and I don't
even know I mean I only got on 2015 yeah
so it was already kind of it was just it
was little it was like right before it
all start you got that used to 2015 was
like the start of the culture war yeah
right this the culture that gamergate I
guess with the beginning I wasn't I had
nothing to do with that but that was
weird sort of where it started bubbling
up and then 2015 the culture were
exploded across the entire platform
right then 20 then in the middle of 2015
is on Trump you know comes down the
escalator and it goes on from there
right right so prior to that I mean
Twitter was just like I mean it was just
non-stop comedy it was non-stop messing
with people post funny memes joke around
you know there's this one firewall tweet
somewhere around there or someone goes
you know I I can get banned for if you
know just saying hi to my friends but
you know back in 2011 somebody taught me
how to make crack in my microwave buns
right you know I mean that's it that's a
interesting phenomenon that has taken
place Trump's candidacy and presidency
certainly changed social media forever
because Twitter was so and social media
was so ubiquitous to his to his rise
victory yeah part of the whole
experience social media doesn't always
bring positive things sometimes brings
negative things negative experiences and
sometimes you have to go out into the
real world and try to figure things out
for yourself we were talking about this
before we started recording and you were
starting to tell me about the time that
you actually went to comet pizza for
dinner now that's a calm that's a
confluence of the real world social
media
News fake news politics all of that sort
of coming together so tell me tell me
about that why did you go what happened
and what happened afterwards absolutely
so I had heard about this training
hashtag right there was a hashtag that
was trending with regards to this
restaurant and I had it was sort of
towards the end of the election and
quite frankly at the time I had no extra
time to care about it or understand it
or learn about what it was because I had
an election to win
and that was my focus I was very mission
focused and I remember a guy I knew at
the time and I'll talk to anymore had I
had said hey you gotta check this out
you gotta check this out um and I think
this is weird I have no time for checks
what out what out the the the hash tag
and it went back to some emails and the
wiki leaks regarding John Podesta and
somehow there was a linkage that brought
it back to this restaurant and I just
sort of blew him off and said look I
have no time to get into this right now
do you know where the linkage came
between comma pizza and the pizza gate
hash tag at this point yeah but at the
time no bro what was it it had to go
with a certain reading of John Podesta Z
mails that suggested that there was a a
secret code Oh being being used between
himself and a group of people which
centered around this essentially this
restaurant right and so and that's just
because they like frequented this
restaurant or like I've been to comma
pizza like it's by my house my kids have
been there at take my kids yeah there
was like a fundraiser here I've had a
great pizza there with like this goat
sausage and goat cheese or lamb sausage
and goat cheese
oh wow it was amazing but so it's all in
the email so there's a linkage and do
you know where the link it like who made
the linkage between the pizza place and
then whatever code does this come out of
4chan or where did this come from it was
a 4chan thing yeah I was a fortunate
thing got it so you decided your eyes go
down the sofa so afterwards right so
afterwards after when after day
afterwards after the election a couple
you know
couple weeks go by and people are still
talking about this thing and so I was
already doing these so I use an app a
lot called periscope I still use it and
whenever I go around DC whenever I'm at
something or an event I'm at a concert
we're from do and I throw periscope and
I say you know here's where I am here's
what I'm doing I try to be entertaining
and try to explain what's going on to
people and I had a basic understanding
of what people thought about this
restaurant and I thought well this is
ridiculous you guys think that this is
some kind of like it's I think to me it
seemed like cuz I'm from Philadelphia
right and it seemed like one of those
places that sort of just it's it's kind
of like the art scene you know type of
place where yeah they it might seem
weird if again if you're not part of
that that circle if you're not part of
that that scene you may not understand
it but to me it just seemed like well I
would say it was like like a South
Street Philadelphia kind of kind of
restaurant and so I said well you know
would be funny why don't we just go down
there for dinner some night and and show
people that it's you know just a regular
pizza place right it's not a regular or
it's it's not involved in some you know
crazy thing and so we go there I go with
a friend of mine and I've just got you
know sort of a camera going in my pocket
I've just got the the periscope going to
my pocket as we walk in because I say
look I and in my mind what's gonna
happen is you know I can sort of plan
these things out I say well I'm gonna go
in I'm gonna order some food we're gonna
sit around we're gonna show people I
guess have some some games there some
like game room and then sit down order a
food and then leave and at the end we'll
say well guys I guess we were wrong just
guess guess the internet was wrong on
this one you know leave it at that so I
proceeded to sit down my friend he
orders a beer I don't drink
I ordered a garlic not a slice of pizza
by the time the garlic knot comes the
manager comes over and says you know we
would like to ask you to leave am i
doing something wrong he said well
you're you know you're you know you're
furthering this this you know narrative
that's out there about this place and I
looked at my said no no no I'm not
trying to do that right now I'm just
showing people why are you why are you
going live and it said because I just
always do that it's something I always
do it like some people take pictures of
their food I go live on periscope any
motions to this police officer that's in
the corner and says you need to ask this
guy to leave I said okay we're freezing
him service head look hey men no harm no
foul
debt that's your choice I completely
understand where you guys are coming
from I'm gonna go right so I leave it
was it was there like a conflict or was
the tensions raised or did you protest
or anything uh I mean it at first I said
well I might be asked to leave did I do
something wrong have I have I offended
someone have I yeah I was sitting there
about to eat my garlic knot you know and
he essentially it was this this live
stream and that the live stream was just
titled dinner at competes at right it's
no you know furtherance of any kind of
nigger hashtags on there
no okay and afterwards I get asked about
this by the the Washington Post they so
they read they reach out to the
Washington Post and get this story going
about it the comma pizza people yeah and
they claimed that I was in there like
harassing people and chasing children
around and none of which I'm you can
watch the video it's none of which I had
done right and they said that you know
we had to kick this guy out because of
what he was doing and all this and I
said I ordered food I think I was doing
everybody else was doing and then
Washington Post calls me and asked for
comment and the first thing I said was
look I think that what's being done to
this place you can go back and read the
article I think what's being done to
this place is the same thing that was
done with Iraq with WMDs and all these
other hoaxes that have gone on I think
it's a hoax that people are spreading
lies about this place and I thought that
by you know possibly you know go in
there with a friend and just showing
people that it was a regular place that
it would help to end that hoax sort of
debunk that hoax obviously it didn't
turn out the way I intended right so
that sort of was the narrative and that
ended right
two weeks later or so I think everybody
knows what happened after that there's
there's a shooting some guy at your
Madison Welch
drives up from North Carolina rushes in
screaming yelling takes a shot comes out
is arrested right terrible horrible
situation something that you obviously
don't want anything to happen with don't
know if you saw my video I've never been
able to find any evidence that this guy
had a twitter account so I don't know
how he would have seen my video but of
all people megyn kelly on December 15
2016 data I remember because it's my
birthday
goes on and claims that I radicalized
this guy to do what he did
doesn't ask me for a comment doesn't ask
me to come on to defend myself doesn't
even try to to get things from my
perspective that no actually it was the
opposite I was trying to debunk that so
that people like this wouldn't do things
like this to just show people that it
was a regular place where you could walk
in and order a meal and then leave and
she plays my video right with the sound
off and so she's putting words into my
mouth they put and this is Fox News
right so they put they put words into my
mouth
they put a lower third under there and
all of these things then she brings on
the owner who's you know repeats his
false story about me that I was
harassing people and chasing chill
chasing children and suddenly the the
world is is turning on people like me I
know there's people like me but turning
on me in this instance is saying why did
you do this why did why would you ever
do this and I'm I'm trying to kind of
scream into the ether that this is the
opposite of what I was doing and if
anything they said what about when you
said this I said guys that was those
satirical I'm making fun of the people
who think you know and actually one of
the organization's I work with an open
secret room I gave Hoffman they do
they've done a lot to expose child sex
abuse in Hollywood as well as another
industries they focus mainly in
Hollywood though
and one of the things I asked him one
says because we've worked together for
years now at this point I felt them
share stuff I've had him on my show at
one American news I said to him that you
know were you ever worried about working
with me because of this this narrative
that's out there and he said Chuck I
watched your video this was obvious what
you were trying to do and even with half
a brain would know you were making fun
of people who believed that and you were
just trying to sit down and have a
regular meal I said okay so so I'm
because they make you feel like you're
insane right they try to make you feel
like your own words don't match with
your feelings and your intentions and
that the things that you say don't
matter because what they think about you
matters and so that everything you say
and every piece of evidence that you can
provide is wrong somehow or is not to be
taken at face value because their
narrative is taken at face value so I
got been a victim of fake news I've been
a not the worst one that's ever happened
it's something that I have to fight it's
something that still you know people in
very bad faith bring up and try to tie
me to when which is something that a
situation that I really had nothing
against excuse me nothing to do with but
actually something that I was trying to
prevent and I think that people really
don't understand that because again they
don't understand internet culture they
understand meme culture that this is
something that I was hoping would not
happen and that I was hoping that I
would be able to put these accusations
to rest by showing the wide Internet
community that there was nothing to be
found here that yeah maybe you know John
Podesta is a a liberal and Hillary and
all this other stuff but this restaurant
has nothing do with it do you think that
you'll ever be able to grow past that
sort of scandal and how much time will
it take do you think you'll ever be able
to put in enough high quality not to say
anything else was low quality but
consistent professional use air quotes
quality material and output like writing
a couple of books and hosting an
interview show on that on a news network
and you know being of legitimate
communication special
you ever gonna be able to grow past that
in the eyes of some people well it
depends on the people right you know
there's always gonna be people who and
as I said they operate in bad faith
there's always gonna be people who say
you know I don't believe you I think
you're lying I I think you you believed
in all this stuff I think you did this
and at that point you're yeah
essentially you've got people who think
they can read minds you know they've got
people who think that they're they're
just projecting again what they think of
you onto you and so there will always be
people who are naysayers there always be
people who attack but those people by
and far have been getting smaller and
smaller and smaller and essentially I've
noticed that they've it's it's just
political at this point it's really just
political and I've since then and since
that time President I had States has
retreated me four times I've been
working was Apple media for a while and
I'm one American news and I think over
time when you create and continue that
consistent record of day in and day out
being on the grind and showing people
who you are and maintained again
maintaining that brand right that you
know having the family that I have and
showing them out there that when they
try to throw these these you know you're
a tin foil guy they try to throw the
stuff at you but when I'm showing people
on a daily basis Who I am and the work
that I'm doing it becomes very hard for
those smears to stick it becomes very
hard for those those attacks to land
those punches to land because it just it
creates a cognitive dissonance almost
for for the people saying and because
people can see with their own eyes Who I
am what I'm about the life that I live
the work that I do I'm very very very
open and transparent about Who I am and
when people tried to smear me and
slander me it doesn't stick as much
because of that openness and
transparency and you know it is
something that I think about though you
know what I be so transparent with
photos of my family if photos of my son
if it wasn't for this situation but I'll
never know I'll really never know what
it's like because in order for me to
maintain that there's no other way to do
it I've had to deal with some of the
same things where people paint you as
the opposite of what you are like people
have painted me as some sort of
advocate I don't even know what that
means like I'm running around telling
people that they're supposed to you know
rape other people I mean it's insane
I was you know I have been critical of
radical feminism and use satire and
irony to make them look as stupid as
possible and then people take your Sat
teracle comments and to it exactly rate
higher sarcasm irony you know those
things are never ascribed because again
we are lesser beings we are savages
right so you couldn't possibly know how
to use an intellectual tool such as
those so you must be taken at face value
right exactly you're just a literal
barbarian so our friend our friend Mike
Sarna bitch also has sort of obviously
experienced a lot of the same things and
he's told me in the past like yeah you
know just day by day just put more
ground between yourself and those things
those sort of malicious scandals and it
came out of nowhere and fabrications and
so you know eventually one day maybe
that'll just fade to the fade into the
background except for the people who
specifically only want to murder your
character and those people then are just
self selected and identified as like
your absolute chose they've chose you as
their enemies and so anybody with half a
brain and who's pays attention to your
work now and has ever met you personally
is never gonna you know ascribe any of
those silly things to you as some of
those writers and sort of bad faith
actors have out there but it does bring
up an interesting question which is do
you have different responsibilities as
your profile grows larger for example
when you're just trying to get
discovered in this cacophony out there
sometimes playing it straight is not the
way to discoverability you have to be
you have to be loud you have to be
obnoxious maybe you have to say crazy
things you have to create conflict maybe
where there was a conflict before you
know it's the performance art aspect we
were talking about but uh as your
platform grows and your and your power
grow and I don't mean that limo looks
this way I just mean your impact on
people do years.you does your
responsibility evolve as well too Jack
does Jack the sobic today I have a
different responsibility
then Angry Game of Thrones fan or even
nascent you know Jack P from 26 summer
2016 well it depends on what you want
out of your social media right it
depends on what you what you want under
that what I want out of life in the way
I approach it these days yes I do take
responsibility for everything that I
tweet since I've had that blue checkmark
the formulation we were talking about
before everything since then is
something I take full responsibility for
and I'm putting myself out there as this
this is me this is who I am
you know look at wheat is not the same
thing as a professional video that I'm
doing for one American news so
understand that yes I'm sarcastic I'm
still satirical I'm just I try to be
funny right I post memes but there is a
responsibility in terms of your your
impact on the world and that's why since
2017 actually June of 2017 one of the
biggest things that I've advocated for
is or advocated against I should say is
is political violence and it's taking a
stand on the side of peace and saying
that if we are ever going to sort of end
the culture wars and get back to a time
in our society where we can just talk to
each other and and the tribalism and the
sort of like just warfare that's going
on at least in the cyber space that
occasionally translates into the
physical space that we need to stand
against political violence of all
stripes doesn't matter what side you are
red blue green
you know white black etc that we should
all agree the political violence is
wrong when you look at things like the
Russia Gate shooting you look at this
guy traveled across half the country
right from came from Illinois to
Virginia waited for a month living in a
YMCA with like one pair of clothes
waiting for Steve Scalise and other
congressmen and Senators Jeff Flake was
there Rand Paul was there to open fire
at them with a you know with an SKS
rifle because he thought that they were
Russian operatives of some sort right so
right where's the responsibility for you
know MSNBC and Rachel Maddow or
the responsibility of them saying you
know we shouldn't have done as far as we
did on this we shouldn't have taken
these accusations at face value we
should have tried to mitigate or defuse
situations before it got to the point
where somebody actually thought that
because of our words that this these
these group of people you know
Republican congressman but American
congressman right you know regardless of
politics that they were somehow enemies
that needed to be taken out as as
assassinated right as James Hodgkinson
believed and that's why even even to
this day right now we held an event in
June of 2017 standing against racism
standing against violence standing up
for peace and saying that if you if you
want to agree to a basic set of rules
than the first thing you have to say is
political violence is wrong and I would
encourage everybody out there within
range my voice out there in in the
community and I probably tweeted about
once a week that that we need to be a
peaceful people that we cannot stand for
political violence this is why just last
week when DC and Tifa was posting
posters around Washington with Tucker
Carlson's home address on them with
Stephen Miller's home address on them
that I absolutely called this out I
raised this to Twitter and they actually
were Twitter actually did respond and
suspend an tyfa DC's Twitter account
because they were even posting their
address online and saying that you know
people should shut them down well if an
chief is saying shut them down and
you're posting the address then yeah
that's calling for that's incitement for
violence right essentially the with you
know the definition that I learned of in
in the military is if you're trying to
use violence to achieve political ends
and there's a word for that it's called
terrorism that's that that is the tactic
that you are attempting to use right
well I do appreciate that message I was
at that protest rally thing in in 2017
across the street from the White House
against political violence as somebody
who has experienced sort of it's not
physical violence but you know the the
network mob attacked the dock saying the
ban
getting fired the shaming all that to
exile I can totally appreciate you know
this idea that we need to not use
violence or network warfare even as an
equivalent to achieve political means it
did it did feel personally to me like a
terrorist attack like these people
swooped out of nowhere they tried to
ruin my life
and so I really do appreciate that
message and I think that that's a good
note for us to wrap up this this podcast
on it's been two hours of fantastic
material I really really truly
appreciate you talking to me and if four
guys members of the liminal order of our
men's community I'm going to we're gonna
have a little exclusive session right
afterwards but Jack where can people
find you what's the name of your book
that people can buy and how can they
best interact with you out there in the
world today yeah so I think everybody
knows I live on Twitter Jack Pacific jck
POS o bi e C rampant on my Instagram
game get my Instagram game on point now
so follow me there as well a lot less
politics there more pictures more
cultural stuff a lot of Game of Thrones
Marvel movies criticism that goes on
there
Star Wars of course is I would consider
myself a recovering store's fan and then
also of course if you have cable one
American news absolutely love the
network I love what we're doing I love
the fact that when you turn on one
American news you don't get screaming
you don't get shouting we don't do the
panels of outrage all the time what do
we do we sit and give people news
packages indigestible you know two to
three minute chunks so you're getting
about 15 stories an hour if you're
someone who cares about efficiency if
you care about your time and you don't
feel like just being outraged all the
time turn on what America News you will
get more stories more bang for your buck
in terms of time and you won't have that
emotional baggage that comes around with
any of the other three cable networks
that's that sounds fantastic
thank you again Jack also everybody out
there check out the my website Jack
Murphy live.com if you want to learn
about the liminal order go to Jack
Murphy live.com forward slash liminal -
order and check us out there get up on
the the waiting list the membership is
closed right now here in late June but
we will be opening up membership again
sometime in the next couple of months so
get on the wait list there's a lot of
guys in in liminal order right now are
already having such a great time and
really getting high value out of
everything in fact one of the high value
thinks that they're gonna get is a
little private one-on-one
question-and-answer session would Jack
Pacific right after this so again go to
Jack Murphy live check it out
Jack sobic thank you so very much we'd
be meaning to do this for a while and it
will divert it went super well and again
thank you thank you very much thanks Ben
all right all right I'll hit pause on
this and I'll cue up the questions and
then