[Music]
Stanislav Grof
is one of the world's most radical
psychiatrists an expert on psychedelic
therapy in the 1950s and 60s he
conducted thousands of psychedelic
sessions with patients he became
convinced that these experiences of what
he called none ordinary consciousness
could create deep lasting
transformations and also that these
non-ordinary states often happen
naturally but Western medicine had no
framework for understanding them when
the drugs were made illegal in the 1960s
he developed holotropic breathwork a
system of controlled breathing that
creates similar experiences how do you
summarize the worldview that you've come
to well basically what emerged out of it
was infinitely larger image of what the
human psyche is what the dimensions are
how far our consciousness can reach and
then also the nature of consciousness
and the relationship between
consciousness and matter consciousness
usually seen as a side product at the
epiphenomenon something that comes out
of the neurophysiological processes in
the brain and if I should sum up what I
have experienced myself over the years
and what I have seen others experience I
would end up somewhere in the realm of
the great spiritual philosophies of the
east probably somewhere between Hinduism
and Buddhism you know I love the
simplicity of Buddhism but I also loved
a the archetypal world the mythological
world of the of the Hindus and the
richness but it would not be it would
not be the Cartesian Newtonian worldview
you know materialistic science I mean
this that kind of worldview doesn't
survive
very much where we start doing this
inner exploration because that's not the
sort of language that's associated with
science
it's considered flaky or it's considered
unscientific no it it can happen only in
a culture that does not honor inner
states of consciousness which is really
primarily the industrial society since
the scientific so a scientific
revolution all the the ancient cultures
all the pre-industrial cultures native
cultures they all held non-ordinary
states in great reverence they spent a
lot of time developing very powerful and
safe ways of accessing them and this
became basis of their spiritual ritual
life they were using these states for
healing they were using these states for
as a source of inspiration sort of
artistic inspiration even for practical
purposes you know finding lots objects
or lots people or following the movement
of the game of the animals that they
were hunting and they had regular events
or either groups or the whole tribe
would actually go through and own
ordinances of consciousness so their
whole philosophy cosmology mythology was
based on the experiences from these from
these states now then what happened then
in the industrial scientific revolution
is that major discoveries were made that
were turned into technological
inventions being with the steam machine
and so on and it started radically
changing the world and then came kind of
a hubris they came intoxication with
what the what the reason can do I don't
know if you are aware of the fact that
for several years
not a dime was not a dime in Paris was
renamed the temple of Reason so suddenly
the reason is he was something that the
modern human humanity was very proud of
and everything that was not rational was
relegated into sort of an area that felt
like embarrassing leftovers from the
childhood of humanity primitive magical
thinking and I think what happened here
that the the baby was kind of thrown out
was the bathwater
because not everything that's not
rational is irrational you see there
also states which are translational the
Mystics are not irrational they had
experiences that are not normally
available and they had to integrate the
insights into their worldview they have
no problems with everyday reality you
know it doesn't take a lot of brain to
function in everyday reality but they
have something extra like when America
was discovered
you know Europeans had to expand their
worldview they had to integrate the
observations from this new territory
the day before didn't know about and so
something similar with the Mystics and
we are now with transfers in psychology
new paradigm we are recognizing what
error that was to just dismiss that
whole area and focus just on reason and
I think we're paying a big big toll you
know in terms of how we are destroying
the world we lost really vital viable
spirituality experience with
spirituality hmm speaking from my
personal perspective I've had I've done
a lot of inner work a lot of meditations
I've done psychedelics quite a lot when
I was at university and on two occasions
I've had what I experienced as
incredibly deep spiritual states and
when I was in that altered state it
almost felt like I was making contact
with other other consciousnesses or the
collective unconscious surrounded by
synchronicities and but I also found
that a very difficult experience because
in that state it became really difficult
to tell the
between meaningful synchronicities and
ones that I was creating in my mind does
that sound familiar as an experience
well in my late wife Christina and
myself we have done quite a bit of work
with psychedelics and then we developed
what we call
holotropic breathwork were very powerful
States very similar to psychedelics can
be induced by something so simple as
faster breathing evocative music certain
kind of bodywork and a very very clear
implication of that work was that
current psychiatrist is painfully
superficial painfully limited what is
seen as the psyche is just barely
scratches the surface the Freudian the
postnatal biography and the individual
unconscious no Freud was very proud and
he was discovering the unconsciousness
is what we thought the psyche was it's
just the top of the iceberg or the tip
of the iceberg and now the rest of the
psyche is really hidden and this is what
now psychoanalysis is discovering if you
now would go to what happens in these
non-ordinary states of consciousness you
would have to change it and you would
have to say anything that traditional
psychoanalysis discoveries at the tip of
the iceberg and there's an enormous part
that remained hidden to classical
psychoanalysis they were sort of some of
the renegades you know Otto rank open it
there is a record of birth and then
young enormous opening into the
collective unconscious both historical
and and archetypal mythological so in
these states whether they are induced by
breathing by in psychedelics or whether
it happens spontaneously they will take
into this into these areas you can
relive your birth
you can relieve some kind of a trauma
that you had already prenatally you can
have experiences
seem to be coming from other cultures
other other centuries sometimes with a
sense of really convincing personal
remembering like the job we deserve a
key is not the first time this is
happening to me I once was that person
and that can take you into the
archetypal world we are meeting details
from different cultures cultures that
you have never studied this was great
youngster I said and this could be this
has a dark side and so there are demonic
archetypes that you can encounter and
they are very you know blissful
incredibly ecstatic kind of states that
can come everything had a much deeper
meaning than what was actually going on
there was a deep symbolic realm that I
was tapping into and it was very hard to
navigate but it felt incredibly like the
most vivid experience I've ever had
does that is that a familiar story yeah
so the problem is really with psychiatry
the psychiatry has a narrow
non-functional model so our observations
show that there's a significant subgroup
of these non-ordinary states of
consciousness that happen spontaneously
which are actually healing attempts of
the organisms that are crisis of
spiritual opening and they're mistaken
for for pathology because the
experiences go way beyond the model the
biographical model which is being being
used so when a psychiatrist with
traditional training too has to work
with somebody who is in spiritual
emergency somebody who is reaching into
these other areas it's like you know a
blind trying to lead somebody who is
sort of seeing its problems you know
with seeing through one eye or something
like that does it sound like a spiritual
emergency the one that I just described
to you
well we wrote we wrote
of books about spiritual mergency one
was our own book which was called the
stormy search for the south and then the
other one was a compendium we collected
papers of other people who sort of
presented different aspects of the same
kind of idea
beginning with the classical paper of
Robert Assad Jolie crisis of spiritual
open ink and then John parish work was a
Jungian analyst who was working with
so-called psychotic patients without
tranquilizers allowing them to go
through whatever they went through and
using the Jungian maps to to process
those experiences there were there were
papers by Ramdas the former written
Richard Alpert who did the early
psychedelic researches was fired from
from Harvard jack Kornfield a great leap
asana Buddhist teachers and Armstrong it
was a great psychic and she was
describing the crisis that she was going
through when her a real psychic gift was
opening so that's called spiritual
emergency and then Cristina 1980 started
spiritual emergency network where we a
collection of people who were capable of
supporting these states in such a way
that that approach use the healing the
transformative I believe evolutionary
and also heuristic potential HEU are
when you work with these states you see
an experience things that current
psychiatry simply cannot explain the
model is it's really too narrow too
superficial but you believe these things
are real that they are really existing a
lot of these experiences are are
subjectively real what do you think they
are sometimes objectively real as well a
lot of my effort was to actually show
that many of them are what I would say
ontologically real and it starts with
birth were according to current
psychiatry you're not supposed to
remember anything from birth it's
actually a strange strange belief that
there is no consciousness in births or
even in newborns as I don't know several
months ago I think there was a article
British scientists show that newborns
can experience pain the next thing we'll
hear scientists show that dogs can
experience pain so the belief that
there's no no consciousness no memory of
anything that that precedes at the
moment of birth and the reason that's
given for this is that they the cortex
of the newborn is not fully myelin asti
the protective fetish sheets myelin
sheets are not not completely finished
now it's amazing the same argument is
not used for the importance of Nursing
something that happens immediately after
birth suddenly unmanned eyes the brain
can record subtleties of Nursing and the
best impact on the whole life of the
mother and the child child psychiatrists
and obstetricians recognized even
bonding which is the how important is
the look into the eyes between the fetus
and I mean the newborn and and the
mother and at the same time denial
the tears of any relevance what happens
like during hours of potentially
life-threatening situation adverse so
this this work with holotropic states
showed that there is a powerful record
of births powerful record of the
prenatal State and there is a powerful
collective unconscious archetypal
historical karmic and so on if I if I
feel like if I had gone
to a Western psychotherapist at the time
or western psychiatrist in particular
they would have I would have got a
diagnosis of some sort but you see
basically because we have that narrow
model if you start having experiences
that have to do with birth
psycho-spiritual death rebirth and so on
or or if you have experiences of some
archetypal beings or even past life
experiences the idea would be that some
kind of pathological process stepped in
and created these experiences that are
not they are not sort of legitimate
aspects of the human psyche they are
sort of some kind of alien Enclave which
is bizarre belief system I mean if
anybody experienced what that looks like
when you when you have archetypal
experiences that would have been some
pathological process as a beauty there's
an artistry in that that the
pathological process cannot create if
your pathological process in the brain
it's going to disturb your intellectual
faculties it's going to it might cause
this you know disorientation in time and
space it will give you amnesia you will
not remember some things but will not
sort of make you experience Shiva
Nataraja or take you to the Cimmerian
underworld you know so this is just a
very unconvincing thinking in psychiatry
in it that we somehow board and we
perpetuate it's not tenable anymore so
you think it's a misdiagnosis that a lot
of these people are misdiagnosed yes we
don't have a category mystical
experience spiritual experience so every
experience of this kind would be seen as
pathology of one kind of another and the
approach is you know put people on
tranquilizers or some other medication
if it's intense hospitalized then put
put diagnosis on them
diagnosis which doesn't really mean
anything
this psychosis that where we can find
something organic these are organic
psychos those are medical problems and
we can find something in on the x-rays
or in the cerebral spinal fluid or in
the blood and so on we can really make a
medical diagnosis but there's a large
category of these so called psychosis
which we call endogenous or functional
now if you know something about medicine
you know what this means if somebody has
epileptic seizures after a trauma we
call it post-traumatic epilepsy
if somebody starts having seizures and
we don't find the reason we don't say we
don't have a clue we give it a name
idiopathic epilepsy or you know
functional or whatever if you say
endogenous psychosis it just doesn't
mean anything it means that the person
has experiences and behaviors that your
model doesn't explain and that term
literally means generated from within
but we sort of present it's endogenous
psychosis as if it was anything behind
it it's a tautology yeah so this is just
a large category of states that just
because the current model doesn't
include those experiences that are
coming up then it's seen as product of
pathology but there's really no medical
documentation we don't find anything in
the cerebrospinal fluid you don't find
anything in in blood there's nothing to
to support the idea that this is a real
diagnosis if you have diagnosis in
somatic medicine it means something you
know you have to have something related
to etiology why why this is happening
it has reflection for what's called
pathogenesis how
that cause symptoms developed it has to
have some kind of prognostic value and
also guide you for some specific form of
therapy if you have anemia you have to
make a diagnosis what kind of anemia
will it respond to iron ore it respond
to
vitamin b12 transfusions or whatever if
you have infection you have to diagnose
what kind of infection because different
infections have to be treated
differently if you say endogenous
psychosis you know there anything from
use like of in the past insulin comas
electroshocks to people trying to do
psychotherapy so it doesn't with the
psychosis it doesn't really commit you
to do any specific treatment when you
have that experience that the most
general framework is that the Western
industrial civilization consider these
things to be crazy so you don't have
kind of any conceptual framework that
would suggest that maybe this is
something different you you know that
the medical profession the scientists
they know you know this is we have the
the inflation of sort of a you know
appreciation of anybody who was involved
in in science like science got people to
the moon and developed lasers and
computers and if you come there the
psychiatrist they think you have the
same kind of you know accurate sort of
solid understanding so you can have a
paradigm that gets you to the moon and
at the same time it's very lousy when
it's applied to to psychiatry but there
is a there's a magic about you you sit
there as a representative of a
profession that is supposed to know and
they have a certain position about
psychotics of the psychotic state so you
know experts label you as crazy so who
are you to challenge it even if you
yourself seem there's some value in the
okay so that's that's an important thing
the other thing yes you even if it's
germane content of the of the psyche it
can get scary I mean there are the the
archetypal beings which are very very
scary dark sort of mythological beings
or it takes you into the underworld and
so on
and you believe you can actually make
contact with those in altered states
yeah plus plus you know they're my
sources of real fear I mean if you are
reliving something that was the birth of
40 hours when you died in the birth
canal and you had to be resuscitated
there is a pocket of enormous anxiety so
when it starts surfacing you know you
will you will get very scared now
another thing you can be you can connect
to the prenatal state and there was
heavy toxicity your mother or there even
cases where the repeated attempts at
abortion you know some some toxic
substances being introduced into into
the mother's body so if you hit if you
hit that kind of memory you will
probably paranoid like you wouldn't
believe a lot of the so-called psychotic
patients to deal with poisons they say
their neighbor sort of is digging
tunnels getting into their house
somebody poisoned the food in there so
they feel intoxicated they feel they
feel poisoned and so on and then you
know who is doing this they have no
conceptual framework what is happening
and so there's a tendency to project it
that is you know what is the dangerous
situation that it's coming from and so
on so there are good reasons for
paranoia if you want the other thing
that can happen frequently that people
start experiences what you called
synchronicity the unbelievable sort of
coincidences and they seem to be
focusing on you
and this is known in psychiatry but it's
dismissed it's called delusion of
reference we don't we know there are no
meaningful coincidences related to you
so you are making it up but anybody who
studies these synchronicities who as the
objective evidence has to say this is
way beyond statistical probability I
have I wrote a book when the impossible
happens which is kind of biographical
where I describe things that happen to
me that I've seen that current science
would consider absolutely absolutely
impossible would could not happen in our
universe and these unbelievable
synchronicities are very much like that
for somebody they can seem to be
positive things are lining up that the
universe is sort of you know caring
about them and it's guiding them and
sometimes it seems that the the coin set
is a kind of closing closing in and you
feel sort of surrounded and suddenly it
starts making sense that you in some
sense persecuted and so on this this is
very similar my experience in those
altered states is that the
synchronicities come thick and fast and
in a way stop being remarkable you you
get used to the fact that the right
person comes along at the right time or
the right things happens at the right
time but that in my experience can be
very can be quite overwhelming and can
be quite destabilizing because you can
start seeing meaning maybe when there
isn't like you get so used to
coincidences that you take everything as
a synchronicity when maybe it isn't it's
quite easy to lose my experience it's
very hot easy to lose one's bearings in
that space
well this is something this was the
discovery of Jung who became aware of
the fact that they are very very unusual
coincidences that can happen in life and
some of them seem to be just coincident
it's in the external world but then he
noticed there's different kind of
coincidence where the connection is
between an intra psychic phenomenon like
a dream or a vision and something that's
happened in what we call objective
reality that if the psyche gets into a
plane full interaction with the physical
world that should not be happening in
the Cartesian Newtonian well there
should be the objective world
and it is the psyche they should not
sort of you know get into playful
interaction and but it is exactly what
is happening and so he was observing it
actually for 20 years before he dared to
present it to the scientific community
because it violates that the basic
principle in science which is linear
causality everything should have a cause
and and an effect and suddenly you find
something that you cannot explain in
terms of linear causality in in the
horizontal sense and that in itself
points to there being more going on that
the consciousness itself has some
interaction or creative power in itself
well you see what happened is that he
startled he was being you know
surrounded by the kind of professional
community obviously it was part of it
him questioning his own sanity where
these things were happening so yeah and
was aware of what a bomb it is for the
scientific community took 20 years
collecting this is before he went out
with it and actually he got tremendous
support from Albert Einstein who visited
had they had lunch and he told Einstein
and I started carry on studied it
because it is now emerging in modern
physics I also got reinforcements from
Vogue and Paul II who was somebody who
was very much involved in the
development of quantum physics and he
was initially Young's patient and then
they became became friends and he also
encouraged him said this is now what's
coming out from physics and so there are
now experiments you know with welds
theorem and the showing that the
universe is basically non-local that
that this distance is you know don't
have that kind of absolute value that we
attributed and I can synchronistic
things can happen where things are
connected over enormous distances and so
on so this is now accepted in in modern
physics so that whole concept of
delusion of reference and so on has been
transcended I have in the book when the
impossible happens maybe one third of it
is about amazing synchronicities that
that happened and so you see if we had a
psychiatry who describes this and it
would become part of general knowledge
and so on you would be in a better
position when the synchronicities start
happening you would know that this is a
phenomenon the synchronicities increase
when you are in a non-ordinary states of
consciousness incident increases and so
on you could still get scared but you
would have something to you know to work
with the other thing we would know that
if somebody is in a state of this kind
of activation of the unconscious the
person needs special place not a
psychiatric hospital a tranquilizer but
be in a safe environment to people who
know something about this ideally
experienced it themselves
and they can give them reassurance and
say this is fine you know a very
important part for example this latest
experience of death River
psycho-spiritual death rebirth when you
might feel you're dying so you need
somebody hold to hold your hand such
this is not real dying just go this is
this is part of a reverse process you
imagine like the 60s where it was
neither ourselves nor the young people
who were experimenting at no Norwich
where it's gonna take them you know
that's a scary stuff here it was bad
enough to discover new territories and
you know and people were moving to new
countries and they didn't know what they
were finding this is much scarier you
need maps you need some kind of
understanding and you still make
it's good but it helps and the kind of
experience that that that I had for
example do you think it's really
important to integrate or to understand
those I think it's enough if you if you
draw the message of it which is that
this is not just your ordinary nothing
special material universe that is it
this is a much more complex system were
you know consciousness and and cosmic
consciousness absolute consciousness
plays a very significant role in it
there is a script the hindus talk about
Leela you know this is a cosmic movie
it's not just something that happened by
bouncing atoms you know it's not the
universe that created itself by
development of matter in it because I
guess the message I get from your from
your books and your work is not only are
these experiences quite common but they
are very profound and in some ways
essential for us to develop to evolve to
form a relationship with these
experiences would you say that's a bit
is very important in life yeah well
somebody who spelled it you know
obviously I tried but before me a young
the idea was that we should live our
life in such a way that you combine
behaviors which are and approaches and
strategies which are based on what we
see in the external world but spend some
significant time doing self self
exploration examination and we would be
tapping the wisdom which is in the
collective unconscious and connect with
what he called self which would be in
capital its capital s in English but if
the self is the big self different from
the ego and so you connect with it and
you find guidance from the inner
intelligence and we are using this as
basic principle in the work with
holotropic states what I call holotropic
states are States it's a very important
subgroup of non-ordinary states that
have this healing potential
transformative potential evolutionary
potential so when we work with these
states the essential principle there is
you mobilize inner healing self healing
intelligence and this is what Jung was
talking very much you know you it's not
the analyst that goes and figures it all
out and that's brilliant interpretations
and so on that wouldn't work because we
have any number of schools and each
school will tell you something different
about the same thing so there's no
unanimity among schools of psychotherapy
as to what are the most important
motivating forces in the psyche why
symptoms develop what they mean how you
interpret them and each of those schools
developed a different technique so if
you have a problem in the current
circumstances you can flip a coin you
choose a school and with each school
comes a different story but what's wrong
with you what you should do so this
basic principle with the whole topic
status if the experts cannot reach
agreement why don't you trust your own
healing intelligence your body can do it
why not the psyche your body can heal
itself what comes through very clearly
when almost every time I do a breath
session is I I just know I can see where
I'm going wrong in the world and what
like I feel like I'm tapping into my the
part of me that already knows what I'm
supposed to do what my mission is what
my what I need to do next and it just it
feels like a download from a from
somewhere else
yeah now what we see if you get into
this holotropic state which would be you
know the psychedelic states working with
breath but also in anthropology would be
shamanic work the kind of experiences
that the shamans have as part of the
initiatory cry
and that they use with their clients the
kind of experiences that the initiates
have in rites of passage in Aboriginal
culture the kind of experiences that the
initiates had in the ancient mysteries
of death and rebirth in Egypt analysis
in Sumer in in Mesoamerica and so on and
then also what I call technologies of
the sacred which were methods of
inducing these states developed in the
context of the great religions so let's
say Christian mystics that things like
essa cousin Jesus Prayer or the
Exercises of Ignatius of Loyola they
were using in monasteries fasting sleep
deprivation
you know extended prayers and so on in
Sufism you have you have the whirling or
you have various sort of chance the
seeker because he caressed and so on you
have you know Kabbalah and you have
Taoist ik you have different forms of
yoga different schools of Buddhism and
so on those are all designed to induce
these states that I call holotropic
there they lead to spiritual opening
they lead to healing transformation and
so on so the work with holotropic States
has very important implications it
functions the state function as a radar
which will find in your psyche and in
your body where there are problems which
would mean finds in your unconscious
material which has strong emotional
charge and which also is in a certain
position to the threshold of
consciousness is close so it's ready to
emerge today for processing there are
other things which are very important
but they still bear it very deep they
will it will take two sessions or three
sessions before they make it to the
position towards the threshold of
consciousness that I are ready to come
but you basically see this process as
self-healing
yeah and it is the opposite of what
psychiatry is becoming more and more
which is symptomatic control and it's
it's confused with therapies called
therapy
it's basically suppression of symptoms
that's not that's not therapy
psychiatry historically developed a
subspecialty of medicine so we tried to
use medical thinking interest finding
the right diagnosis which is very
difficult with those conditions which
are not biological in America we have
now diagnostic Statistical Manual number
five tremendous fights about what should
go how what it should be written like
and the clinicians basically constantly
complain that they cannot match what
they see in their patients so that
concept of diagnosis simply does not
apply to psychiatry unless these data
are organic so we need really a very
different you know very different
approach to this this symptomatic
treatment or limiting your approach to
suppression of symptoms would be very
bad medicine if you be you know don't
ask why it is there and go to the causes
to some ideological intervention it
would be like a person coming to the
hospital with fever and it's a fever and
what are we gonna do put him on ice see
no more temperatures you find this would
be very lousy medicine I mean you miss
some kind of infection that would kill
the person or some other condition so in
in medicine you use symptomatic
suppression in two situations one is if
you simultaneously do something causal
you really try to go for the for the
reason or if the if this currently is
not known if we considered incurable
then we can't do anything else but
work with the symptoms so to do nothing
else but suppress symptoms in psychiatry
is like treating these conditions as if
they were incurable this is nothing it's
nothing else we can do but suppress the
symptoms and it is very much supported
economically of course by the
pharmaceutical companies it says there
is a deep connection between the
psychiatric profession and the
pharmaceutical companies and they you
know they would not be interested in
developing something like psychedelics
something that you do once in a while do
you want something like Librium valium
you take four times a day for the next
20 years that's the interest of
pharmaceutical company to help people a
little but you know not not a whole lot
and how important as a culture do you
think it is for us to re-establish some
kind of access or some kind of
relationship with these kind of altered
states well I think it's very important
and you know all the ancient cultures
all the pre-industrial native cultures
they saw that this value in these
northern estates and they spent a lot of
time and energy developing safe and
powerful ways of healing now we sort of
poo-poo that we dismiss that when you
know then we became rational we're
scientists and so we have psychoanalysis
or or behaviorism and so on when I had
some psychedelic experiences and started
working with patients and saw the power
of it I apologized to the shamans what
we think about this is these sort of you
know savages just barely lit literally
and they do some kind of mumbo-jumbo
there I realize of the power of these
medicines I would compare it to I was in
psychoanalysis for seven years if I
would compare what what's happening with
those days with what happens in
psychoanalysis or the behavior
deconditioning it becomes like a joke I
mean that's a real
really powerful intervention in the
psyche and if it's done properly I mean
if you have a powerful tool you have to
be careful how you're using it it's not
something to play with you know it's
amazing that there were not more
casualties in places like Woodstock
where half a million people they brought
loads of it and we're ending it with
both hands they didn't know what they
were taking it's amazing that there were
not more casualties I mean people been
drinking there there would be more
casualties and all this when I see
people like people doing raves they
would take something in the open square
they they know they don't know what they
are taking they they know they're doing
something illegal the police can come
you know that's not a great set and
setting you don't expect
healing sort of miracles happen under
dr. Gupta's but I mean there is a way of
using it responsibly where it becomes
more powerful than anything we have
available in psychiatry and I hope that
we are returning to that real
renaissance now after 40 years where it
was practically impossible - this is a
fantastic segue into the last question
because I guess all of us who I've
studied a lot I've read all of your
books Richard tarnis Rupert Sheldrake
people like that who are sketching out
the problems with the worldview that we
have and also sketching out a possible
alternative and I guess we who are in
this world feel like a transformation
has to happen that there has to be a
change the world view we have that's
based on materialism and one based on
consciousness has to take over and I
guess every generation feels like
they're on that cusp that there are at
the moment when things will transform
and you've been part of this world for
quite a long time do you get a sense of
how long that might take for a
Copernican shift to happen again it you
don't have to very be very bright to
realize we are in trouble I mean this
humanity is in trouble we are in a
crisis and if we follow
of that trajectory we might not make it
I mean if you see the level of
industrial pollution of the air of the
water of the earth you know where
biological creatures is nothing that we
need more than clean water clean air and
soil where we grow our food no you know
no motives like economic profit
ideological religious military concerns
are more important than protecting the
life because we are biological entities
so it's insane you know to violate
somehow the environment in which we are
living we should have a constitution
that protects environment and protects
life you know something like violence
should be outlawed should not be
acceptable form of form of solving
problems and people who do some
significant inner work they get rid of
their own bad programs which would be
you know prenatal traumas trauma of
birth whatever happened in their
childhood and so on if you can clear
this you start seeing it I mean it's
it's not you know very complicated thing
what this planet should look like we
need to have renewable energy so that we
don't plunder fossil resources you know
limited limited for sale resources coal
or petroleum and turn it into pollution
this is a blind la I mean the weather is
going to take 20 or 50 years or 100
years this is this if we do it this is
going to be inhabitable planet
yeah gonna wipe ourselves and take a lot
of species with us there was a very
interesting which was showing if these
things really get bad what what was the
species that was best equipped to
survive they were the cockroaches and
insect insect more than
I think what hold house did Chronicle or
something like that
yes the question is we all feel do you
think that a shift is is imminent or do
you think you well you asked that
question how long you know it's very
difficult to say I believe that it's
probably the only hope it's a humanity
changes I mean violence and greed have
been the driving forces through you know
millennia and we are in a situation
where we cannot afford it anymore I mean
the weapons are too powerful now and we
have overpopulation and and we have the
the pollution happening so we have to
change into something else or we are not
going to make it terence mckenna's did
you know that the history of the silly
monkey is over we either change it to
something else or we are not going to
make it we have we have now powerful
weapons chemical nuclear biological and
then use it like with emotions that are
like from the Stone Age only where they
were using clubs stuff at stones they
did do much damage and even after the
big battles you know 50 years later
nature would recycle everything and you
could barely know that something was
there now this one accident in Chernobyl
you know this the radioactivity will be
around for hundreds and hundreds of
years
I don't know strontium half time and
2,500 years or something so I feel since
this is true insanity you know people
who live hopeful yeah people who have
past life experiences and spiritual
experiences you know they are okay in
this be the maniacs are those who are
spinning these kinds of these kinds of
scenarios you know nuclear confrontation
and stuff like that so you're asking am
i hopeful and moderately hopeful if it
were just based on what we see I would
probably be pretty you know pretty
pessimistic
but there seems to be things happening
on some our other level like for example
a lot of people are going through
powerful transformation without it
showing like what was showing in the 60s
people painting their cars psychedelic
colors and you know wearing long hair
and beards so that very very easily
identified identifiable as troublemakers
you know they were the ones who were
around the Capitol protesting against
the Vietnam War and so on today the the
transformation a lot of people are
involved in transformation but it's time
was much more skillful means as the
Buddhists call it you know and I think
it's our ultimately our only hope that
the people change and and true
spirituality comes into the planet we
have lost genuine experiential
spirituality we have religions but there
are more of a problem than solution you
know you have organized religions that
that unite a certain group of people who
are want to see think the same way and
worship the same way but it also divides
the world it's it's setting that group
against another we are Christians and
everybody should be a Christian so we
convert you or there is no place for you
you know we are Muslims you are infidels
so let's wipe you out Jews you know you
are you're going we Hindus you're 6 and
so on and the differences are enough to
kill not only between the Creed's but
inside you have here examples you know
what can conflict between Protestants
and Catholics in Ireland you have you
have the and this has been going on for
centuries then you have Sunnis and Shias
would be four different systems or the
same creed they would be killing each
other and destroying each other's
temples
Joseph Campbell used to say that a
useful deity should be transparent for
the transcendent which means it should
be pointing to the ultimate but not
being mistaken for the militant said if
you make an archetype if you make a
deity opaque you cannot see beyond that
then you have basically idolatry and
then you have the the danger that you
divide the world because there will be
people who would focus on that
particular archetypal domain and would
get into a hostile relationship so you
need a situation where you get through
the archetype to the source out of which
everything comes and this is something
that you find in mystical branches when
the organized religions get into
conflict and fights the Mystics they
don't have any problem the mystical
experiences are universal they are
all-encompassing everybody is included
they don't sort of alienate the world
and so I think what I believe we need
true spiritual revolution in which we
would give people means to have personal
experiences honored the spiritual quest
but would not have any kind of
investment in which form it ultimately
takes that sort of it become you know
truly global global religion rather than
being dividing thank you so much
[Music]
you
[Music]