[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome again to awakening from the
meaning crisis this is episode four so
last time we discussed the axial
revolution and in particular how it
moved into ancient Israel we talked
about the advent of the psycho
technology of time as cosmic history as
a narrative and which there is an open
future and in which your actions the
moral quality of your actions can
determine that future in which you
participate along with God in the
creation of that future this brings with
it the idea of progress moral progress
the increase in justice and this is how
we move from the less real world to the
more real world for the ancient
Israelites it's understood as a journey
through time and space historically we
talked about the kind of God that the
God of the Bible is how he is in fact
the god of this open future and
particularly he intervenes moments as of
moments of Kairos turning points where
he tries to bring people back on course
we talked about the sense of faith as
the sense of being on course to being
able to sense how history is flowing and
unfolding how you are participating in
that story how you are shaping it and
being shaped by it in a tightly
reciprocal manner and that sin is the
deviation from that and what is needed
is to wake us back up to bring us back
on course and we talked about how the
prophets represented that and they
represent increasingly that vision that
axial vision of the moral redemption of
history we then turned to look at how
the axial revolution was coming into
ancient Greece and in particular two
figures we looked at we're looking at
the figures of Pythagoras and Socrates
last time we talked about Pythagoras and
how he represents an exaptation of that
shamanic behavior of altering the state
of consciousness entering into something
like a soul flight but how for
Pythagoras
that had been allied with the psycho
technology that was being emphasized in
Greece rational argumentation the
discovery of rational patterns in the
world and Pythagoras of course is famous
for discovering that music can be
expressed mathematically he is at least
associated his school with things like
the Pythagorean theorem this idea that
we can enhance our capacity to pick up
on the real patterns in the world even
if those are not readily apparent to us
and by coming into a direct awareness of
those patterns through our rational
insight and faculties we can transform
ourselves and Pythagoras changes the
shamanic soul flight into a release a
freedom from imprisonment in this world
which he represented as being imprisoned
in the body and we fly free and so soul
flight has been turned into a radical
kind of self transcendence in which we
are liberating ourselves from the
illusory world as we more and more
conform to the rational patterns that
dictate the structure of reality the
other person who is going to figure and
in fact is figures even more largely in
the axial revolution in ancient Greece
is the figure of Socrates Socrates and
Pythagoras are going to be the two most
important influences on Plato and if you
were to put Western civilization on to
two feet the one foot is the Bible the
other foot is the works of Plato so
Socrates is a very unusual figure there
are as many interpretation of Socrates's
as there are of people like the Jesus
even in his time there were many
differents Socratic movements groups of
people who claim to be adherents and
disciples of Socrates he is an enigmatic
interesting provocative and maddeningly
frustrating figure to try and get clear
on so I want it understood that when I'm
talking about Socrates I'm talking in
about a particular interpretation that I
share with other people I think it can
be well argued for
as I said whether or not this was the
full historical Socrates it's very hard
to know and in some sense this isn't
that relevant because it's the Socrates
I'm going to talk about that has become
part of the cognitive and existential
grammar of the West so getting into the
figure of Socrates is kind of
interesting a good way to start is to
see how how provocative a person he was
is to do his biography so as many of you
probably know ancient Greece was a world
in which people believed they could
speak to the God through Oracle's the
Oracles were human or or otherwise
natural phenomena that represented how
the gods were speaking to humanity one
of the most important Oracle's is at
Delphi and I've been to Delphi if you
get a chance at some point in your life
go to Delphi it will really put this app
on your brain because the way the
landscape is organized really does have
a transformative impact on sort of your
consciousness and your sense of self and
your sense of place in the world
so the situation that the Wright the
site of Delphi is itself very
transformative what would happen is a
woman Pythia would sit in a cave or
something similar to it again became
always the caves like the association
with shamanism
remember that shamanism was associated
with cave art ritual practices taking
place in caves like in Pythagoras so
she's in a cave she's sitting on a
tripod there might be some intoxicating
gases in there she's eating perhaps
eucalyptus leaves she's probably going
into some kind of psychedelic trance
state that seems plausible and then what
happens is people would because that's
that's that is a cross-cultural thing we
find that people are thought to have
access to the gods by being able to
enter into altered states of
consciousness so what would happen is
people would come in they would bring
their questions they would pose
questions to Pythia she would then
speak on behalf of the gods and then
after speaking on behalf of the gods the
people around her would there would be
males who would interpret what she had
to say so the thing about being an
Oracle is if you want to stay in
business you don't want to give clear
answers right so if I come to an Oracle
and I ask a specific question I'd I
don't want to give a specific answer I
think there's a very good reason for
that I don't think that people actually
can foresee the future in any kind of
supernatural manner so typically if you
go to an Oracle and say should I marry
Cassandra you'll get an answer or
something like sometimes the spring
comes early or should I invest in this
project you'll get an answer like you
know sometimes the squirrels do not
gather too many nuts you don't know what
to make of this and it might provoke an
insight in you it might provoke a
reflection in you and whether or not the
events go one way or the other you can
often retrospectively reinterpret them
as having been consonant with the
Delphic Oracle so the Oracle seems to be
providing a foresight 'fl information
but usually of course it's not so what
happens is a bunch of Socrates's
friends he's already famous when we sort
of meet him in his biography a bunch of
Socrates's friends decided to go to the
Oracle and ask the Oracle a question
about Socrates so they make the trick to
Delphi and I in my mind I sort of
picture this almost like half jokingly
there they want to see what kind of
crazy answer they're going to get from
the Oracle about Socrates so they go all
the way up to the Oracle and then they
pose their question and the question
they pose is there any one wiser than
socrates and what they're looking for or
perhaps not what they're looking for
what they're expecting is some very crip
dick obscure answer like you know the
snow melts farther in the south or some
bizarre answer and instead they get this
answer no there's no human being wiser
than socrates crystal-clear answer and
so you can imagine how shocked they are
so they travel back of course to relate
this story to Socrates and here's here's
something telling first of all that's
just telling it enough itself that the
Delphic Oracle would give such a clear
answer now it's it's it's it's a
qualified answer there's no human being
wiser than socrates right but when they
go back to Socrates Socrates is response
is also profound interesting so if we're
honest if we're honest and we found out
from some sacred authority that we are
very wise most of us would be very self
congratulatory is like yeah I knew it
and how do I know that because one of
the most persistent biases have is that
people believe they're above average
intelligence and of course most people
must be wrong about that because most
people have well average intelligence
but if you ask anybody is your
intelligence average they will tell you
know I have above-average intelligence
more so of course even for ideas such as
wisdom but Socrates isn't
self-congratulatory he doesn't say yep I
knew it all along
there's the confirmation I so want now
that's really telling enough itself
because to quote a friend of mine Leo
Ferrara we are entering the age of
confirmation porn in which people are
continuously seeking confirmation from
their beliefs and and part of what's
going on - the meaning crisis and the
ever expansion of in our
society is precisely because we have
technologically enhanced through social
media our capacity for gratifying
our bias for conformation we'll talk
about this later but we all carry a
terrific bias called the confirmation
bias in which we seek information that
confirms our beliefs and we tend to
avoid information that challenges it and
part of what is going wrong right now in
our culture is that through a lot of
factors that are endemic to the meaning
crisis we are accelerating and
exacerbating our propensity for falling
into the confirmation bias and I think
that's what my friend Leo means by
confirmation porn we have a kind of
pornography if we take pornography to
mean the gratuitous an unwarlike
justified sanction
satisfaction of a desire then we are
living in an age of confirmation porn
Socrates is a corrective to that here is
a great temptation he has presented the
word of the God that he is wise wiser
than anyone else and rather than
accepting it and giving in to that
confirmation bias his immediate response
is to challenge it now the challenge is
tricky for Socrates Socrates is no
atheist although he's going to be
charged with atheism when he's put on
trial but he does believe in the gods
he's going to do something very
important about the gods he's going to
transform the Greek gods into moral
exemplars but and what that means for
Socrates is the gods can't lie the gods
can't lied for Socrates and this is one
of the ways he's going to transform the
understanding of the gods and Plato
along with him the Greek gods as they
are represented in standard Greek myths
aren't very accurate portrayal because
those gods lie and they write they cheat
and they betray Zeus cheats Zeus cheats
on his his wife etc but for Socrates and
this is part of the actual revolution
the gods represent moral exemplars they
represent ways in which we can self
transcend and morally improve so for
Socrates it's therefore axiomatic that
the gods can't lie to him so the gods
are telling the truth
this wedding and this is something we're
gonna come back to the way the Greeks
Wed Definity divinity I should say to
reality the truth and sacredness are
bound up together is going to be really
pivotal think about how much we separate
those two in our culture but for
Socrates they are interpenetrating so
the gods can't lie they have to be
disclosers of the truth but on this on
the other hand Socrates has significant
and profound self-knowledge one of the
things I have tattooed on my back is
know thyself it was inscribed at the
Delphic Oracle but Socrates makes it his
personal slogan for life there's been
some recent things written about this
and I think they've largely reflect
reflected a misunderstanding of what
know thyself mean know thyself doesn't
mean become aware of your biography I
mean we all are prey to that and we have
a culture that exacerbates that
narcissism we like to stroke the ego of
our personal autobiography and store up
treasure domin that we can point to
other people that indicate our
uniqueness and our specialness and why
the universe should specially take care
of and pay attention to us that's not
what know thyself means it doesn't mean
that kind of stroking of your
autobiographical ego know thyself is
much more a kind of direct participatory
knowing it means understanding how you
operate it's not it's if I were to use a
literary analogy it's not like your
autobiography it's more like your
owner's manual it's how do you operate
what are the principles what are the
powers perils what are the constraints
that are operating within you Socrates
as we'll see thought that that kind of
self-knowledge was central and the this
is the core of the axial revolution the
axial revolution is this critical
awareness and sense of responsibility of
zone cognition so on one hand the gods
can't lie when they say Socrates as the
wisest human being but on the other hand
Socrates has deep self knowledge he has
Socratic self-knowledge in which he is
convinced that he is not wise and he is
not willing to give up on either one of
those and that's a telling thing about
him that tells you something very
central about him he holds these two
together his existential self-knowledge
and this disclosure from reality are
going neither one of them is going to be
given a greater Authority they're going
to be held together so now Socrates
faces a personal dilemma a dilemma that
goes to the core of who and what he is
how can it be that he is the wisest
human being when he knows that he is not
wise so this is a very deep dilemma that
he set for himself it's a kind of
profound problem that he seeks to solve
and what that means is that Socrates
starts on a quest he starts on a quest
of trying to determine how both of those
things could be the case at the same
time now the quest seems to have evolved
very naturally into a way in which he
interacted with those around him what
Socrates would do is he would go to
people who claimed or would credited
with being wise and he would ask them
question he invented in fact what has
become known as the Socratic method also
known as of Linkous the Socratic method
is a way of asking questions in order to
try and draw somebody out we'll talk a
little bit more about in Linkous in a
minute but first I want to talk about
the two types of people that we have
good reason to believe Socrates was
interacting and what that can tell us
about the Socratic notion of wisdom and
we're going to see how the Socratic
notion of wisdom knowledge and this idea
of self-knowledge
is deeply bound up with how meaningful
your life is so the two groups that
Socrates the two groups of people that
were accredited as being wise were the
philosophers and the sophist if you
remember last time we talked about
pythagoras pythagoras actually invents
the word philosophy it comes from two
greek words by lia sophia this means
right the the friendship love of wisdom
so and Pythagoras creates a community
around him you create a community
distributed cognition in which you
interact with other people in order to
try and pursue wisdom a philosopher is
someone who in concert with others is a
lover of wisdom so Socrates is
interacting with the philosophers and in
particular one group of philosophers
that come before him in fact Socrates is
regarded as creating a revolution in
philosophy precisely from how he
differed from the natural philosophers
and he is also doing the Socratic method
with the sophist and you can see that
this also comes from Sophia wisdom it's
where we get our word sophisticated from
the Sophists are also people who claim
to be wise now the natural philosophers
are very interesting the natural
philosophers seem to represent a
fundamental change in human cognition so
I'm going to take as an example one of
the natural philosophers who is
considered to be the first example of it
bailey's now because these guys are just
as we're coming out of the dark age and
they predate Socrates sometimes by a
hundred a couple hundred years right or
their boats a lot of what we have from
them is
very fragmentary we don't have very much
in fact you can put most of Bailey's
philosophy into three lines into three
sentences I once taught this to a course
of mine and one of my students went out
and made a t-shirt in which they put all
of the Lee's philosophy on one t-shirt
because we that's how fragmentary it is
let's talk about these three fragments
because they reveal something very
important one is all is the moist the
next is the lodestone as sue K and this
is important because this word sue K
which we now pronounce psyche is going
to be the basis of the idea of
psychology as a discipline and finally
everything is filled with God's which
sounds very pre-action monic
now what you have to pay attention to
here is not what the LEAs is saying but
what that what he says reveals about the
kind of thinking he is creating what
does he mean by this all is the moist of
course there's controversy about all of
this because it's fragmentary it's old
but given how other people in the
ancient world like Aristotle followed up
on this a plausible interpretation is
everything is made out of water
everything is made out of water
now that's false everything isn't made
out of water
it's not just scientifically fault its
kind of metaphysically false everything
can't be made out of water or we
wouldn't be able to identify water on
its own but put that aside think about
this what surrounds ancient Greece water
be digging into the ground what will you
hit water what falls from the sky water
what does everything need in order to
live water
what can take the shape of any container
you put it in water see what I'm trying
to get you to see is although Bailey's
idea is false it's highly rational it's
highly plausible what he's doing is
using his reason and his observation to
come up with a plausible explanation of
what the underlying substance is behind
everything by the way pay attention to
this word this means stands under
another metaphor it's related to lots of
other words where we use standing to
talk about understanding for example
okay so notice what he's doing here he's
not doing mythology he's not generating
a narrative about some divine agent he's
not saying this has happened because
Zeus cheated on Hera and then Hera
sought there's there is no story here
there's no mythological narrative
there's no right divine agents involved
that's not how he's trying to explain or
understand instead he's doing a rational
analysis based on
and he's trying to get at the underlying
stuff that everything is made of do you
see what I'm showing you what fail EES
is inventing is there any other word for
this he's inventing how to think
scientifically how how this happens is
obscure but that's what's happening he's
inventing the kind of thinking that we
now and I'm gonna say it again
take it for granted as if it's natural
but he's inventing it what does this
mean the lodestone has su K so a
lodestone is a natural form of magnet
what's interesting about magnets is that
they can move themselves and they can
move other things around them
the original meaning of this is of
course breath or wind but what it
ultimately refers to and came to refer
to is write anything that's a living in
the sense that it's self moving that it
can move itself and that can therefore
cause other things to move so I can move
myself and therefore I can make other
things move the magnet can move itself
and it can make other things move I'm
aware of sookay within me I see the
magnet doing something similar and
therefore I conclude the magnet and I
both share Sookie he's wrong but that
doesn't matter this is a plausible
rational argument here he's trying to
get at what we would now call the
underlying force behind things now
please remember that by the way that
Sookie originally means your capacity
for being able to move yourself and make
other things move you may ask why does
that become the word for mind psychology
Minds ookay
because the mind is that part of you
which you can most move it is the most
self moving part of you and it's where
all of your capacity to move other
things starts if I'm going to move this
marker my mind first moves itself and
that drives me to move the marker
but that way of even thinking about me
so that I can start a science of the
psyche starts with Daly's and what
what's this everything is filled with
this seems so scientific John and then
you're throwing this at me the gods
isn't that a throwback to mythology I
don't think so I don't think so
see look what he's doing here now in
turn I need to introduce a term I
promise to try and keep the
technicalities to a minimum what we need
a term here right so ontology is the
study of being the structure of reality
ontological analysis
it's when you use rap reasoning to try
and get at the underlying structure of
reality by getting at the underlying
stuff and the underlying forces that are
at work in it so theories is introducing
the ontological analysis that drives the
Scientific Revolution
what are scientists doing they're trying
to get at the underlying stuff they're
still trying to do it right now they're
trying to get at the underlying forces
they're trying to see into the depths of
reality they're engaging in ontological
depth perception
this doesn't mean right physical like
this doesn't mean our normal perception
into spatial depth what I'm seeing what
I mean here is seeing with the mind into
the depths of reality ontological depth
recep perception now once you get that
he's discovering this way he's
discovering he's inventing this way of
looking at the world it's gonna bleed
into right here right now think about
how powerful that way must be think of
the power in that vision he gets an
access to the depths of reality and what
is he saying that provokes ah that
provokes wonder that gives him a sense
of connecting to what is most real it
helps him to make the most sense of
things and that's what it is to
experience something as sacred so this
is powerful stuff
now Socrates was seems to have been
influenced by particular one of these
natural philosophers called an
exaggerated who was in Athens just
before Socrates annings a gross declared
that the Sun wasn't to God for example
that it was a hot rock and he got into a
lot of trouble for things like this
Socrates seems to have enjoyed more than
enjoyed he seems to have been impressed
by the natural philosophers commitment
to getting at the truth but ultimately
Socrates he rejects this not because he
rejects reason rational analysis he's
going to engage in that himself multiple
times or argumentation his whole
Socratic method as we'll see is all
about argumentation what does he reject
about the natural philosophers they
don't help him with his axial project
see the problem with the natural
philosophers is they give you truth
without transformation they give you
facts they give you knowledge but they
do not indicate how you become wise they
do not indicate how you overcome
self-deception they do not indicate as
Socrates would say how to become a good
person now it's interesting how much
people say that even now even today
sometimes in clear ways that are helpful
sometimes in confused and mixed-up ways
which are unhelpful but the idea that
our scientific worldview while giving us
all kinds of knowledge does not in any
way train us for wisdom does not tell us
how to become wise does not tell us how
to transcend ourselves and become better
people this is a common complaint and
we'll come back to it about the
scientific worldview Socrates sees it
even then so here you have truth but no
relevance
the truths that are discovered are not
existentially relevant they don't matter
they don't enable the cultivation of
wisdom the transformation and
transcendence of the self now Sardi's
interacting with the sophist which is
famous is a lot more antagonistic this
this when he talks about his relation
here it's much more the language or the
tone at least that's how I read it of
disappointment he was expecting more and
he found less here and it's not clear
how much is the Socrates and how much
this is Plato who's writing about
Socrates but here the relationship is
much more antagonist ik now who are the
sophist well if you remember we talked
about when the axial revolution is
coming to Greece you get in the
emergence of democracy and in Athens the
democracy is direct democracy now before
we get too far into this we don't want
to over glamorize this yes
Athens is the beginning of democracy but
let's remember if I was a woman the last
place I would want to do well in the
ancient world as ancient Athens ancient
Athens treats its women horribly just
horribly Sparta treats its women better
than Athens democracy is only for
Athenian adult males women foreigners
anybody else even if they're Greek
they're not right considered to be
worthy of participation in the
democratic process and it's a direct
democracy right everybody files into the
assembly and votes on everything now
what that means is as I've already
mentioned your capacity for debate and
argumentation is a root to power this is
why it develops so powerfully in ancient
Athens the better you are at arguing the
better you are at persuading other
people the more powerful and influential
you will be
what happens is a group of people invent
a new psycho technology they invent
rhetoric they invent ways of picking up
on how language and cognition interact
they find standardized skills that can
be practiced and developed so that you
can influence people increase the chance
that your language will change their
mind
now the Sophists were only concerned
with teaching the skills they basically
separated the technology from any kind
of moral commitment so for example a
particular sophist might go in the
morning to this aristocrat and help him
argue for why Athens should increase the
number of ships in its Navy and in the
afternoon go to this aristocrat and help
him craft an argument as to why often
should decrease the number of ships in
the Navy the sophist didn't care which
was the case what mattered was
empowering the individual to win the
argument now how does this work and how
can we relate it to our to our lives now
so basically a good way to think about
this is the sophist pick up on the fact
that when we are communicating we're
going to talk about this a lot later as
we go on we are being driven by what we
find salient and relevant not just what
we find true or believed to be the case
remember with the nine dart problem what
stands out to us what's relevant shapes
how we see things and how we understand
them so let me give you a modern analog
for what how rhetoric works a place
where rhetoric is readily apparent
advertising okay see the point about
advertisement is to make use of the way
your brain will associate things the way
your brain finds certain things salient
make things seem highly relevant to you
in order to manipulate your behavior now
what's telling about this and this is
the point about the sophist is how much
that can happen right in a way that is
disconnected from whether or not it's
true I mean you watch the beer
commercial and here it is here's really
attractive people and they all get
together and they're all having a great
time and it's this beer and here's the
beautiful attractive people go into an
actual bar that's not like that okay and
you know you're not going to see the
kind of broken-down lives drunk people
now here's the thing you know that
that's not true you know that you like
if you like if you went into a bar and
you actually saw something like that
happening if when you wash your hair
with shampoo you were suddenly in the
shampoo commercial you'd worry about
your sanity you know it's not true it
doesn't matter it makes certain stimuli
salient to you and so you buy the beer
you buy the shampoo this is what I mean
when I say your beliefs aren't the only
thing driving you so this brings us to a
notion I promise to come back to and I
want to use it technically I'm not
trying to be vulgar but this is
important this is the notion of
and the classic work is by Harry
Frankfort on this his essay on
it's 20 years old now his Frankfort is
very interested in talking about the
difference between somebody being a
 artist and somebody being a
liar because they aren't the same they
can overlap a person can be both a liar
and a artist but let's talk
about pure cases how does the liar work
the liar depends on your commitment to
the truth the lawyer tells you something
I'll use P to represent some proposition
the liar says P to you even though not P
is the case because if he can get
convinced you that P is the case you
will change your behavior because your
behavior is to some degree significant
degree influenced by your commitment to
the truth if you believe P is true that
will change your behavior that's how
lying works lying depends on the fact
that in general people are committed to
the truth because in general people want
to be in touch with reality
that's not how works see
 unlike lying works by making
you disk disinterested unconcerned with
whether or not what with what is being
said is true when somebody's
bullshitting you they're trying to get
you to not find important or right
central how true the claim is instead
they're working in terms of the rhetoric
they're trying to capture you in terms
of how catchy it is like the advertiser
how salient it is how much it grabs your
attention so there was a famous example
from this from the Simpsons and you know
Simpsons has been aunt for a thousand
years now and I think it's still on so
this is from a long time ago and at the
time it seemed so almost absurdly
ridiculous funny but it turned out to be
extremely extremely prescient because
the example is a political example there
are two aliens running for political
office and they're giving a speech to
Americans right and I mean no insult to
Americans but I mean I think we're aware
of how what I'm going to say is relevant
to American politics right now and the
speech goes something like this one of
the aliens named Kang says my fellow
Americans when I was young I dreamt of
being a baseball but now we must move
forward not backwards upwards twirling
twirling towards freedom and everybody
Cheers
no it's meaningless it doesn't mean
anything but he invokes youth baseball
moving forward moving upward twirling
and freedom and so if you're an American
you get this rush you get this rush that
rush is these are all salient things
they're highly relevant to you you
associate and identify with them and so
you're swept up you're caught up in it
now why does matter well part
as I said at the beginning part of the
way people articulate the meaning crisis
is there's so much and it seems
to be increasing we are separating
relevance and salience from truth but
there's a deeper reason and I think this
is part of why it matters to Socrates
look you can't although we use this
metaphor for self-deception it's
actually not a good metaphor you can't
lie to yourself it makes no sense
cognitive psychologists have been
pointing that in philosophers and
pointing this out you can't no not Pete
and then say to yourself but P but P the
trouble is you know that this is not the
case and so simply stating this to
yourself
doesn't do anything you can't lie to
yourself because you're in possession of
the truth
did I just prove to you that
self-deception is impossible no not at
all see you can't lie to yourself but
here's what I would argue you can
 yourself why because lying has
to do with believing I'm gonna come back
to this again and again look believing
isn't something you directly do here
I'll show you pick a belief you would
like to have I would like to have the
belief that everybody loves me I don't
believe that but I would like to truly
have that belief so what should I do
I should just believe believe you see
televangelists doing this telling people
believe but you can't you can hope that
everybody loves you you can wish that
everybody loves you but if I say believe
it
you can't do it that somehow belief
works it's not a voluntary action you
can't lie to yourself see self-deception
works in a different way you know what
you can do you can yourself how
can you yourself because what
you can do is direct your attention if I
say pay attention to this finger you can
and you can also choose to pay attention
to something now attention and we'll
talk about this later
and it's how central it is there's two
sides to attention you can direct your
attention for example if I say your left
big toe you're paying attention to it
and suddenly it's salient to you when
you pay attention to something it makes
it more salient it stands out for you
but you know what else attention can
also be direct not only be directed by
you to make things more salient your
attention can be caught a sudden noise
and you turn and you attend to it it was
salient and it captures your attention
so not only can you direct your
attention your attention can be captured
by what you find salient and notice what
this means you can do you can direct
your attention to something and make it
more salient and because it's more
salient it will tend to capture your
attention and because you're paying
attention to it you make it more salient
which means it will more likely capture
your attention do you see what's
happening here these two things feed on
each other I pay more attention to it it
becomes more salient it becomes more
salient it gathers my attention I pay
more attention to it
I'm more likely to be attracted to it
and it spins on itself in a
self-organizing manner until your
attention is attached to something it's
super salient to you it's highly
relevant to you and you lose the
capacity to notice other things that's
how you yourself the salience
and the catchiness of the stimulus has
overtaken any concern you have for
whether or not it's true
or represents reality this is how you
deceive yourself so do you see that's
why Socrates is going to be so
antagonistic towards the sophist they
are the opposite the opposite of the
axial revolution they are the opposite
of that rational self-knowledge the
attempt to overcome self-deception the
sophist are promoting and when
you promote you not only
promote the deception of others you make
yourself more vulnerable to
self-deception you fall more and more
prey to self-deception so the natural
philosophers are truth without relevance
the sophist and the propensity for the
promotion of represent
relevance disconnected from truth so
notice here they have the power to
transform people but they've
disconnected it from the pursuit of the
truth these people can give us knowledge
of the facts but do not facilitate self
transformation what Socrates wanted is
he wanted both he wanted individuals who
knew how to pay attention in such a way
that what they found salient helped them
determine the truth and that the truth
that they found help them to train their
attention to find salience Socrates
wanted something like that so what do
you would do is he would go about
questioning people maddening frustration
so Socrates would come up to somebody
and say well what are you doing here and
oh I'm in the marketplace well why are
you in the marketplace well I'm
purchasing something well why are you
purchasing something well I want to get
these goods
why do you want these goods because
they'll make me happy and nad then
Socrates starts to oh so you must know
what happiness is well happiness is
pleasure Socrates I guess and these
things give me pleasure but is it
possible Socrates with us to have
pleasure and still find yourself in a
horrible situation that you really
dislike well of course
Socrates that's possible oh so then
happiness isn't pleasure you're being
coy with me tell me tell me Socrates
would say what is happiness oh it's you
know it's getting what's most important
to you well that means that you have to
have knowledge is it any kind of
knowledge well no it's the knowledge of
what it what's important what's truly
important or what you only think is
important I guess what's truly important
Socrates
okay so what's that knowledge of what's
truly important called
I guess that would be wisdom Socrates oh
so in order to be happiness to find
happiness you must have first cultivated
wisdom tell me how you cultivate wisdom
and what wisdom is and the person goes
our they collapse they get to this point
where they can't answer they fall into a
state called aporia people compared it
to being stung by a stingray or falling
under a magician spell you don't know
what's going on now here's what now you
one went one thing you might say well
Socrates is just a skeptic he's trying
to show people that they don't know
anything because he wants to show that
the gods are right that nobody has any
wisdom etc that's too simple I think
something more sophisticated is going on
with Socrates Socrates right Socrates is
trying to get you to realize he's like
he's like in coronating the axial
revolution he's trying to get you to
realize how much how much each one of us
myself included how much were
bullshitting ourselves all the time why
because we pursue things we find things
salient to us their happiness Fame its
salient to us and we're pursuing it
we're putting our efforts into it
way before we understand it way before
we grasp the truths of it we are always
making ourselves susceptible to
because we are being driven by powerful
motivations that are salient to us that
are greatly in excess of our
understanding of their truth or reality
we're always all of us bullshitting
ourselves and the point and what that
does is that provokes a reaction in
people it goes one of two ways people
either go ah and they don't want to be
showing that about themselves and they
become angry at Socrates or some people
have an insight they realize oh oh I
need to transform myself I need to find
a way to keep relevance and truth
tracking each other
enabling each other and when Socrates
realized that he was having this effect
on people he had his answer to his
dilemma
he knew how it was that the gods were
not lying and he was the wisest of human
beings his answer was the following he
knew what he did not know and we all say
I know what I don't know I made note of
a lot of it no no no he knew in a way
that allows you to directly painfully
confront your capacity for in
yourself
to really realize what you do not know
is to realize I am pursuing her and I
don't know what's going on I'm pursuing
that and I don't know what's going on
that's what he's talking about
now many people think that Socrates dis
concluded that that's it he didn't know
anything no that's not what Socrates is
talking about Socrates does claim to
know things you can imagine how Socrates
pisses people off so he is put on trial
in ancient Athens there isn't a state
that arrests you one one citizen accuses
another you brought on trial you're put
in front of fifty five hundred men it's
always men remember very very very
chauvinistic society and then the
accuser presents their case the
defendant presents their case and then
they the jury votes on it so Socrates
was accused by people that he pissed off
of atheism which doesn't mean not
believing in God's it just means
teaching strange gods because as I
mentioned he was concerned to make the
gods moral exemplars now when Socrates
is on trial it becomes clear that they
will let him go if he sort of agrees to
stop doing this philosophy stuff that
he's doing stops pissing people off and
then he utters something that's very
famous and this is a statement of him
deeply knowing something he says the
unexamined life is not worth living a
life in which there is no effort made to
put these two together is a life that is
not worth living because it is a life to
use our terms that is awash in
that is beset by self-deception and
self-destructive behavior so Socrates
knows what makes a life meaningful
there's a kind of wisdom wisdom is to
keep your truth Machinery and your
relevance machinery tightly coupled
together so that you don't
yourselves see
Socrates famously claimed to know taw
erotica we're gonna have to talk about
this later because it comes from erotic
and for most of us all you hear when you
hear erotic is sexual that's not what
eros means right it's more much more
broader term in ancient Greece what
Socrates means is he knows how to love
well and that doesn't mean romantic love
but it means as Socrates knows what to
care about he knows how to keep what he
cares about with what's real he would do
things like walk into the marketplace
and say look at all the things I don't
need he'd say how much time did you
spend on fixing your hair this morning
Oh about 20 minutes how much on fixing
yourself
Socrates knew what to find significant
what to find important he knew how to
properly care he also compared himself
to a midwife he knew how to take that
caring and that sense of what makes life
meaningful the cultivation of wisdom and
help people draw out give birth to their
better self that's why he compared
himself to a midwife this is what he
knew socrates knew how reason and love
go together you might find it sort of
entertaining to know that Frankfurt who
I mentioned a few minutes ago wrote a
book called reasons for love what he
also puts together reason and love
things that we have been taught to keep
as antithetical to each other
for Socrates separating them which our
culture regularly and reliably does is
one of our greatest follies
they need to be interdependent and
intertwined with each other we need to
rationally know what we should most care
about
so Socrates just put on trial he's found
guilty he just narrowly loses
so then after losing and it looks like
part of the reasons were political and
part of them he's pissed off the
powerful and all kinds of things he
associated with people that turned out
to be corrupt but he loses by very
narrow margin and then what happens is
each side proposes a penalty the accuser
has proposed death that Socrates should
be killed and then this tells you
something about Socrates Socrates says
the following practicing philosophy has
cost me I have to constantly work at it
it's very demanding I'm not right
wealthy I am dependent on other people
people attack me it's been very risky
the worst penalty could be for me to
continue doing philosophy and in order
to make that even worse the government
should give me free housing and free
food for the rest of my life so as you
can imagine this pisses everybody off
and Socrates is found in a much greater
vote he's condemned to death now notice
Socrates is so convinced that he has the
right kind of know thyself not
autobiographical but this that I've been
talking about he knows how he works and
how to train it to transform it so that
he cares well and reduces his capacity
for self-deception that he's willing to
die for it he finds that meaning so
important that he's willing to die for
it now he's a very interesting figure
for that reason but there's also other
important things we should know about
Socrates this the shamanic is still in
Socrates because he could do the
following he could stand in one place
for 24 or even 48 hours meditating on
his own thoughts
he was terrifically capable of
controlling his body's physiological
reactions he could drink a lot without
getting drunk he could
into battle in winter without any right
shoes on his feet he was famously brave
so he and he had this divine voice
whenever he was about to do something
wrong
he'd hear this voice that would tell him
don't do it Socrates so once again you
still find right the shamanic has been
carried into the socratic in really
important ways we're going to talk about
later how those two are interwoven
together now Socrates has many followers
but there's one person who was present
at the trial but wasn't present at his
death when he drinks the hemlock and you
know what I got to sit in the spot in
Athens that corresponds to where
Socrates was probably imprisoned at
least that's what they said that person
who was present at the trial then even
offers to pay for Socrates his release
but is ill and not present at his death
his Plato and Plato as I foreshadowed is
going to take Pythagoras and Socrates
and put them together and advance even
more significantly the axial revolution
in ancient Greece thank you very much
for your time
[Music]
you