welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
welcome to the dark stoah these evening
events tend to deal with darker subjects
and as a disclaimer they could engender
existential horror so consider yourself
warned you can think of tonight's
session as kind of a stoic group
practice in negative visualization in
thinking about a negative outcome that
may or may not maybe is little likely to
happen in our futures and coming to
terms with it emotionally and tonight
we're in for a treat we have none other
than Pat Ryan who some have said is the
most dangerous man on the internet and
he is talking about CRISPR which is this
brave new world technology that I
imagine some of you are familiar with
that holds a lot of promise but perhaps
mostly existential threat and we're
gonna learn a lot more about that in a
moment so the structure for tonight is
basically I'm going to hand it over to
Pat in a moment and he's gonna take us
through a presentation and at the end of
that we'll have an opportunity to ask
him a few questions so pay attention and
if you come up with questions along the
way feel free to throw them in the chat
and I will speak them for you or you can
share them once we get to the end of the
presentation so without further delay
Pat I'm gonna hand it over to you
hi folks thanks for the disclaimer
Daniel I appreciate it and this is a
topic that I have talked about endlessly
for almost two decades so I am just
completely deadened by any possible
shock value that happens from it so
please don't take my my flippancy as
arrogance here I'm just fairly exhausted
in terms of researching the
possibilities of how this is gonna pan
out and thank you for coming back for
I haven't scared you off yet that's
right we'll see what we can do tonight
CRISPR is a technology that allows one
to inject DNA sequences into a cell
that's basically it with one tiny
difference what I just described is
exactly how a virus works it lands on
the surface membrane breaks it through
deletes the DNA or blows it up and then
injects its own DNA to then turn the
cell into a manufacturer for more
viruses rinse and repeat what makes this
different is that it doesn't blow away
the host cell's DNA it keeps most of it
intact the snippet that gets injected
parses through the DNA it finds exactly
what you intend to remove and then it
injects what you intend to replace it
with so it's kind of like opening a book
and ripping out a page and putting in
your own page to change the story
you don't fundamentally destroy the book
in the process but you get some
interesting fanfiction well in this case
what happens is you end up with
violating the great taboo of horizontal
nuclear transfer which is something that
nature has wisely forbade us from doing
but we have idiotic we found a way
around it so this is definitely our
destiny and we just gotta ride the crazy
train see where it takes us and so
hopefully this will give you a realistic
understanding of how us humans are going
to what I'm gonna call we're going to
Tower of Babel our own brains so before
I begin the history of why we even want
to do these things it'll be as brief as
I can make it and I'll try to make it
interesting so further preference here
we go
screen okay
and that crispers art another horrifying
things were probably going to do to each
other
welcome to your evolution where your DNA
is as flexible as your hard drive we
will no longer be on a line of evolution
we will now enter a crazy web that is
almost impossible to predict it's gonna
be John in the future wherever you're
our job so moving on
where do we start with CRISPR well we
actually start with play-doh
surprisingly he wanted to create a
society in which the leaders of that
society were the best possible leaders
that people could have he called them
the guardians and they were voted by the
auxiliaries and the guardians were
basically philosopher Kings so the
guardians were people who guarded the
city from external threats and itself
and ensured its well-being but how do
you make the Guardians care how do you
defeat the problem of greed and people
making themselves enriched from the
position of power they find themselves
in
well Plato to the rescue he turns around
and says that wait a second
what if we throw a yearly orgy and all
these people come together they bump
uglies and they get some kids and then
what we want to do instead these are is
this is a summary of Plato forgive me
and what we're gonna do is people we
admire the most the traits were looking
for the most well we're going to we're
gonna make sure they breed the most so
this person is a good leader or this
person was a good mathematician or this
person is just really funny go ahead and
pump out a bunch of kids within our
Guardian cast and we'll head your bets
so this is basically a hedging strategy
to make sure you end up with kids that
are competent based on initial starting
advantages as best as they could see if
they didn't have a concept of genes but
they did master animal breeding so I
guess they looked at it that way so this
is like a really early for me eugenics
basically this idea where you have
selecting controlling the taking natural
taking the natural out of
after election and having controlled
selection it's basically it's a basic
tactic that's all what's going on here
and again his reasoning was primarily to
make sure that the leaders of the city
were the best possible leaders because
they did not want corrupt leaders they
said Plato hated democracy he fucking
hated democracy he wanted nothing to do
with it he wanted to burn to the ground
democracy killed his best friend
soccer they voted him to drink hemlock
so yeah he hated the shit out of it so
he was trying to solve the fundamental
problem with democracy by getting the
best possible leaders and this is where
aristocracy is born the very concept of
it
the Romans thought it was some good idea
they take a couple pieces of it
themselves so they come up with they're
the laws of the Twelve Tables which was
very early Roman law in the history
books they decided it wasn't enough to
to make sure that all the leaders were
smart and beautiful we also got to kill
the ugly kids too because we're gonna go
all the way with it
I mean gotta get yeah I get both ends of
it if you're if you're going for this
eugenic li.selected
kind of a society and maximizing your
aristocracy because it you've already
picked for the best possible leaders in
society there's only so many people with
genitals that you can possibly breed you
eventually run out of options
so you've hit maximum efficiency in
eugenics strategy now you got to start
booting the losers and this is where
things go off the rails pretty quick
leads you can imagine so the Europeans
decide to LARP Crusader Kings to for the
next 15 hundred years and do exactly
what Plato suggested where they go ahead
and control who what's daughter's
married you and which sons married to
who and this is primarily in the Middle
Ages for the most part and everybody
knows and Crusaders too it's very
important to turn the Pope gay because
he'll absolve you of your sins and you
always get away with it cuz he doesn't
want his dirty secret and that's that's
that's a ridiculous example of how this
game ends up it ends up in like this
Middle Ages version of homosexual
blackmail that just it goes off the
rails unfortunately pretty brutally and
I think I think Martin Luther had some
beef about that too about the corruption
of the church but this is all again
misses all spawn
Plato's vision of a highly efficient
aristocracy so Europeans thought it was
a good idea and they just did it forever
things changed when a guy named Thomas
Malthus came along he was in economists
and he was wise to understand the
relationship between population and
labor demand no one had really knocked
that out before quite like he did so I'm
gonna this is a long this is his words
this is population spite by Thomas
Malthus
so the highlighted section is basically
he's making the case he's saying the
poor are having children and it's
interfering with their ability to to
better their lives because it's another
mouth to feed
yes the labor harder and those type of
arguments but the next argument gets
lost in the retelling of this and it's
an important point the sex drive is so
strong that people are always increasing
their population and as it constantly
does this it causes the lower classes to
distress and the reason for that is is
yes of course it's more mouths to feed
but it's actually there's a meta reason
beyond that in economics reason because
the more people you have the more
redundant labor you have so instead of
having 20 farmers you now have 200
farmers but you only need like 10 so
what happened to all the redundant labor
well they just kind of don't farm which
means it can't buy stuff they can't eat
they can't use their skill and turn to
labor you know have a surplus of
population and you don't have the
ability to scale your productivity to
those people because it's the 1600s you
can't just like spin up a machine to do
it for you so the population pressure
causes pricing in labor to go down so
the cost of labor goes down as
population goes up the inverse is also
true as
people are killed or displaced or exiled
there are so few of them that the price
of their labor goes up and this is the
key point that is always lost with
discussing Malthus the invention
processes for shortening labor without
the proportional extension of the market
for the commodity and particularly the
difference between the nominal and real
price of labor a circumstance which has
perhaps more than any other contributed
to conceal this oscillation from common
view so what he was trying to do is
reveal that hey it isn't just greedy
kings and princes being inept and it
isn't just poor people just being stupid
it's the very population mechanic itself
that's driving poverty and that was his
argument and it's a he's not entirely
wrong i if you look at it from that if
you look at it from that side
I don't side with them I'm Malthusian
it's for starters I don't like them as
people I don't like the culture that
they end up always going towards it
becomes too nihilistic and it's
celebrated before that nihilism I just
maybe it's a taste thing but I just
don't like it but in this case he's
making a very solid point regarding the
relationship of population and labor and
then see what is here period it's worse
and worse but the forms of capitalist or
growing rich from yeah right so in this
case there is now a negative side effect
it's almost as if you want more poor
people so that the farmers have more
cheap labor and so that the capital
investments get better returns on their
investments so now there's this
additional negative incentive on top of
population rates exploding it's you want
the poor to have as many babies as
possible and so this is this is thomas
malthus's argument against it as best as
you can and you know you finally
realizes the superior power of
population cannot be checked without
producing misery or vice so even if you
try to make these poor people to stop
dumping out kids for their own benefit
you have to kill them or you make them
you pay them to not burn down their city
and they they spend that money on being
bums who knows these are things you
don't want in your society either sorry
this is an ample portion of these two
bitter ingredients in the coven human
life and the continuance of the physical
causes that seems to reproduce them bare
too convincing a testimony so he
realizes to catch-22 of his own
revelation he says crap
more people are happening but if I try
to do anything I'm probably gonna get
killed or make the situation worse so he
sees the crazy train and he knows
there's no stopping and he points out to
good effect this surprisingly goes
immediately to Charles Darwin now this
link isn't really well talking in
evolution studies Charles Darwin he
wrote Origin of Species because he read
Malthus and this is from his own words
from the autobiography of Charles Darwin
I happen to read for the amusement
Malthus on population and being well
compared to appreciate the struggle for
existence which everywhere goes on from
long-continued observation of the habits
of animals plants it at once struck me
that under these circumstances favorable
variations would tend to be preserved
and get ready for it folks and
unfavorable ones destroyed the result
would be the formation of a new species
okay
let's sit this back this guy read
Malthus and he discovered a way to
create new species from it right the
what how did anybody how could that have
possibly been the take away from Elvis
unfortunately he tells us the solution
as I believe is that the modified
offspring of all dominant increasing
forms tend to be adapted to mainly and
highly diversified place in the economy
of nature ok so here's why this matters
this is how he's able to go from the
population oscillation
that Malthus was talking about and then
say oh it's the economy of nature that
we haven't accounted for there is an
economy to nature there is a behavior of
energy sharing resource distribution
that's been going on in this background
I can't quite put my finger on it but
it's there and what Malthus is talking
about is also see in the breeding habits
of other analysts so the breeding of
humans is affecting their distribution
of demand for their labor and their
ability and their well living and we're
also seeing the same population mechanic
play out amongst animals and plants so
he's able to read Malthus and extract
that unique insight and it is because of
that that he's able to publish the
Origin of Species
so Malthus was a key influence to
Charles Darwin and that's not really
well researched but it's right there
it's his own words and so he's able to
see the the this is humanity's attempt
to try and understand population
mechanics in a very clumsy way and
Darwin saw in animals Malthus saw in
economics and when you merge those two
together you realize economics was the
actual constraint the resource
distribution was the actual constraint
and because of that constraint we're now
able to understand better the pressures
that cause those oscillations that
Malthus was talking about Charles
Darwin's cousin was John gulten and
gulten was a big supporter of Darwin and
Doren was a big supporter of Dalton this
at this point we're in the - I think
1800's
late 1800s Britain with Victorian
Britain so Dalton takes a look at Darwin
and takes a look at Malthus and goes if
we know that the population is
oscillating we can either sit there and
be a slave to it or we can do something
about it so this is the birth of the
progressive movement the modern
progressive movement starts with John
Galt
and the reason so the formation of the
blue church this is the birth of the
blue church right here
the modern blue church all the tactics
they embrace and everything they do
starts with goal because if you read
that box that says that's his actual
words what he's saying is he's making
the case for the world we live in right
now and he's explaining how you engineer
the times that they're in at that point
to get this world we have today a world
which would be one in which society was
not costly so there's there's an
abundance of price pressures that drive
the prices down where incomes were
chiefly derived from professional
sources so you don't have scumbags and
and bankers all over the place you're a
you are in profession you are being
producing something of value and not
much to inheritance the elimination of
Kings and in the church effectively no
more inheritance of where every Vlad had
a chance of showing his abilities and if
he's highly gifted C first-class
education and can enter the professional
life by liberal help of exhibitions and
scholarships which he has gained in this
early youth the ability that under one
is he's painting the picture for this
abundance of opportunity that he wants
to create where the marriage is held in
a high honor honor as it wasn't Jewish
times where the pride of the race was
encouraged and even here he makes the
footnote he doesn't mean the race
Sciences he doesn't that's not what he's
talking about even makes that footnote
makes that very clear where the weak
would find welcomed refuge and celibate
monasteries and Sisterhood's
so even those who aren't part of his
plan still have something to find
meaning from so he's taken he's
basically he's making this political
stoning speech effectively he's taking
Darwin he's taking Darwin's influence
from Malthus and he's forming this into
a political discussion he's saying how
do we organize our society in a way to
get these wonderful outcomes and he's
saying from Darwin we are able to find a
starting point and he's saying that he's
comparing the
participation of society to cells where
the cells are constantly interacting and
it's a it's a stochastic randomness
which appears what's going on but quite
the opposite is going on they're very
well organized and they don't need to be
organized from from a central power and
he's using Darwin as like this model
that that's what's already going on so
we should probably emulate that because
that's what nature has already laid out
for us they ought to keep in mind this
is this is Dalton this is Victorian
Britain this is the birth of the blue
church this is to prevent them the
humanist material a materialist
progressive faith starts here in this
argument the idea that we can shift
populations to then shift society to
then build the society we want to build
and we don't need a central power to do
it he's out there basically saying
bitcoin but for but for populations you
don't need a central bank you don't need
a king or a pope biology is doing this
without any of that shit so we should be
able to do that too this was this was a
very charged argument for certain sects
of Christianity at that time and would
obviously piggyback off of the Marxism
that was becoming more and more popular
out of this era as well okay that's a
lot and then he goes forth to basically
say yeah like Darwin's awesome forever
so at this point the Europeans are
starting to say hey they're inching
towards the uncomfortable cut reality
where they're like let's start doing
breeding programs as Dalton is
effectively stating he wants to create
this public breeding program in the name
of health in the name of the health of
the society I had any I didn't go into
what gulten was saying there but he's
looking he's he's citing Darwin for a
reason he doesn't believe in the idea of
creating gulten does not believe in the
idea of creating walls or ideas of
making dictates he's saying if we just
intelligently and cleverly steer the
breeding that's already going on
that we're going to get the society so
it's a rehash of Plato's philosopher
kings and the underlying principle of
course is to show that science can
triumph over a religion which is the
drive of a lot of the new church and
progressives from this period onward now
simultaneously this whole Dalton is
laying the groundwork for a holy war
against society itself against the
organic formation of society he's he's
laying the ground to say we're going to
change the society in a way that's
better for everyone involved and we're
going to do it one penis and one vagina
at a time meanwhile somewhere else in
Germany a bunch of smart do to get
really confused by dice and the
accidentally invent probability that
sounds like a hell of a segue but it's
deeply related so pascal format they
solve gambling there's a there's a funny
problem they encounter where if you and
I decide to play a gambling game we're
rolling dice and the game suddenly ends
because a bunch of assholes come in and
you know they chase us out because they
don't want splaying well how do we
figure out the split of the putt that
we've already played into do I split
fifty-fifty do you get more because
you've won more it's an uncomfortable
way to like how do you fairly figure out
how this game was going to resolve if
the game is entirely powered by random
forces it's it's this like an insurance
problem basically well that's where the
concept of the expected value comes from
so these two guys they decided to say
hey we're gonna solve this problem about
figuring out the probability of how
these dice were going to turn out at
this time and then the payout will be
divided along that number instead and
that's the fairest distribution that you
can do in a game that has driven
entirely by randomness of course because
they solved this problem they saw
gambling which inevitably led to casinos
which from casinos leads to Donald Trump
so these guys were making America great
way back when
meanwhile from here Mendell decides to
say hey this probability thing is
pretty interesting let's apply it the
heredity heredity support I always
struggle with so heredity back then was
like trees and branches and so and so
begat so and so begat so and so they
were like linear lines of who's who
Mendel was like that stupid I think
probability probably has something to do
with this so I'm gonna I'm gonna take a
whack at that and he comes up with this
little concept this there where he he
starts very small in a way that he can
control and predict he start some plants
he says if I put this pollen in this
pistol then I get these properties if I
mix them in these ways then they get
these properties so he's able to apply
like set theory probability to the
outcomes of breeding for very simple
beings starts with plants it moves very
tiny animals afterwards now this is
revolutionary in and of itself no one
had ever done this before
in fact because no one had ever done
this before his work wasn't even
understood history almost completely did
not even come across this guy it was by
total randomness ironically given the
nature of probability that his works
were even found it's almost as if the if
the simulation theory is true the
simulation becomes self-aware of the
moment this guy's works become fountain
if there was anything that could have
changed how this simulation would have
rolled out burying his work would have
fundamentally changed everything in
human history but because of this
discovery he's able to then take the
concept of heredity and say it's not
just kings and princes and and causality
some randomness here and we can actually
predict the randomness by using
probability that's that's a assume
that's a rocket leap that is a quantum
leap in thinking now this guy this
fucking guy like I could speak on this
man for hours this guy is fundamentally
insane but he's also incredibly charming
his name is JBS Haldane now how Ben I'm
gonna talk about him then I'm gonna
explain why what he did was important
and the two things have nothing in
common so
so Haldane was he was the only person
who loved World War one alright there's
gotta start there right he loved World
War one
this guy could not get enough of
shooting Germans this guy fuckin loved
it
he wouldn't he would wouldn't I get
authorised he'd crawl out of the
trenches with his mortar team and just
dump mortars randomly on Germans and
he's laughing the whole time you
couldn't get enough of it
this guy's he swore that gas was a
better weapon than than bullets
this guy was destined to live a life of
just total stochastic excitement with no
rhyme or reason it was he's like the
original Joker it turns out that a brain
that is able to process such madness and
keep saying it's also a brain that can
come up with some pretty fantastic
fucking thinking and he's able to merge
Mandela's probability with Galton's
political utopia so what he's able to do
is he's able to research linking how
genetics on the linkage and the mapping
function which is a technical term he's
able to say okay we can find that this
trait from these parents is passed to
these mice so he's able to take Mendel
and apply it to mammals does it with
mice first but it gets progressively
good some more and more stuff so because
of this he's actually the foundation of
population genetics he he finds out a
way to take distribution that Mendel was
talking about and and fulfill the goals
of Gotham in the process now most people
have never even heard of this guy and
there's a reason for that because he's
batshit insane for starters and too he
was a die-hard fuckin Stalinist all the
way up to 1975 you've never heard of
this guy now you know why but I
recommend reading him he's incredibly
charming he's incredibly funny dude he's
also a goddamn genius but his work was
able to bridge Dalton's dream and
Mendel's discovery and actually bring
plato's eugenics to the masses so moving
on all of this is the backdrop for the
20th century and I believe the 20th
century can be summed up as the holy
words to control the evolution of
evolution
I say holy wars and I mean the the
programming term where you have people
who have opinions about a certain
open-source project and they're like
well I'm gonna fork the project to do
this and the other guy says I'm gonna
form a project to do this and you have a
holy one there's no reason the 14 exists
anyway just fucking do it and that's
pretty prominent in Linux but that's
what I mean by all those words so to
control the evolution of evolution and
so it's kind of recursive but it's
important because evolution itself is
this process that's organically going
along so you want to control and iterate
this process which is the evolution of
evolution so just to recap everything
I've been talking about has been
treating the evolution of evolution as
policy so we start with play-doh
control the breeding of the elites
middle ages where that's the elites a
fine sounds like a good plan to me and
they do it forever if Malthus who says I
but we also got to control the breeding
of the poor Darwin says hey we can make
new species through breeding that's cool
and then the EM gauntlet says we're
going to systematically control the
greeting in the name of public health so
this is this is the intellectual
foundation behind smash applied eugenics
right and so this is where the holy wars
start because once people they all agree
here to like okay that's a that's an
intellectual line but I agree with but
now that we're here who controls the
breeding there's going to be which
philosopher-king is it going to be well
[Music]
Margaret singer thought that all women
should control the breeding programs a
dolphin Horner whose name I can't say
but the state should control all the
breeding programs Henry Ford thought the
oligarchs who control it this guy you've
never heard of either Lysenko lysenko is
the reason why Russia's genetics program
are in a complete disarray they still
haven't recovered from its idiocy he
thought the people should control all
green
then you have hippies just running
around saying fuck this hit the brakes
its nature have a shot at this you know
it did good enough it should know keep
going then you have Craig feckner who is
you never want to be against this guy in
a fight this guy will wreck your life
he says the market should be in control
of breeding programs then you have
Josiah um last name was escape me saner
I think it is
he says the individual should at least
have a stake in all of these breeding
programs if they're all over the place
and then of course everybody's favorite
deep state blackops spook who certainly
didn't kill himself he thought that him
and his claim should control the
breeding programs and he funded the hell
out of that stuff and one day all that's
gonna come to the forefront but he was
big on this stuff too was super big on
this stuff so this is how the holy war
is basically evolved to control the
evolution of evolution and all of these
guys were wrong they're all wrong every
single one of them but they weren't
wrong because they were stupid they were
wrong because they were limited they
were too busy trying to look at Galton's
vision purely from a policy standpoint
applying a utilitarian applying the
moment the maximum amount of benefit the
least amount of burden and the least
amount of cost so they were trying to
play this out through the the games of
human law and in human policymaking well
that changed around 1950 that will that
change with Mendel that starts with the
change of Mendel so evolution of
evolution is not just policy it's also
technology what I mean by that is we got
the the random brothers over here they
figured out how to make casinos the
Mendel comes along by bike a random
twist of fate his works get picked up
and worked on and he figures out how to
predict the breeding outcomes of plants
and animals leads to Sciences wackiest
human being ever coming around with
breeding of humans which end Watson and
Crick will you figured out DNA all right
so here's where we go from policy to
technology we're taking all we're
increasing the the resolution of our
prediction power we get to the father
of the Human Genome Project where they
match human DNA now we're finally here
the inventor of CRISPR where we can
modify the DNA of living beings on the
fly this is critical because while
CRISPR itself there are problems there
are a million problems of CRISPR it's
probably not even going to be the answer
but because we figured out how to do it
it we will figure out ways to improve it
whether the final solution is CRISPR
whether it's something else doesn't
matter this has been tasted this
possibility has been tasted and that's
enough for people to keep trying to
apply on it and this is where it changes
because policy failed for the exclusive
reason that their only means of
controlling for the outcome they wanted
was through actual organic natural
breeding but here we can decouple
breeding from the execution required to
get the Galton's vision you can leave
sex completely out of the picture now
and you can still get Colton's vision
this is a mind-blowing possibility that
we have the unfortunate timing to be
born at the beginning of you definitely
want to be at the end of this you don't
want to be at the beginning and let me
explain why what have we done without
this crazy technology right what have we
actually done to breeding where we
didn't have the ability to do all this
magic shit well when death is valuable
we have found ways to breed animals into
apparently Arnold Schwarzenegger so what
this means is we were bulking these
critters up because death is valuable to
them you only kill them once and so you
want to maximize the amount of meat that
you're gonna get from the kill
so when death is the primary source of
value generation you're gonna make this
super freeze because you can only kill
them once now what happens when life is
valuable now you might think oh well
life is valuable that sounds good you're
gonna make fucking sexy nose a little
bit of please no you're gonna make
fucking mutts start it as a wolf like
that thing it's like torture and a
genome but that's what we did we did
that they didn't do that
life was valuable we one of these
critters around us this is what we did
and what you're looking at here this is
this is a glimpse of the future for the
human species we're gonna do that shit
to us I will put money on it we will do
that shit to ourselves because life is
valuable and here's again evolution of
evolution this policy we have the
Chinese killing every baby girl they
could find people who are intentionally
selecting their mating habits based on
eugenic data that they were able to
collect with her attacker they're not
trying to figure out who's Jewish and
who isn't this damn thing right here
this was this thing was like this is
like the carpet bombing solution to what
gulten wanted for guys probably don't
know this but this is a this is a birth
control dispenser so this thing was just
like it was just throw them right into a
society and fuck all let's see what
happens this was just like the carpet
bombing approach to get the answer you
were looking for and oh my god it's you
ended up experiencing all of the things
that Malthus warned us would happen and
we just didn't give a shit we were so
desperate to have a solution we just
threw fucking this at it
population control propaganda you've
seen this like all the singing people in
the earth we got stopped and it's gonna
get out of hand you got to do something
about this so this starts happening all
of which generates this wonderful little
line of population growth expected to go
down this of course is false the numbers
do go up for nations that don't practice
it only the advanced nations do this
stuff the self-determination stuff
because we're too busy trying to chase
Galton we want that perfect society and
if we have to eliminate ourselves to do
it Soviet that's what we're aiming for
we're trying to you gently reach a
eugenic equilibrium and this is what
humans have done without Christmas so we
have fucked with population mechanics as
much as possible throughout most of the
20th century and if you're looking for
reasons why the 20th century
so incredibly unstable here you go
you're looking at it the holy wars for
the evolution of evolution but now
because of CRISPR it's not gonna be holy
wars anymore it's gonna be a race it's
only a race to control the evolution of
evolution so again here's how CRISPR
works lands on a Cell says hey little
cell squirts in DNA and yeah
instead of blown out your DNA I'm gonna
scan your DNA I wanna I want to replace
this look this fuck check it out throw
this in rookie gun we're good all the
DNA keeps going the new DNA is in this
wholesale boost in mitosis and then poof
you have new DNA which means I could pop
some shittin me and if it spreads
through all of the virus spreads through
me or the virus delivery mechanism
spreads through me I will replace the
DNA and all of my cells eventually so
it's like hot swapping my genetic code
on the fly and by the way this CRISPR
$140 that's it for a test kit so this is
cheap it's only gonna get cheaper so
what we've done is because we no longer
need population mechanics to do this
type of research we can now focus on the
end of the Joule level which gives us
phylogenetic efficiency as an observed
orient direct decision act so start with
me observe the sequences we look at all
the letters and the distributions we
reconstruct the evolutionary histories
from here so we get a timeline so we can
figure out okay here's how these things
are going we can learn more about
evolutionary processes so we can make
some theories about if you alter this
DNA what do we get and then we you know
we check our work and then we come back
and we look around around around we go
right so we go to empirical we've got a
theoretical bouncing around
epistemological II was figuring out how
we can start modifying the long-term
development of these species to species
trees now we can we have only been bound
by population mechanics to do that hey
throw CRISPR in the mix now and get down
to the individual oh and by the way
because we're talking efficiency now we
have economics and I'll be able to walk
into this and you'll see
well the problems immediately start so
the evolution of evolution has
efficiency efficiency will close because
there are multiple metrics of efficiency
and now what I'm gonna do is I'm going
to present six models of efficiency in
the order in which I believe they're
going to play out over the next hundred
years
so CRISPR should aim from the least
amount of computational complexity this
is known as a analysis of algorithms
it's a big o-notation in computer
science right so what this is is you're
trying to create a CRISPR that does the
maximum amount of computation with the
least amount of complexity in this case
and once you select for that you will
have achieved a level of efficiency from
the CRISPR delivery system itself so
you'll have figured out the easiest way
to compress it down for mass production
right so that's the first thing you want
to do next thing is you should find the
lowest cost for that production so now
that you have the theoretical means of
the complexity down to its least amount
now we want to mass-produce this stuff
so we got to figure out what the prices
we got to figure out how do we
manufacture that least amount of
complexity how do we mass-produce it one
of our techniques are materials needed
trainings needed you know the entire
price discovery mechanism writ large
from there you want to do out allative
efficiencies which means you want to now
talk about the quality of the crispin as
now we're talking about before we were
just talking about can we do it yes can
we get a cheap yes okay
now because we can do it cheap there's
gonna be a lot of competition what is
the quality of my CRISPR what is the
marginal benefit I can provide the
consumers relative to the marginal cost
in production how do I differentiate
myself and say that the CRISPR I'm
providing is way better than that
assholes CRISPR over there he's a
fucking moron my shit's great so now
we're playing this this competitive game
in the economic space so then we
eventually did we get the Pareto rules
where we figure out the Pareto frontier
and we're saying well um now we're
shifting into this kind of this
political space where where we want to
achieve the maximum adoption until no
one else is made worse off so so as this
game involves you're going to discover
the Pareto frontier where no more
further
tinkering - this is actually going to
improve this the pre or frontier will
just cut it off right there on the spot
we won't be able to get any more
efficiencies so all of these things
combined will draw that Pareto line out
and that will be the end of the game of
proficiency now we go to the game of
meta efficiency this is where the
frontier and the scientists and the new
brilliant thinkers and the real sexy
marketing of CRISPR has a great
wonderful discovery is this collective
thing we're all doing the futures
company so bright as soon as it hits
this hard frontier the whole narrative
switches pretty much overnight now we
talk about
planned obsolescence and rebounding
demand so now we're talking about hmm
I'm already getting my CRISPR down to
price to unit economics I need to
maximize the amount of demand
permanently so how can I put CRISPR in a
place to where if if the man for it goes
down the price still goes up how can I
get it into place where demand goes up
the price still goes up now this is
called Jevons paradox and in economics
it's the idea of oil oil is a different
type of commodity because the more you
consume it the more you need and the
reason for that is because without oil
you need donkeys and slaves to do stuff
so in order for me to do work I need to
excuse me I need to consume oil to drive
my ass to work which is going to
assuming a factory it's going to need
oil to run so the more I'm consuming oil
the more work I can do that requires
more demand for oil down the line and so
this creates this Jevons paradox where
the demand for it goes up the cost goes
up the demand for it goes down the cost
goes up some sneaky terrible human being
is going to find a way to bind CRISPR to
this behavior and when that happens all
bets are off because then you can talk
about CRISPR purely returning maximizing
shareholder returns at that point has
nothing to do with quality has nothing
to do with public health or anything is
just all the fucking brown all the
fucking wheels are off and it's just
crazy trained forever so this is the
order I think the efficiency pathing
will go it should take about a hundred
years once you get here just try and
find a way off the planet because it
just doesn't get
so what does this look like what does
the marketing looked like as these
efficiency games play out what does
Gucci think about this what is Louis
Vuitton think about this I think we're
gonna sit on the sidelines I don't think
so
let me just give you an example of this
ad and read it to you in a sexy voice
over voice I used to do back when I was
20 but gosling West's Johnson artisinal
machine series by Gucci you'll have
you'll have the the stoic demeanor of
gosling the creative talent of Kanye
West and the British physique of the
rock Johnson over there all in one thing
and oh by the way you want this for your
babies maybe you want for yourself it's
crisp record don't put in me right now
right so now we're talking jeans as
commodity Jean edits his commodity so
now we're talking CRISPR is fully
exposed to the full force of marketing
at this point so all the artists and the
creatives and the people who are
experimenting with it I mean I tried to
layer in like a couple years ago I tried
to start a Kickstarter for this process
thank God banded like 30 minutes nobody
would have wanted to allow me to start
collecting the DNA of these celebrities
and selling the CRISPR apparently I was
way too ahead of my time but this is the
type of marketing you'll definitely be
saying and think about it from the
perspective of everyone involved on its
surface it looks like everyone actually
benefits from this at first
imagine a poor family in India they make
like two hours a day or whatever right
well they may look at this and say if I
was more like these people then I would
have an advantage so there's a huge
incentive for these people to them
don't CRISPR in themselves and I'm gonna
be the Indian rock it's gonna make some
creep beats and looks fly for all the
ladies right that's what I want that's
gonna maximize my chances in the game
yeah but you're not the only one doing
it everybody's doing it billions of
people are doing it so so any type of
perceived benefit if everybody can be
Kanye in less than what Kanye West does
doesn't matter it's it's now a cheap
commodity cuz everybody can do it if
it's genetically you know previous
position whatever however it expresses
of course as a question of nature versus
nurture I get that but for marketing
reasons I'm stricking and speaking about
marketing perception that's how it's
gonna be sold and that's how it's gonna
be bought
does that promise is gonna be made
people about buying bulk whether it's
true or not doesn't matter and then from
the production manufacturing side okay
now I can pay back my investors because
I'm hitting this markets at scale
eventually people start making policies
to be of subsidies to these producers
say hey come to my nation and make some
you know super humans as you promised
you can and then we will subsidize when
we eat some of the risks to incentivize
it further it's just one example I think
we look at Kanye enough moving on what
about the fashion industry that's not a
tumor that's a CRISPR fad what I can do
to my skin aren't I cool kind of status
games can we play here it's gonna drive
marketing it's gonna reach here it's
gonna push the whole thing we're already
starting to see artists playing around
the concept this is Patricia Puccini I
think I'm pronouncing that right night
times terrible but here is an example of
what appears to be obvious animal
features being grafted onto humanoid
types of beings there are this is a
favorite artist of very elite people by
the way if you look up this name I see
some stuff obviously a bat nose enlarged
flipper like hands one foot cleft palate
looks a little bit like a seal because
the detail obviously dog based features
some fucking weird me I know that is
longs in mortal combat but what you're
seeing now this is an example of of gene
Punk so you know what cyberpunk is and
you know what steampunk is what's gene
pump gene Punk is just I'm gonna
intentionally trash my genome now you
know you get tattoos you want to be a
badass I'm gonna look like a literal
fucking monster now because yeah cuz I
hate my dad now you're gonna see that
and that's gonna happen and the artists
are already experimenting with what
visually looks like that's some some
damn good skin tone I gotta say for art
first time I saw and I thought they're
actually real I thought they were actual
chimera but this is this is on the table
too it's not just the sexy stuff it's
the monsters too so where does all of
this art lead us to all of this art and
marketing it goes to memes controlling
genes instead of natural instead of
breeding and mating as the primary means
of getting the maximum amount of genetic
advantage for your distribution whoever
controls the means the memes will be
able to control that distribution all
the same you'll be reading out of it
entirely so you get the little puppies
around around doing this pepé thing the
bang right no we're gonna buy t-shirts
of Pepe look like tattoos of Pepe some
merch and whatever gene edits you got
bro throw them on top no problem I want
that fucking frog look so there's
someone Chris throws up some stuff cuz
there's obvious demand for it you get
the Pepe meme gene from her in two bucks
whatever and then poof now what you've
done is we've taken the distribution of
human fill a genetics or phylogenetics
and we've attached mimetic G markers
throughout the human species we'll be
able to see the effect of advertising in
our own genome that's terrifying
that's absolutely fucking terrifying but
this will be the primary means in which
the eugenicist s-- will go this is the
cheapest way you can do it because you
don't need to control the entire
production system of CRISPR that's some
some eggheads are going to play that
game of efficiency of efficiency it's
these guys these are the guys who are
going to control the distribution of
what humanity's future is at the genomic
level and they will do so in an
extremely unaccountable manner because
once hyper consumer practices start
touching the stuff and I'm walking you
through it you see what its gonna be
like
so now aside from making mutants and
more the rock Johnson's
we're going to cross the threshold where
we start figuring out if we play with
this gene we can start also changing our
brains I call this the gene drive of the
Bell
so like the Tower of the Bell but it's
the gene drive of about the humanists
they this is this is the petulance of
these people they think they can
quantize belief right this is all that
quantizing belief so they can prove that
there is no divine they want to say that
oh well I have modified the gene which
has changed your connectome and so all
of your freewill is actually just an
elaborate a tree and there's no free
will and West worlds right right that's
that's what they're trying to go for and
that's and they have the the efficiency
of economy backing them they have the
culture backing them by the time they
reach this point so we're naturally tip
into this space and it won't be tough
all you have to do is tell any expecting
mother hey you want a super baby you
want your kid to be fucking intelligent
when a high IQ baby there there's a
marketing I've done well fucking genius
that's it right so I'm rich of course
anyone's going to see it's going what I
have a dumb fuck like it's this you know
on one hand you're gonna have your mean
IQ IQ people some people buy into that
some people don't but whatever you're
using to measure your intelligence
capabilities you're going to see that
shift heavily once the hyper marketing
stars
what is that resulting to I don't know
but I tell you what will happen once you
cross that threshold we start
fundamentally undoing the one thing
we've been relying on the entire time
and our story doesn't end this way the
horrors of horrible stuff I'm talking
about it doesn't end this way by the way
I'm gonna explain to you why so let's
just assume that you and myself and and
everyone we know they are baseline Homo
sapiens right there
they're the homo sapiens who derived
organically from the evolution process
and now we have what I'm going to call
neurological derivatives so those
neurological derivatives that I'm gonna
focus on our emotions let's start there
right so I have emotions a very
sensitive guy and I feel stuff and
do stuff and it affects my behavior I
get my hand oh my god fuck or I see
something sad and I cry whatever I have
emotions right I'm gonna start here
these emotions determine social
interactions so if I emote to you I'm
mad it's gonna change the outcome of a
social interaction and if you emote with
a smile it's gonna change the outcome of
the social interactions so these drive
these these social interactions we
collaboratively figure out which ones
are good and which ones are bad and we
come up with a reward system which ones
we want to promote and which ones we
want to get rid of and we call that
culture so these are like efficiencies
we're building right and this in turn
leads the morality because culture isn't
enough culture is just for the present
for the operational generation
generation it's live only I want to take
my lessons learned here and I want to
preserve them through time I want my
kids to have some of these cultural
mores as well because there's some
pretty good efficiencies here I figured
out so you don't have to fall into the
common pit traps around it slow so I
want to bake this in right which is 10
leads to ethics which is the exploration
of all of this stuff and how they're all
related so after that when you get the
ethics and we keep examining you know
what is but if you know so all of these
things were doing these neurological
derivatives were engaging in we actually
deeply depend upon for our base ability
to communicate and these arguably lead
into the civil structures we are
designing aid our neurological
derivatives they absolutely form
religion legality the system of who owns
what what is fair what is not fair
finance - who do I owe can I even
comprehend the mathematics behind the
contract that I'm obligating myself
towards the science itself
can I a super brain out there trying to
figure out reality well I mean bacteria
didn't send rocket ships in the space
right so so instead of looking at
civilization as a byproduct of our
activity which human action homo
economic home economist says we should
do instead I look at civilization as a
reflection
of our neurological derivatives these
are the things we come up with and the
structure of these things are deeply
dependent upon all of us having the same
these because the moment you start
introducing people who don't have the
same emotions as everyone else the rest
of this shit doesn't even make sense
so if I strike fear from your emotional
capacity and I apply that to an entire
nation you're gonna come up with a
culture and a morality and an ethic
system that is fundamentally different
than everyone else and as a result
upstream or downstream you're gonna have
totally different religions and totally
different legal systems so this is the
baseline we've all had the benefit of
having this shared part right here we
all have roughly the same emotions of
course within here each one of these
develop their own models and assumptions
traditions and projections but it's all
derivative of this so what happens if we
start fucking with this because we're
making these well let's find out
it's a baseline human that we've been
exploring and oh no it's the ultra
humanist eco clave these people are the
that's let's imagine a hilarious future
where the blue church has the shit
kicked out of them and they lick their
wounds and run away they realize that
perhaps trying to teach people about the
values of their enlightenment ordeals is
a bit too expensive and risky so instead
they just start coding they're at those
into people at the genomic level why
deal with propaganda if I can make
drones that reflect everything I want so
now I got these humans who are afraid to
touch trees because they might harm them
they don't you know they don't want to
gyp throw away trash they have an
irrational fear of that no I'm fuckin
with their brain to limit their options
so I can then fulfill whatever my
ideology is so now I'm taking what the
baseline humans have made by modifying
the genome and then the connectome and
AI encoding my ideology into biology
itself the same way that I put me
into jeans say the unified cream click
leave happen season welcome to South get
some nationalists in here right it's not
just all blue church say it's uh you got
some Koreans in there and they're like
God North and South jeez this is a mess
I don't want to live in fear anymore
let's go make some babies that are a
little bit of both however they define
that you know of course they don't
resolve the geopolitical tension of the
region but they're already making people
who are demanding it we are unified they
have an extreme amount of dopamine for
example or you know they they have this
this heavy expansion definition of what
familial bonds it should be you start
tinkering with the brain completely
possible the slavery reparations clade
let's say the Karin's of the world
they're really uh they really don't like
slavery and they feel really bad and
they and the babies just aren't black
enough and they will not they just want
to just right the wrongs of history man
they just there you go now my babies
black enough so I'm in the fight now so
now you have this like signaling element
in addition to means and your genes now
you have ideological signaling all over
your GM we've already covered the the I
hate dad gene Punk's you've seen those
you're gonna see a lot of gene trash
coming out of here it's gonna be wild
it's a wacky wacky scene then why why I
let all the fun for the idea like this
let's get some corporations in here
that's the PepsiCo super baby white why
drink soda if it doesn't make your baby
super baby it's fuck and that seems like
a market loss I don't want to just rock
my teeth I want my kids to be fuckin
superhuman I just drink this can of soda
and proof them kids are at it
Louis Vuitton summer race and now you
got fashion back in the mix right and
this they've you know this summer have
your jeans look like this no it's and
then you have like versions of it
iterated it's good
I hope I'm conveying the madness of the
situation that's fuckin you might even
have a rogue AI though something's out
there making memes it could start a
strange crazy cult it's just fucking
with jeans on purpose to to maximize its
ability to keep people in its belief
system so we can feed resources
- it totally bill and then of course a
Neanderthal clave why deal with humans
22 before us it's bring the Neanderthals
back why not now I think I've
successfully made my point here now I
guess all that remains is how true is
any of this how am I taking this little
cast 9 thing and extrapolating all of
these possibilities maybe I just have an
overactive imagination
that's fair so let's look at what's what
I've been doing this is the Neanderthals
we've already made them there's 6,000 of
them
you brought Neanderthal brains back it
took a long nap but brought them back
you've all seen Jurassic Park you know
you get the it the DNA from the from the
mosquito right it's trapped in the amber
put it in the stem cell no way to go
right well that's what we did here we
went to a went to a Neanderthal exhibit
scrape some DNA off the bones plug the
DNA into human stem cell with the help
of CRISPR and we were able to then
induce stem cell into a neural cell to
make these brain organoids and oh by the
way we've attached those brain organoids
to robots and they walk around in their
little robot chassis so we're here I've
been here since 2018 and I'll take you
if anybody ever wants to see the lab
I'll take you just let me know I'll walk
in there so we're here all right so we
have one we have one clave of this wild
crazy thing I'm talking about this is
the sector layout of all of the AI
startups in Israel which is just one
country right these are this is the
ecosystem AI research and startups that
are already going down highlighted in
green is every sector that will
influence everything I'm talking about
that's damn near half if not over half
so again one country American is way
bigger euro zone's much bigger Russia's
they fucked up and then I don't
they'll ever recover but the Chinese are
certainly looking in this stuff too
because the thing about genomics is
actually data problem it's not so much a
chemistry problem so any advancement
from here will tip the scales into the
future I'm talking about an
uncontrollable fashion so the instinct
is to kind of dig your heels you know
say ah this is crazy I want nothing to
do I'm gonna fight it I'm gonna fight
all this stuff and God do I have a shot
at it man trying to fight this stuff you
know fucking lose it's a tidal wave of
incentives you're gonna have a good
flight and make yourself feel good but
lives are dolphins man what if what are
you gonna do um kind of defeatist but
wrap it up don't let your memes be
dreams let your memes become jeans and
you're all doing that's it that's all I
got sorry for the nightmare sorcs wow
thank you so much Pat that was quite the
journey all right
it's 935 right now Pat where you get to
stay for another half hour in a bit mmm
cool so this we're gonna switch over to
questions now so hopefully you guys have
prepared some feel free to throw them in
the chat I'm gonna start by warming Pat
up with a with a few of my own and then
I can start reading the ones in the chat
so the one that's top of mind right now
is can you speak a little bit more to
what you think the timeline for this is
like is there a Moore's Law equivalent
for synthetic biology is this gonna hit
some exponential curve like in the next
few years and I'm just gonna blow up is
it a hundred years like he said earlier
what's the story it never goes Kerswell
in the productive forces behind it will
definitely start going exponential the
demand for it will go exponential but
once you break the gene drive of Babel
Plateau everything plateaus over that so
because you'll be dealing with
fragmented societies that are no longer
able to communicate with you have a
sense of actual time lengths based on
the Neanderthal work I've to
improvements in CRISPR are on the
timeline the AI is getting better and
again we're actually able to use the
brains we grow to make the AI better too
which is enhancing things pretty
significantly as I I'd look after the
years easy 50 years okay so this this
segues to another question it seems like
a central assumption for at least the
section where you were talking about the
economic efficiency curves was
assumptions that the economy is gonna be
fundamentally similar to the way it is
today do you think we could enter some
sort of post capitalist realm that might
change your projections based on that
assumption so many years I mean if we're
if we're okay with lining signs this up
and chaining them and beating them then
yeah you don't have to pay but if you
need to if you need to recoup from your
investment
someone has to eat the bill somewhere
whether it's a state entity whether it's
a collective entity these scientists
will be heavy and demand I don't see
capitalism dying I see these scientists
making $500,000 a year probably more so
they'll be able to command those wages
they'll go wherever there is capitalism
whether it's here whether it's China
whether it's the fucking moon they will
find it their demand will be too high I
guess kind of a broad like meta question
is what's your theory of history I come
from a Marxist school of thought
originally that's
mathematic intellectual Marxism not the
I hate my you know I eat my parents
Marxism I I'm concerned primarily with
the the equilibrium between productive
forces and consumption forces it's the
most boring part of Marxism but it's the
only part that I actually take away and
then find interesting everything else is
just fluffing and stupid projections and
opening sense so I look at history that
way that changed when I came across a
person's book as he never released a
book which is a tragedy his publisher
was it's too afraid of the content his
name is Gregory Rollins he's a computer
scientist professor at the University of
Illinois
he is a Trinidadian immigrant and he has
that 1970s big African man personality
like big Matic and he wrote this
fantastic book called the human swarm
where as Marx was trying to go from
history and say hey it's the rich versus
the poor if you look at the scoreboard
it's not the poor have been beaten sadly
every single time it's actually the rich
versus the rich and the poor get
suckered in so what what what brawlin
says is he says well let's not look
through history and blame let's look
through history as if we're all stupid
and that's where he that's where he puts
his position he says yeah we're stupid
were malice were animal-like of course
but we're also operating primarily from
a place of ignorance and not malicious
ignorance but innocent ignorance and so
we can we can we can attribute certain
things that we don't like in our history
to to the bad things we need to
eliminate in current times but he didn't
do that he said okay well humans are
making the best assessment they can do
with the energy information and
resources they have it's anyone's guess
what works and what doesn't work so he
looked at it primarily from that point
which was a relief to look at history
for the first time without having to
find people to blame so I thank him for
that liberation all right final question
for me before I'll start reading some of
the ones in the chat can you speculate
on our salvation like do we need to get
off this planet
yes get the hell off
as fast as you can whatever it takes
that's the only answer I have there all
right
I'm gonna start reading some of the
questions in the chat we have one from
Marshall that I was asked to read is it
possible to aerosolize CRISPR yes right
now it is currently the the transmission
vehicle is very unstable but it can be
aerosolized the instability of it it
doesn't get you the results you're one
however that's the problem
you don't really go for aerosolized
approaches unless you're like super
close to single Rachel do you want to
unmute yourself and read your question
yes I'm what you're talking about a few
minutes ago do you think about all
battles start with petty conflicts of
Belcher bridge and then triple down and
that we're all just kind of like
mechanisms and there are bears when they
invite yes I think I think they're
primarily in competition with one
another and they are iterating their
knowledge of humanity to rope in more
and more people with or without their
permission I think that's probably the
most accurate description of their
behavior of that particular task of
people
alright key do you want to meet yourself
and read your question no I'm a little
scared to but I'll do it anyways I'm so
sorry
no it's great it's actually a lot of fun
when you add four timelines I'm like oh
maybe it already happened I'm kidding
I'm joking I'm totally joking I'm not
really joking thank you so can you I
just wrote can you speculate on the
reversal of entropy and I only ask that
because I'm always fascinated by Isaac
Asimov's really short story called the
last question um so I just I would love
to hear your thoughts on because there
was someone else who spoke about like
gods of chaos somewhere and I was like
that's hilarious um so yeah I'd love to
hear your thoughts that is certainly the
heart of the matter yes we are certainly
enslaved to entropy and it's the only uh
people ask me all the time do you
believe in the God and I'm like entropy
has all the properties that it's the
divine so accurately it's probably the
only thing that the British Victorians
actually put out there that was so
goddamn predictive entropy and reversing
it that is the Holy Grail
that's basically whatever was looking
for that kind of unaccountable future
where you get free everything you don't
have to be you know you don't have to
resolve your conflict at all that's the
dream of reversing entropy at least from
the human standpoint scientifically I've
struggled in it for a long time the
arrow of time for example being so
predominant is it's indicative of I mean
think of just running a thought
experiment if enter people is reversible
so what you're talking about is
symmetrical time that's really what
you're saying you're saying I can take
time in the positive and now I can make
it go back to the negative I'm talking
about purely symmetrical time so if you
have a symmetrical time then you're
talking equilibriums so any type of
positive time event that would happen
there would be in a corresponding
negative eventual time and eventually
you
hit zero entropy it looks like nothing
there's an absolute nothingness because
there is no energy all energy that can
happen gets reversed so you're talking
about any possible universe that can
embrace that can come from a Big Bang
there has to be an asymmetry of entropy
otherwise there is nothing because all
time is reversible asymmetry of time
implies equilibrium of time so you have
to have an asymmetry of time in order to
even get this so if we start playing
symmetrical time than a man over to your
presentation on that in the future if
you can I'm gonna read a question from
Joe which current solution does Pat put
the most stock in for getting off the
planet like game be learning our source
code and developing a warp drive any
other alternatives I'm backing something
that if game B fails my thing will work
what I'm proposing is extremely radical
I don't work but it's wild
the key to getting off this planet is
Astro economics that's the key it's not
enough to put your faith in scientists
and say Oh mass is gonna solve this
problem for me I'll just go back to my
job and wake up one day and space travel
will be here nope this is a full contact
sport and everybody's required to do
something so Astro economics is the only
way to actually do it because you need
to create incentive for people to go
into space and lo and behold there is a
much incentive despite all the crazy
shit we do to ourselves space is
fundamentally a desert there is nothing
up there there is so much nothing up
there that even going up there will kill
you our biology is not well-suited for
zero gravity it takes a tremendous
amount of sense incentives to make
people give a shit
so how do you make people give a shit
about going into a desert turns out we
have historical examples to look at
religion was a profound motivator of
getting people into a desert that is
effectively what the beginning of the
Old Testament is I'm sorry not beginning
by the time you get the Moses I'm going
to incentivize a bunch of people to walk
in a desert for 40 fucking days you know
how to do it it's their religion
certainly plays a role but it's not the
only way of doing it turns out that all
these asteroids there's a couple of them
that are sitting on a hundred million
tons of platinum that's five trillion T
trillion dollars how do you get that
asteroid I'll tell you I'll tell you I
won't I don't know how to get it but I
tell you whoever does get it that's
going to fundamentally change our
capitalism looks at their pension funds
how they fund everything their limited
partnerships and their outlays of
everything because once five trillion
dollars suddenly becomes reachable
you're not gonna fund another stupid
dog-walker app that's for goddamn sure
so I believe if you solve the the Astro
economics problem you will create the
necessary incentives for people to give
a shit about space and the easiest way
to do that is to make space labor cheap
but when a space leavin look like well
we could be space labor if zero-gravity
didn't trash us every five seconds we
were up there but I already showed you
the Neanderthals
those are real 6,000 of them oh we've
already sent some into space why we send
him into space because we want to evolve
them to survive space so that they can
be the processing units for space labor
that's why we're sending them up there
we'll see how the research goes but I
intend to build a very large fleet I
need at least to 3 million to 3 million
of these goddamn robots and I will be
able to start grabbing these asteroids
and slamming them into the moon and
selling the mineral rights but you got
to get the you got to get the incentives
all lined up it's it's about it's still
at this point it's still about tricking
human psychology and
them into a place where their incentives
are solving a problem so that's my
solution
it's wild crazy and zany but I'm back in
it I'm all-in pad I keep picking up on
the hints of like Frank Herbert's dune
and the background of beer you're
thinking that's another influential yeah
there's a related question here from
Dave Dave Michaels do you want to read
your question there we go my question go
already forget what it is also hi
Patrick is it uh you you're uh thanks so
earlier you mentioned getting off the
planet immediately is the way to well I
don't even know why you were telling
people to go see me but that was the
advice yeah so my question is so you get
off the planet how does that and I'm
hearing an echo in my own voice I'm
gonna take that off the societal
patterns the humans of SCYTL patterns
are gonna follow that right we're gonna
we're just gonna continue going into
space and going other worlds and Maury
to be us and we're not gonna change
well CRISPR is gonna change like how you
are and we can survive space and all
that kind of stuff like we're still
gonna be humans those patterns are
something to be there um what's the end
goal right so the the reason why the
space domain is so important is because
if we do not do this all of our genomes
will be homogenized for the sake of
hyper consumerism we will have either
specific genomes for productive
capabilities and then we'll have the
rest of the consumer base will have a
very specific genome to maximize their
consumption behavior excuse me at that
point there is no humans there's just
efficient cogs in a machine that is
designed for its own insanity
effectively this will promote a
tremendous an absurd amount of
resistance you
even fathom the level of insanity that
this resistance will take formats and if
we continue to play that game on one
planet there is a good chance we will
wipe ourselves out from this stuff
whether it's new whether it's the the
capability dabao tirana virus right now
and that's based on data that is barely
spooky I mean if you look at the numbers
it's barely spooky but when you start
playing CRISPR where people are
intentionally modifying their genome at
scale being trapped on a single planet
is a recipe for disaster and so yes we
will bring our nature with us everywhere
we go but at least we'll be hedging our
survivability by isolating ourselves
into different enclaves and the Stars
hopefully and and I say hopefully I know
I'm not here to solve war I'm not here
to create a utopian peace like
Dalton I don't I'm not that person I I
want to solve survival first before I
start you know putting fancy morality in
front of it so I believe if you had your
bets you scatter across and you put
enough distance between people you can
start playing this CRISPR game more
safely and you have backups because once
we played this CRISPR game we're not
going to stop I think we have to thank
you for one or two more Raven would you
like to ask your question
[Music]
sure
so could crisper horror stories have an
influence on the rate of adaptation of
this technology in the general
population assuming that it's voluntary
rather than something that's forced I
guess I have three technically and you
can pick whichever one you want to do I
guess is it possible we are approaching
gene editing from a perspective that
misunderstands the complexity of the
genome and that early adopters in
particular will end up with serious
problems potentially later in life
they're all fantastic questions I'll
focus on all three the marketing your
first question was a marketing question
which can which can delve into an ethics
question as well in terms of adaptation
and frightening people off or
accidentally scaring them into it I've
certainly painted a very horrifying
picture this entire time and I tried to
spice it up with occasional bits of
black humor but the it's not going to be
initially sold in the horror that I'm
presenting it's going to be sold as the
right thing to do is gonna feel good as
you do it you're gonna you're gonna feel
like you're doing the right thing as you
do it that's gonna be the most
successful it's it's like when Dalton
stumbled across it at first he didn't
come around and say we're gonna fucking
breathe these pores until their goddamn
machines he didn't say that he said
we're gonna fix the public health or the
system so he learned the power of
messaging very early on and I think
you'll see horror stories which are
happening now because it is unknown to
us and eventually those horror stories
will go away they'll be antiques and
you'll have the right side a history
story dominating the marketing space but
eventually
horror stories come back but they're
much more informed and they'll be
targeting actual things that people have
actually gone through so you won't be
you will be trying to put a boundary
around the unknown you'll be saying hey
man this crispr thing kind of fucked up
this person I know and then those who
are our stories become the foundation of
political fuel the future effectively so
gene-editing
does it misunderstand the complexity of
the genome that's a great question
the genome is the byproduct of four
billion years of winner-take-all
selection and the level of complexity
you have to engage in to maintain your
form over those four billion years is
beyond fattening it's beyond human
comprehension for sure there is a
incredible level of complexity in fact
so much so that a lot of the early
CRISPR bio hackers are getting terrible
forms of cancer because it's so goddamn
complicated you mess up your gene once
and there he goes Stage five Auto cancer
you're fuckin done for and those those
reports are being suppressed by the way
if you dig you'll find them so the early
adopters just like again I'm looking at
CRISPR as a selection mechanism the same
way breeding is a selection mechanism so
early adopters breeding is bloody stuff
brutal birthing process is painful the
the mating competition is brutal every
part of it is a very carnal experience
and this will be no different the the
early adopters will most certainly
experience their fair share of being a
loser in the selection game and some of
them will win but there's gonna be a big
body count for sure and that's just
purely rooted in ignorance of the
complexity of it
all right or approach being the end of
the hour now I just want to thank Pat
again for taking us through that journey
I guess one kind of open question for
you now is what's part two what's the
next presentation gonna be oh yeah I
like the entropy thing because that goes
into my other pet projects of quantum
gravity that I've been tinkering with
way too long
reversible in truth entropy I was
actually your house Steve when I
concluded something along those lines so
ironic that you're here now well I think
I think I'll talk about that that might
be relevant sooner rather than later
I don't know throw some suggestions uh
pretty good on my feet
who would be interested in the entropy
chat just to show hands okay gentlemen
thank you Kay Fleming appreciate it all
right just just in closing I just want
to thank Pat again I want to thank Peter
for stewarding the stoah and just a
reminder this this dough is a gift and
if you feel called to give a gift in
return and however way you want you can
do so at a link that will throw over in
the chat and and that's our that's our
time for today so thanks everybody for
showing up
thanks folks
thanks Beth thanks Dale look with the
nightmares my apologies