[Music]
everybody we are back it is Jack Murphy
and you are on the Jack Murray live
podcast you can find me Jack Murphy on
Twitter at Jack Murphy live website is
Jack Mercer live.com and find me on
youtube my channels are actually
starting to take off a little bit I'm a
there Jack Murphy live also on Instagram
everywhere around the internet jack
Markell live also check out the liminal
- order calm the limo order is a
nationwide all men's fraternity where we
work hard to be the best version of
ourselves that we can be so if we can be
a better service to our family our
community
and hopefully one day the nation as well
- and today I have a very special guest
somebody that I've been really looking
forward to talk to his name is Ryan
Williams and he is the president of the
Claremont Institute and publisher of the
American mine online journal and the
Claremont Institute has been in the news
a little bit with some very interesting
new engagement tactics and covering some
some interesting new content but before
we get to that I want to learn just a
little bit about you Ryan and have our
listeners get to know you just a little
bit and also learn a little bit about
what the the Claremont Institute is so
first off welcome thank you very much
for coming on the show today I
appreciate it yeah awesome today is
today is Presidents Day so we're both
squeezing this in between family and
other things so it's a I really am
grateful for your time but tell me
you're the president of the Claremont
Institute how did you find yourself in
that position and then also what is the
Claremont Institute and what do you guys
up to
sure yeah well the history of the place
is kind of in twined with how I came to
be here you know we were founded by some
graduate students in 1979 so we turned
40 last year and they you know the
waning years the Carter Administration
they thought that the conservative
movement knew it it was against
communism abroad maybe unlimited
government at home but didn't really
know how it ought to think about its own
history its own principles and and what
it should be for so that was the project
they were all students of this great
Lincoln scholar and scholar of America
named Harry Jaffa who passed away just
four or five years ago and I came out
for graduate school I
gone to Hillsdale College for undergrad
and the president of Hillsdale was a
former president the Claremont Institute
Larry Arne so that I sort of knew about
the place did one of our summer
fellowships the Claremont Institute's
that is and then I took a year off after
college and then came out for graduate
school started working part-time and
then before I knew it you know graduate
coursework was up and I was working full
time eventually running and most of our
programs spent four years as chief
operating officer and then took over in
September of seventeen so that's that's
sort of my my history and it it speaks
really to the Claremont Institute's
history which is we've always had a foot
in academia or the academic world and a
foot in the political world we always
thought that you know the battle of
policy day-to-day is important but
really the battle of ideas upstream from
that battle so we wanted to play in that
space so really what we do more than
anything else is we do a lot of teaching
especially in the summer for people from
beginning of career and policy in and
national intellectual life or political
life all the way up to mid-career and
then we have a fellowship for lawyers we
have one a new one for speech writers we
publish a quarterly review of books and
then you mentioned at the outset one of
our newer products is an online
publication called the American mind and
we do podcasts and conferences and all
the rest sort of think-tank stuff but
we've never really we've never really
done this sort of normal white paper
policy work although we comment on
politics and policies we've always been
interested in the battle of ideas part
of you know conservatism broadly
speaking and and then going forward who
knows what I think conservatism is
probably a diminishing diminishing asset
rhetorically so we're all trying to
figure out what comes next so would you
say yes to think-tank or know you're not
a think-tank or something sort of you're
yeah I mean at certain point labels are
pretty descriptive because everyone
knows what they are so we're a
think-tank we just do a little less of
direct policy work then then your
standard you know Washington think tank
and we're way out here in California so
it's always kept us I think to our
benefit out outside the DC
chamber right right and in reference to
Clermont and the folks that have been
part of the Clermont Network I often
hear this phrase drowsy and applied to
them can you explain what that means
sure broadly speaking it's it's a way of
looking at political philosophy or the
history of ideas and how they influence
politics Straus really more than anyone
else at the in the 20th century revived
the serious study of old books whether
it's Aristotle or Plato or Hegel or
Nietzsche you know he'd like to he would
say and his students would say they're
really like in their political
philosophy laughable realm they're
probably twenty great thinkers we should
study them and we should study them in a
way that we think they still have
something to teach us rather than
looking at them as sort of historical
curiosities so taking them seriously on
their own terms
that was sort of out of out of fashion
in the 20th century when Strauss took up
that project and historians and
political philosophy students and those
types political thinkers thought yeah
you know Aristotle is interesting
because he had this influence in his
time and he's time bound but to take him
seriously as offering any wins wisdom or
insight into politics now would be crazy
headstrap Strauss said that was a great
presumption you should first try to
understand them as they understand
themselves before you think that you're
better than them you may come to that
judgment eventually but first you know
take them on their own terms is there a
difference between a westcoast Strauss
enn in East Coast Strauss iam yeah
the categories are too facile of course
or to you pay with a broad brush but
roughly speaking the East Coast I would
say is a little less political thinks
thinks that the American political
project is as fine as far as it goes but
you know kind of a materialistic thing
not that high not that noble that's good
it lets them do what they want to do in
terms of you know seeking the truth and
philosophizing and and again I should
have a disclaimer they don't all think
this way it's just a sort of broad broad
brushstroke and then the West Coast is
really I mentioned Harry Jaffa at the
beginning it's really he and his
students are West Coast drowsiness
followers and fellow travelers which is
to say a little more comfortable with
the scrum of American politics had a
little higher opinion of the American
political project I'm selling it short a
little bit a much higher opinion you
know it was sure we were we were liberal
small-l liberal in the political
philosophical sense but there's also the
sort of moral architecture of the
founding the the concern with happiness
and virtue and nobility is there as well
it's just the rhetoric and the
principles in their application is
updated for a world very different than
the ancient world yes it's a interesting
to me to think that studying ancient
philosophers would be out of vogue I
guess I didn't really realize that
because as far as I've been paying
attention to politics and philosophy you
can't you can't walk to tweets without
hearing somebody reference Nietzsche or
Aristotle at this point in time yeah and
I think to a large extent that's part of
Stratis legacy not just him but but he
was probably the biggest player in in
the serious revival of that kind of
study well would you say the general
goal of the Claremont Institute is or
let's how about two parts what was the
goal and has it changed over time our
mission you know has been to to quote
verbatim just forgive me listeners to
restore the principles of the American
Founding to their rightful and
preeminent place in our national life
that's still our project but restoring
principles is a very different thing
from you know offering an unchanging
suite of policy prescriptions or being
unsensible to the changing needs of
politics and American cultural and
political life so I would say our
adaptation is how do you revive those
principles or how do you apply them you
never go back in politics of course in
any real sense we're not going to return
to the 18th century or to that cultural
and political landscape but I think we
think the principles are true and so we
have to figure out a way to reapply them
because if we don't this experiment
self-government is going to turn into
something else and if it if it's not
already well down that road yeah do you
guys do
you come out and support a specific
candidates no I mean we're we're a
non-profit so we don't endorse
candidates or or legislation we
certainly comment on on policies and
candidates but we're not in this you
know PAC or C for business at all so we
we don't get directly involved in
campaigns or policy work well to the
extent that you can talk about it before
the in the early days of the 2016
Republican primary did you guys have a
general favorite by early days yeah I
think the earliest indication of our
general disposition was I think in the
spring of 16 my colleague Bill Buckley
wrote a piece for the magazine I think
for the online online portion of the
Clemmie review books this was before the
American line was up where he said I why
I'm anti anti Trump and he was kind of
riffing off an old I think he had in
mind you know Buckley way back in the
day wrote wrote a kind of defensive Joe
McCarthy and and I think back then I
think Buckley was kind of anti anti
McCarthy I think bill took that
inspiration a bit but he sort of laid
out the case for look I mean we're not
quite sure what to make of Donald Trump
but the hysteria on the what was then
the early never Trump right and the left
about this guy is totally misplaced and
sort of out of control we ought to take
a more sober view of of him in the run
of American political history and we
should you know we should have a little
sobriety about the whole thing and then
the a lot of that I guess culminated in
the piece you you want to talk about I
know which everyone wants to talk about
which was Mike Anton's piece in
September called the flight 93 election
yeah so talk about that a little bit
would you because that that seems to be
an important piece and people are still
referencing it today yeah well Mike had
read vogue Li's piece I'm good friends
with Mike known him for over a decade
now and you know Microsoft reassessing
the field he was a little more open to
Trump there was this sort of um this
group of us who had been in and around
the Claremont Institute for four
the better part of its history who are
sort of trading emails privately about
how we ought to think about the
Republican primary field and how we
ought to think about Trump and the
possibilities of a kind of populist
outsider and so that that kind of all
came to a head Mike Mike stole this
public's this story publicly so I'm not
speaking out of turn but he originally
sent us a piece called I think it was
called towards a more responsible and
coherent trumpism then ultimately my
colleague Charles Kesler some of the
other editors decide it wasn't quite
ready or didn't quite fit with with our
editorial project and that was probably
three three four months before flight 93
and then Mike wrote five ninety three
and we decided you know either we'd come
closer to him or we'd met somewhere in
the middle but we decided it was
definitely worth publishing and the rest
is history Rush Limbaugh I read it live
on air crashed our website and it's it's
still our highest traffic piece a month
in month out yeah well I can imagine I
mean it really set the tone for the
urgency of the the struggle in front of
us here as a nation in terms of where
we're gonna go in the future and whether
or not we could withstand yet another
four to eight years of sort of doing the
same thing without some serious drastic
damage coming to the country the union
and everything else and do you think
that this flight 93 article has helped
coalesce some of your thinking or your
networks thinking or the people who want
to contribute to your publication has it
become a rallying point did it push
people away what was the fallout or
benefit to Clermont American mind for
running that yeah I think in many ways
were indebted to Mike I mean he with
that piece sort of elevated our new
baseline for public awareness it wasn't
without its you know you asked if it
really needed some folks of course I
mean Trump remains pretty polarizing
even on the right as we everyone could
see and I think it's you know it's kind
of a more hysterical and vocal minority
always against him now on the right than
it was back then but you know you know
our constituencies are our fellows we've
taught over the years you know we have
about
a little over 700 alumni our donor
community everyone has liked what we've
done they were divided like the
conservative movement at large on the
question of Trump I think a lot of them
have come around as they've they've seen
that Anton was not being I mean it was a
polemical piece so he was being a little
hyperbolic but yeah his you know his
histrionics proved to be pretty
prescient actually with the kind of
insane reaction to Trump from the left
and you know I like to joke with some
friends that and colleagues that one of
trumps great virtues is he's the
unmasked er you know he he pulls the
masks down on the modern left or at
least the leading edge of of modern
leftism and shows that you know Anton's
predictions about how many more years of
consistent rule by this group we could
put up with I think that was he was
right and not not hysterical or
overblown no and I think not to cut you
off there but I think that the way that
the Democratic primary is going right
now only shows that he was even more
accurate today than even before like
very predictive of the future and for me
in my book and Democrats are deplorable
I really analyzed a lot of these same a
lot of these same trends and I came to
the conclusion that there was a stopping
the Democrats a stopping Hillary was was
like primary function number one what
and and Trump represented an excellent
bomb to toss into the whole system and
at least if anything disrupt the flow
and the nonstop March that would have
only been more brazen had had Hillary we
had Hillary won and I think it's really
interesting to see now how the
Democratic primary is revealing the fact
that they've all continued to just you
know skew left as hard as they can every
single one of them on stage talking
about free health care for illegal
immigrants and Bernie Sanders going on
about how America's racist country from
top to bottom and you know Elizabeth
Warren saying racism is horrible in the
United States and getting worse every
single day and all of these things fit
under this umbrella term that I've seen
you guys use in your new pieces
called multiculturalism and you wrote a
very eloquent piece so did your chair as
well and I wanted to sort of dig into
that a little bit um could you just
explain what you guys mean by
multiculturalism now and how is that
piece that you wrote is it reflective of
sort of your central central goals and
motivation and sort of umbrella for the
work that you're doing moving forward
like how pertinent is it to the mission
for you yeah I think it's um you know
like I said where we're trying to figure
out how we apply the principles of the
founding these days and we think the
central threat in a way is this new but
new evolution of the left probably
starts in the 60s although it has roots
going back farther and that's
multiculturalism as an ideology and how
most people are a lot of people that the
terms not perfect we like it because
it's comprehensive and suggests an
ideology but it's confusing to some I
mean when a lot of people think
multicultural they think what are you
against you know immigrants a good food
and and cultural diversity that's that's
crazy you guys are you're nuts but when
we mean it as an ideology we really mean
it wrapped up with this new identity
politics and political correctness
sort of suite of approaches to politics
and it's it's the latest evolution of
modern progressivism which we've been
arguing against for well it's been
around for a century but we've been
arguing against it since at least the
early 90s and it's sort of the newest
and most virulent form of that so it
takes all of the all the apparatus of
progressivism the modern administrative
state that tends to rule by expert in
judges beyond the reach of politics and
it marries it to this insane obsession
with identity based on race gender
sexual orientation and really seeks to
divide Americans along group lines
rather than providing any sort of common
American identity or citizenship that we
might unite us so we think introducing
that kind of discord and inflaming it
really is a threat to the success and
preservation of of our American Way of
life yeah I mean the name of the name of
the articles defend
erricka defeat multiculturalism that's
pretty subtle titles over here you know
as a total side note it's like as a
publisher myself I get annoyed at having
to do you want to say clickbait but like
just names and titles that are gonna
just drive engagement you know you got
it furious and this and outraged that
and I really just want to put out the
main subject just hope everybody likes
on it but that is not the way the human
mind works and that is not the way
social media game works so guys forgive
me if I ever present something that
looks click baby I swear there's meat
inside just give it a shot
so defend America defeat
multiculturalism you in that article you
guys I'm sorry you yourself through
author put the struggle against
multiculturalism on the same level as
Lincoln defending the Union and and in
the Civil War and abolishing slavery can
you make that argument for the listeners
that may not be familiar yeah
and I'll say you know the the equation
of the two is not to draw some moral
equivalence full-stop between the
problem of slavery and this problem of
weaponized identity politics but it's
really to say the broader point is that
this is a question about the fundamental
things we think about our politics the
human nature what it means for what we
do in politics what it means for how
political coalition's should work how
they should look what it means for
citizenship and voting so it's it's sort
of a in the old political science sense
a regime question you know we disagree
we've written a bit about us being now
in a cold civil war and I think what we
mean by that is not all I mean I think
the broad swath of middle America or
just normal Americans sort don't think
about politics thank God every day in a
day out they're not doing this for a
living like like you and I are in some
ways so now I don't mean to paint a too
broader brush with to normal citizenry
you kind of have a notion of this kind
of thing but I'm not quite sure how to
think about it but really the elites
driving our political conflict there's
just this huge divide that goes to the
core of human
and justice and that's what we meet so
that Lincoln talked about a house
divided
during the slavery crisis and he talked
about look one sized side thinks slavery
is right and should be extended the
other side thinks it's wrong and should
be you know at the time he said not
squelched permanently but really pared
back slowed down and put on the course
of ultimate extinction so that's what he
meant by this sort of regime crisis and
I think where a house divided on
questions of justice just as we were in
the 1850s although it's different of
course we're not fighting over enslaving
a good portion of our citizenry no
you're not but at the same time you know
if you read your Kurt Vonnegut you can
see how this stuff carries out into the
future and I wrote a book that it's a
the redistribution of oppression and so
you know basically this new regime this
new ideology is devouring liberty and
redistributing oppression and you know
in your essay you lay out an argument
that I would like to learn more about
and I would like more people to pick up
on it is that really what we're facing
are two competing versions of justice
and that is not something that can be
maintained for a long time could you
explain can you explain that a little
bit please yeah yeah I mean the old
imperfect and implementation of course
as the post slavery controversy shows
maybe more than anything else but the
old the old way of American justice was
to view it at in its ideal as the equal
protection of equal rights so or we're
all not gods and we're all not beasts we
at least know that about humanity and
that means that we shouldn't rule each
other without our consent and that means
we should protect and governments should
protect the equal rights that we have
under the law that's that's the ideal of
American justice at a certain baseline
and I think underlying that as a view of
human nature you know we can know what
humans are we can know the difference
between beasts or gods however you
conceive of gods and we can sort of know
that we have this equality at that basic
level as Lincoln said not equal and
talents not equal in virtue not equal in
intelligence but equal and being equally
human
that means certain things for government
it means among other things a limited
government because unlimited government
ultimately it will abused rights doesn't
mean small government I should say
especially these days but and then the
other view is the view of the
multiculturalists or the identity
politics left is that no really we're
not really the most fundamental thing
about us is not our individual equality
of rights in fact it's differences
amongst groups its histories of
oppression as you said and it's about
taking the former oppressor group and
taking it down a couple notches rhe
distributing goods services honors and
prestige to the formerly oppressed
groups and as we see from the attack of
modern liberalism even in the last 10
years that that intersexual
intersectional basket is constantly
changing you know that the my colleague
bill vocally I don't know if he did this
in print or not but he talks about the
the oppression Olympics you know it's
kind of yeah it's hard to know who's on
top and who's on the bottom and it's
hard to know who ought to decide those
things but that's that's kind of this
that's what's devouring the left-right
our the thing they're trying to sort out
in the primary and elsewhere is how do
we decide on what basis do we decide
who's the most oppressed and is the most
are the biggest oppressor I think the
left kind of agrees that the biggest
oppressor are so grisly male yeah you
and I so that that's the only thing they
can agree on I think the rest of it is
up for grabs
yeah what's interesting what's really
fascinating about your experiences and
mine as I see it is that I don't have a
background in political science or even
in philosophy I was a philosophy major
for like a half a year at a university
and then I read Marx and I was like
economic sounds important let me learn
about that so I got a degree in
economics but I didn't I got into all
this stuff you know ten years ago after
my divorce starting to learn about the
dating markets and the mating markets
and and marriage and then feminism and
then intersectionality so like I started
in the trenches just trying to figure
out how to rebuild my life after my my
divorce and as I kept pulling on the
string it just keep letting leading me
all the way through into radical
feminism intersectionality kimberlé
crenshaw how all of those theories now
have infiltrated through academia and
media and through a very highly
leveraged and effective minority has
implemented them into federal policy
which then you know just spreads all
across the land and changes basically
fundamental nature of human interactions
especially on college campuses for
example so I've been able to follow this
path all the way to sort of the same
point that you guys did assuming your
path was a little bit different than
mine given given the you know your
educational and and history of the
institution but then we came sort of to
the same conclusion which is that this
identity politics intersectionality
radical feminism all this crazed
pandering to identity politics is a
fundamental and existential threat to
everything that we've got going on here
and for the longest time for me it felt
like I was a crazy person talking about
talking about war on men and more on
masculinity because at the heart of all
of this stuff is an attack on
masculinity because masculinity is the
source of male power male power is the
sources of oppression all societies have
been patriarchal all of them have been
oppressive and therefore male power is
like the root of it and we need to
attack it and that's what's been
happening and I guess I was I was
thinking I was a crazy person until the
APA came out last year with their
pathology aged pathologizing of
masculinity saying that risk-taking and
competitiveness and such are our
sicknesses and need to be cured
basically and then hearing the language
of radical feminism rang out in the
judiciary hearings the confirmation
hearings for Kavanagh so that's when I
was like okay this is all not just a
fevered dream that I'm having and it's
actually all real and it's happening
everywhere and it's infiltrated our
governments and the highest levels of
the land talking about the Supreme Court
etc so I'm fascinated by the work that
you guys are doing
because it's like just this collision
and Confirmation I think that we're all
sort of on the same path and we see
things the same way now I doubt that
everybody around you and your think-tank
ideas fear universe is he's accepting of
your ideas as I may be what has been the
reaction of your sort of think-tank
cohorts that are around you that you
know engage and respond with Clairmont
what do they think about your
identification of multiculturalism as an
existential threat and something that
needs to be a highlight and a focus for
us yeah well the one of the interesting
that piece that you mentioned defeat
multi cultures and defend America or the
other way around I forget you know you
write these things until these things
when you wait I got that but I think the
most a couple of interesting responses
one from Peter Meyers a friend and
academic was you know he he said he he
didn't want he basically said this is
different than the civil rights struggle
that's that was a noble thing so we
ought to be careful about how we talk
about this but the more the more
pointing critique was from Peter
Berkowitz who is involved with Hoover
and actually is now I think still at the
State Department head of policy planning
he replaced Chiron Skinner another
Hoover colleague of his but that's
neither here nor there but he's an
interesting guy and an academic by
training but he wanted to say look it's
not a regime multiculturalism is not a
regime it's not a way of life it's not
as comprehensive as you say if we're if
we're not clear in our categories then
we're miss diagnosing the problem but I
would say in the rank-and-file of our
donors and our friends and our political
actors especially amongst the sort of
more Trumpy crowd or pro-trump folks it
all makes perfect sense to them they may
especially when you say what I mean by
multiculturalism is identity politics
they they all agree that this is this is
a weaponized form of divide and conquer
that really can't end well any
if you see polling on identity politics
nationwide nobody really likes it I mean
it's sort of 6040 against to the extent
that people know what it is so I think
there's a lot of you know political and
rhetorical hey to be made by raising
this question in that way that's partly
why we raised it but you know more
importantly I think it's it was for us
the the latest evolution of this central
project of progressivism to sort of
undermine Americanism and
constitutionalism at its root so we
understand it in that sort of that the
evolved century of liberalism has the
latest instantiation of it and in many
ways the most troubling version of it I
mean it's you max you mentioned Marx it
is a kind of it's a little too clean but
it is a kind of cultural Marxism so we
shouldn't be surprised that the EM the
economic justice left you know
the burning of old has now become the
identity politics warrior of Bernie 2.0
you know he's easily transitioned from
from the old Marxism to the new cultural
Marxism yeah and that you know that's
gonna be very interesting to see how
that plays out in 2020 if he is indeed
the nominee I think that in 2016 there
were a number of Bernie supporters who
in fact I wanna called a number of them
indefinitely in my book who were burned
through the primary process including
one woman who was a Bernie delegate in
Nevada went through the caucuses there
saw how Hillary basically stole that
from him then went to Philadelphia so I
saw how they treated them there and then
just quit the Democratic Party voted for
Trump but I don't think she's gonna go
back to Bernie in 2020 if he's the
nominee partly because she's already
gone through the fire and seen a light
secondly because you know he's just he's
so vastly different now with this you
know rate a racist nation from top to
bottom I just was floored when I heard
him say that in the last or a couple
debates ago I hope that's something that
people never let him forget because if
that's your attitude if that's your
attitude why do you even want to be
leader of this
like what are you gonna do what are you
gonna do when you get there I want to
sort of go back to something you said
just a minute ago about the polling on
identity politics or multiculturalism I
think that in a very easy and quick
survey people be like I'm for and I'm
against or whatever but if you sit there
you really explain to them how it is
permeating every element of our society
and our laws and our money and jobs and
relationships and fertility in household
formation and all kinds of things then I
think that they would start to have a
more negative perception of it one would
hope but you know they just rationally
speaking I'm not talking down to anybody
it's like if you're not full-time
political professional it doesn't make
any sense to even pay attention to any
of this crap so it's not a pejorative
it's like I just I understand why people
don't talk about it or don't think about
it so there is an element of Education
that needs to take place and I'm
guessing that's part of part of what you
guys are trying to do as well to just
sort of explain how it is everywhere
yeah and it's yeah I would say normal
Americans it's not on their radar and I
mean as you said not majority of Lee I
mean the only the best things when I say
normal Americans right regularly Envy
you know raise their kids and make a
living and improve their communities but
unless unless like you the full weight
of the modern regime comes down on them
either through you know social
Australasian running them out of their
jobs I mean anyone that works for an
employer with over 15 employees is that
risk of getting caught up in this modern
apparatus that's driven by identity
politics my um my colleague Chris
Caldwell has a new book out it sounds
like a book on entitlements because it's
called the age of entitlement America
since the 60s but really it's about how
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 though it
was designed to address this discrete
injustice of Jim Crow segregation
quickly through the courts and through
administrative agencies got taken up as
a generalized vehicle for identity
politics and for the enforcement of the
ruling classes notions of justice
redistribution honors prestige
whether it was based on race the
original problem that was meant to deal
with or sex which is also in the law but
then now quickly gender sexual identity
you know and on and on and on there
seems to be no limiting principle about
it it seems to just be based on and I
this is I wanted to bring up this
fancier point earlier the difference
between these two worldviews the old
worldview and it's not just the founders
but I know an older tradition and one
that continued past them was that we can
know reasonably through our the exercise
of our Reason what's right and wrong
what politics ought to pursue and what
it ought not to pursue whereas I think
the new way of understanding politics
and power whether it be Marxist or early
progressives or historicist or now now
the modern identity politics left is
really it's not based on reason it's
based on will you know if I'm a group
big enough group and I will something or
desire something and I've been
historically oppressed and I'm due
rights I'm due recognition and
ultimately if you go down that that road
far enough you know every Chris puts it
this way in his book every new right
that's created I would say I would add
Chris doesn't say this but I would add
especially one that has a basis in this
new notion of group will or power rather
than reason every new right you add you
know has to come at the expense of some
someone else's rights that the older
notion of rights of natural rights of
the founding meant that these were
rights that we ought we all had a duty
to protect amongst our fellow citizens
and the government had to right to
protect for us they were kind of
negative rights but when rights become
these things that I'm owed materially
and as a matter of dignity it becomes a
sort of a war of all against all of all
identity groups against all identity
groups and if you end up end up on top
that's good
if you're on the bottom it's not as good
yeah you know that's an interesting
perspective because thinking about it
now if if the whole thing is basically
about taking from one to give to another
rather than provide like providing an
environment that everybody has the same
chances if it becomes taking from one
and giving to another deep inside people
have to understand that they're actually
like making a taking on people right and
if you're going to be taking something
from someone and or you know parallel
this was like a war conflict it's like
you have to stop thinking of them as a
human right because if you thought of
somebody as a human being with rights
and you know they're just entitled to
their liberty and all that you know you
would be less inclined to just want to
take something from them snaps thing
from so there has to be some element of
dehumanization and and sort of turning
them into monsters which is I think part
of why the straight white hetero guy is
being so demeaned and degraded today
because how how else can you justify to
yourself taking something from someone
if not if you don't think that they're
somehow undeserving or subhuman or you
know some sort of you know manifestation
of evil or something like that and you
can see that in this just in the media
and in the discourse and then the
language and then the anger and vitriol
and of course they deflect it by saying
oh no no this is a structural thing it's
not like individuals do it but come on I
mean the whole structure is built up of
individuals what are you talking about
no one who gets back to you know Madison
and the Federalists says that the the
first object of government is to protect
the unequal faculties of folks because
it will lead to unequal results
I think the modern left and look we can
we can bracket all this and say of
course at the time a huge portion of the
population was enslaved so and at a
principle level the founders knew that I
knew it was a problem but he nonetheless
said in in the best sense government
needs to protect our ability to acquire
property to pursue our happiness and
we're not all blessed with the same
gifts talents and ability to do all that
so if you take that as the baseline of
just human nature which I think most
sane people would you know or all we can
we can do along through habit and
acquisition of talents
stacking I listen to your Scott I find
that we can all improve ourselves of
course but you know I'm no Einstein in
in intellectual pursuits and you know
I'm no Jackie Robinson and my ability to
play baseball so you know I'll always
have unequal sports achievements of
Jackie Robinson and I will always be
intelligently and mentally unequal to
Albert Einstein and but the modern left
I think sees any group difference or a
group disparity as the result of
oppression or structural racism or
institutional racism as they say so if
you if your if your goal is to eradicate
that fundamental fact of human nature
the only way to really do it is is
through a sort of unlimited state and a
really tyrannical pursuit of the
quashing of human nature and that is the
same project as the great tyrannies of
the middle of the 20th century and
that's that's why we don't think we're
being histrionic or a little hyperbolic
when we say look down this road lies
something really bad even though it's
not you know Bernie's not out there
advocating you know gulags and some of
the supporters might be but if you love
Bernie bros you know we're all excited
about the Gulag as we know from James
O'Keefe's reporting but you know Sanders
and out there trying to nationalize the
railroads or you know create bread lines
and gulags and death camps but you know
the logic of this way of doing politics
and and this denial of human difference
and messiness is really frightening and
and we've been we've been down this road
before we had a different Avenue towards
it but it's you know doesn't end well
yeah I think that that's interesting
there's a parallel conversation going on
in biology and psychology right now
about did biological differences between
men and women and and large populations
and such and and how the the data and
the science seems to keep marching
steadily towards you know empirical hard
evidence that there's differences
between men and women in large
populations and whatever and maybe maybe
they're generally the same but there are
certainly group differences and there's
a huge push back against acknowledging
that right and this is this is where you
know the denial of science and reason
gets alarming for me and that's why some
of these issues of radical feminism and
the transgender issue and so it's become
such flashpoints because they really
emphasize and highlight how modern left
is just just tossing science into the
trashcan in order to keep advancing the
goals that they have which is to you
know basically make it slit everybody
everywhere is the same in all ways at
all times with the same outcomes and the
same successes and so this battle the
struggle is actually happening on a
number of different levels across the
country various layers whether it's
academia or in politics or whether it's
in science and it does seem to me that
there is a growing resistance to this to
these ideas and I do see that there's
like a new coalescing I mean we see that
there's a new parties sort of emerging
both Republican Party and the Democratic
Party very different and one of the ways
that I've seen that people one of the
common traits to divide these two groups
now would be sort of the blank slate
errs versus people that believe in some
elements of biological determinism now
if you are believe in determinism it
doesn't mean you believe in superiority
you just believe in admitting and
acknowledging that there are differences
in difference and preferences and
desires and risk tolerances and such and
if you're a blank slate asti's more than
the same and it's just society does it
to you oh and so I'm seeing a sort of a
joining I guess that's why the evopsych
guys are popular with the red pill
community and it's more reactionary
politics and such and and it doesn't
make for someone savory bedfellows at
times but are you seeing are you seeing
sort of a a growing push back do you see
the group that that I can identify
multiculturalism identity politics
intersectionality as a problem is
growing or are we still on the fringes
what's your what's your prognostication
on that what's happening and where are
we going and who's on the team
well I think no I think it is growing
you know helped helped immeasurably by
the what seems to be the galloping
radicalization of the left you know
especially at the national political
level and on the campuses and look we
got to be honest at basically all of the
commanding heights of our culture the
only place that some semblance of right
winger even has real national control is
in politics and even there I think half
the team doesn't understand the problem
right you know this this new way of
thinking about human nature and and
justice has taken over the HR
departments at all of our major
corporations it's certain now it's you
know New York Times in the 16:19 project
it's coming to a if it wasn't already
there it's coming with with a vengeance
to a K through 12 classrooms near you at
my school where my keep my daughter goes
to school right here in Washington DC
yeah so I I think I think people are
waking up to this the political
establishment is sort of it's a mixed
bag as it always is I mean the to the
extent that many of them who see Trump
as a real inflection point and see the
future of right-wing politics in America
as a little more populist a little more
nationalist a little more for lack of a
better term trumpian are trying to
figure out a way forward that both
rhetorically and then policy wise that
resonates with with their with what
their what just what ways in which we
ought to steer us towards a more just
national political life but then there's
a good portion of the Republican
establishment and even part of the
think-tank world that seems to think you
know we're still in the realm of really
just procedural disagreements quickly
incrementalism you know don't get too
excited this this this regime and
self-government we have is fine we're
doing better than ever materially why
are you all so freaked out whereas I
think you and I and many others
increasing numbers both at the
grassroots level and at the elite level
on the right are pretty alarmed at the
church
three of our modern divided and the
modern left yeah I think I think it is
true that it is growing and it's growing
in various different sectors like I said
before so it might be interesting to see
about how how we can unite you know just
identify the various sort of industries
and and and intellectual genres that are
and encountering the issues presented by
these these theories and then try to if
we use like a common denominator of
discourse we can attract people from the
various silos we want onto the same
theme and it's it's something that just
came to mind while I was talking to you
because really we need the evopsych and
biologists guys to really get on get
louder and get more voice in the matter
because we need people to understand it
it's a it's a just a physical
impossibility for everyone to end up
with the same outcomes and so making
that as a goal is a disaster and you
know what I find I've watched these guys
like Eric and Brett Weinstein they
having these public journeys they're red
pilling like right in front of your very
eyes but then they're just afraid to
take the plunge at the end of the day
because they still have some level of
trumpet arrangement syndrome
and I'm just hoping that that guys like
them and others will will continue to
work do the intellectual work and and
maybe work through the emotional baggage
that comes along with this idea of
supporting Trump the madman it was not
really and be able to come out publicly
on the other end it'll be interesting to
see what they recommend for their
audiences and stuff to do in the 2020
election I'm getting the sense of some
people who are willing to sit it out and
I said well you're free riding on me
then cuz I'm out here yeah you would my
name and getting arrows in my back but
you're gonna just sit it out and and and
go with Trump anyway but it just brings
me again to like a further idea here I
wanted to talk to you about how you
could harness the power of the Claremont
Institute network in the American mind
Network how are you doing that how are
you expanding that and then after that
I'm going to follow up on with you on
that on Bronze Age pervert okay
sure yeah I think I just as a quick
aside and I know you agree with this
I think rhetorically you know while we
talk about the emerging science of
genetics and group differences and all
this stuff we need to keep repeating
that no matter the source of group
differences and outcomes it doesn't mean
anything for the equal rights of equal
citizens and the only way we can sort of
accept this new an increasing realm of
science and what it tells us about human
achievement and you know populations
evolutionary history and all that the
only way we can approach that
responsibly as Republican small our
citizens is to also maintain at the same
time look that your identity position
has nothing to do with the equal
protection of your rights so I think the
modern left is rightfully even quite
scared of that way of looking at group
differences because if they can see at
that point at all and if they marry the
the truth of that kind of stuff with
their project they have to admit that
that most of the their policy
recommendations and their philosophical
and scientific attempts to conquest
conquer human nature are really futile
and are going to wind up hurting more
people than they help so that it's just
that's the psychology of it I think and
you see it you've seen it of course with
charles murray decided to way back into
this this debate with his new book on on
human diversity and it's it's all it's
all in the news again yeah I just saw
Dawkins is now cancelled apparently for
her you know he's like I'm not a you
Genesis you Genesis immoral but of
course they're good differences and
people are I am announcing you know it's
pretty wild but yeah what are we doing
we're on you know we launched the
American mind in October of 2018 and
we're having a lot of fun with it I mean
we wanted to our quarterly magazine is
kind of a like I said about the
Claremont Institute it's sort of one one
foot in the academic world one foot in
the the political world you know reviews
books it has essays on culture history
and politics it's kind of highbrow
I shouldn't say kinda it's pretty
highbrow that's wonderfully edited my
colleague Charles is a brilliant man and
a brilliant editor but we wanted a
little more space to engage an online
audience engage a younger audience be a
little more PI radical and a little more
online as the kids say but but at the
same time maintain this focus of ours
which is on ideas and how they drive
politics so that's the sense in which it
still has a foot firmly planted and what
we've always done but we wanted a little
more a little more leeway both in terms
of timing and news cycle but also in
terms of just the spirit of the thing -
- you know have a little more fun be a
little more fast and Lewis Wald while
maintaining this seriousness about
politics and ideas so that that's been a
great success for the first year you
know it's made made a real impression
amongst our our friends and fellow
travelers who do this for a living day
in and day out they all report there
they're looking at it every day so
that's gratifying well you know we
launched a couple of podcast products
and we'll have more coming we're trying
to engage more with our alumni audience
which you know about 300 of whom are in
Washington doing policy and ideas work
and politics and so and then we have I
mentioned it it actually cropped up in
this article Park MacDougall grote for
tablet about us partly about us I
mentioned to him mostly by background
that he put it in a piece but it's okay
we're working on a new center which will
launch in Washington DC soon I don't
have an exact date called the Center for
the American Way of life where we really
get to feet on the ground in Washington
and try to confront these what we think
are these real regime threats at the
domestic level and even some at the
foreign level and talk to lawmakers
about them and try to talk in a in a
responsible but urgent way about this
extent to which they really could bring
down the country and we think that sense
of urgency is sometimes lacking and
Washington DC today especially in the
the think-tank world so we'd like to
address that or fill that gap and work
with you know there's tons of good Paul
you work being done out there we'd like
to be a clearinghouse discussion
centered distribution center and then
really sort of you know lab laboratory
for figuring out how we ought to think
together with lawmakers and political
opinion leaders about how we get
ourselves out of this mess so that's how
we're working on we're having fun I
think that's a great idea and I would
urge you to try to capture the network
power of your Ohana and your fellows and
and your contributors and try to engage
them as most as best as possible as
frequently as possible in a private
community somehow get them all together
email list chats forums like anything
that you can do to to build that network
and get people connected to each other
and understand that as a network grows
that the power doesn't just grow
linearly it grows even better than that
and it's important to continue working
on those on the networks which is
something that I'm trying to do myself
more on like a grass grassroots level
like trying to recruit gentlemen for the
limo order that have the same worldview
but rather than trying to figure out how
we're going to affect policy or Lobby or
even take a firm political position
we're trying to figure out how how does
a citizen how does a male citizen in
America you know fight back against
these issues and what's the best course
of action for us as individuals that
would ultimately lead to positive
outcomes for the nation yeah and so
that's that's our effort on the on the
ground and if if the last six months is
anything of a predictive of the future
the limo order is going to just continue
to grow because the demand for it is
just ridiculous and everything anybody
learns about it they're very fascinated
we've got almost 1,500 people on the
waiting list right now we're opening
from membership again in on March first
and there's just a ton of people that
want to get involved because I think
they feel as though that it's addressing
an urgent urgently missing element in
their life and they're all so tired of
being surrounded by people that don't
understand the problem and don't see the
threat and they're ready to take action
and I don't want them taking public
action we'll never do any sort of public
demonstration never any
no direct confrontation I don't even
want these guys posting on social media
or whatever I want them to keep it the
secret to keep their heads off the
chopping block you know let people like
you and me stick it out there we get
arrows right in the back
sometimes a knife in the back also and
just you know for our gentlemen or mow
order just just try to become the best
versions of themselves that they could
possibly be so and I'm seeing the power
of that myself so I urge you to explore
that also with with your existing
network and what I do like to see a I'm
really happy to hear about the
Washington DC Center that's right in my
neck of the woods maybe out this way a
little bit more frequently and then be
the expansion and you know we got to
talk about Bronze Age pervert okay
because have you guys having Bronze Age
perverts book reviewed by by Michael a
etad and then a series of articles and
essays a symposium I guess is the word
for that all on the same subject that to
me
combined with hosting courtesy Arvin and
having Jack Potomac as a fellow that was
like a big signal to me that you guys
understood the landscape and we're
really interested in gauging with sort
of your grassroots population so can you
tell me how the Bronze Age pervert
connection came to be what the impact
was for that for you did you take any
heat for it how did it all work out
would you do to get was a positive tell
us the Bronze Age pervert story yeah
well I mean as you know that book had
been bouncing around especially the
under 30 crowd I would say I guess I
would say on the right but that's even a
little too cramped a way of putting it
and you know this weird little book that
sort of as Mike puts it you know it's
kind of message board pigeon
you know we're dramatical structure it's
kind of hilarious at times and very
avant-garde on matters of you know
populations and race at other times to
say the least you know that this this
thing but for whatever its faults are
virtues as a piece of work it was it
kept cropping up amongst the young the
young folks on the right and as a as an
interesting phenomena so we wanted to
you know our
especially the the audience for the
magazine you know this term gets thrown
around way too much but you know our
audience is very boomer ish for the
claremont review books they're folks
who've been in the trenches of american
political warfare and intellectual
warfare for 40 years or so not all but a
lot of them then we thought a lot of
them really had no idea what the hell
this thing was or and we wanted to talk
about it a bit talk about it as a youth
phenomenon and and talk about it what it
might mean
and hopefully we hoped inform how some
of our older peers fellow travelers etc
talked about politics and took seriously
this you know this energy amongst the
young on the right that was sort of up
for grabs and we wanted you know we want
to also want to engage and this was
really more the goal of the engagement
or the symposium we call them features
where we have a discussion week in and
week out on a piece on the american mind
which was to engage some of bab saudi a
bronze age perverts audience you know
where whither the right or where the
right goes is to know up and up in the
air right now and i think those of us at
claremont who've always tried to focus
on the importance of you know human
equality broadly speaking in equal
rights and their protection in the old
sense not in the modern identity
politics sense and you know part of the
danger on the young right is to say look
this whole establishment right and left
is so corrupt the only thing that makes
sense to me is this kind of reactionary
politics we think in many ways that's
kind of a dead end i don't know i don't
mean to suggest that's what that's
advocating for the that's a piece of
political philosophical art standing on
its own in a way and he tried to answer
some of that in the response but we just
wanted to stir things up and to show you
know the the the audience for this kind
of stuff amongst the young on the right
that we weren't we weren't you know just
sort of a fusionist reagan
Republicans just rehashing the latest
you know the arguments from 30 years ago
we were open to new ideas and wanted to
engage with them we still have our point
of view which we'd like to push and
persuade people of about how they ought
to think about America and Americans but
that we think it's important to not be
afraid of the arguments that are gaining
some traction on the right so the same
would be said of courtesy Arvin who you
know kind of made his public debut again
as it were on the American mind and you
know Curtis is a little different I mean
he's a very as his old readers know a
very smart guy very heterodox you know
has about funny views that we don't
necessarily agree with about the
trajectory or the status of modern
American government but he's been a
pretty interesting diagnostician of the
how what would you call it the kind of
weird conformist neoliberal statist
consensus on right and left that seems
to be shaping Western European and
American politics we think in a in a bad
way or a still defined way or a way that
sort of you know it's sort of a see no
evil hear no evil and just keep plowing
forward with with globalism and and no
borders and you know what liberalism and
everything will be fine Curtis questions
all that in a unique and very eclectic
way and so you know it's fun to engage
him on that and have him have him reach
some new readers and and you know at
some point continue the conversation
yeah well whereas Bronze Age pervert and
did you ever think that you would use
the word pervert over and over again in
your profession oh yeah Bronze Age
pervert definitely has a connection to
the young guys and he definitely has his
own audience for sure yeah and he can he
can throw traffic around internet pretty
easy but you know it's funny he and I
come from sort of the same background
online we populated the same forums and
and message groups and stuff as far back
as like 2009 so he and I together have
have come up through whatever whatever
the internet is producing where it right
like
we were educated on all of these
subjects we connected with people who
had similar views and then yeah you post
a lot first in a forum and then you
build a blog and then you know you get
around it right in a book and before you
know it you're talking to the president
of the Claremont Institute another guy's
book being reviewed by American mind
right so it's it's pretty actually that
whole phenomenon it's kind of
fascinating to me how how you know Jack
Murphy is a pen name but now it's
basically my real name it feels
introducing myself by my first name John
anymore but it's amazing how like
basically two anonymous guys come up
through internet message boards and and
pick up on all these signals and trends
in and out and make an analysis and take
their own approach and and then we all
have converged here in 2020 and it's
really actually fascinating I like and I
commend you guys for being aware I mean
you're not a Boomer dude I'm looking
right at you you're like Gen X just like
me I think really yeah just barely oh
you will you a young genic sir I was
born in 81 so they the generational
folks insist that I'm a but I'm a
millennial but I refuse that way hi
groovers you know eight or nine years
okay anywhere that can make me a little
any organic no I mean Gen X is without a
doubt the cool kids the state of you
know whole universe right now and you're
definitely in it but I commend you guys
for her I commend you guys for reaching
out and acknowledging and seeing that
there is a connection to be made between
your high level academic and political
stuff and the grassroots stuff that's
coming up as a function specifically
well as Marshall McLuhan said them the
medium is a message I mean our our whole
thrust is you can't separate it from
social media and from blog posting and
podcasting and stuff like that so I
commend you for that and courtesy
Arbonne in particular somebody that we
know you know you can presume that based
on we know Bannen used to read him we
knew Bannen had Trump's ears we know
that those ideas are in the White House
people were in the White House of Fred
courtesy Arvind I even know guys they're
that red bap - so like these these
pieces are
in Washington there in the West Wing
you're in the minds of Trump's advisors
and I would not be surprised if he
wouldn't be familiar with those names as
well if asked directly and the next the
next name would be jack but sobic I
wanted to talk to you about Jays a good
mine
I met him gosh I guess around the time
of the deplorable maybe and we've just
gotten to be friends since then and I'm
very proud of what he's been able to do
he's just such a good guy and he's doing
such good work um how how did his
fellowship come to be and did you face
any pushback from that or was it I mean
I just imagine you got this the Boomers
all around you and you're dropping me
like the pervert and mold bug and the
sobic you know how was that for Jack and
and for you guys and you know how are
you looking to expand the fellowship
program in the future yeah I I want to
tie it back to just a piece of Bronze
Age pervert you know some push back we
got on on doing that review was from
he'll remain nameless but he's good and
representative you know a sort of late
20s staffer working in Congress at a
pretty high level saying come on why you
guys given a platform to bronze-age
pervert I mean then I made the case that
I just made to you and that you know
well and he said I don't know it just
seems like we can get caught up in this
very online existence and think it's a
bigger deal than it is
and my message to him I didn't quite get
the chance to say to him directly but I
think you'll agree with it is and you
you expressed it which is yes the very
on line is its own thing but it's a
increasingly huge thing and our digital
landscape is displacing the old forms of
media it's driving the this sort of
disintermediation of the media toronto's
poured fuel on that fire by D
legitimizing the media for good reason
and many ARMs back so you know we just
have to take this landscape seriously
and not just write it off as a weird
message board thing because it may have
been that 10 year 15 years ago but it's
certainly not that now dot fine yeah and
then Jack you know jack came to us
because well first of all he applied to
the fellowship you know like like
everyone else or like a lot of people
you
made a compelling case for why he wanted
to learn what we taught and came
recommended you know Jack was not does
not have a non-controversial history of
reporting and sort of media stuff he's
part of this online community that that
you've described and you know as you as
you discussed with Jack made it made it
transition from Game of Thrones persona
a commentator to political commentating
to now a media career so we thought all
that was very interesting we we knew
that he was going to be a controversial
pick but decided if we hadn't had the
solid recommendation from a few friends
we trusted we might have taken a pass
just given given the controversy
surrounding Jack's rise to fame and
infamy and media influence but of course
what seems that the fellowship was as
you know as you knew before I did he was
nothing but a gentleman and respectful
and and they engaged discussant in our
seminar and and a family man and
everything else people people have can
get a pretty warped view of folks by
just reading online to as another retort
to the very online equip from our friend
yeah we got pushed back but mostly from
the nevertrump crowd which was this is
just the latest example of our unserious
are selling out to the Trump Magadan and
you know the the new media etc etcetera
so in that sense we know what we were
about we still were teaching the same
old things we always taught trying to
figure out how to how to navigate
American politics in a principled way
and teach that to people but taking I
mean acknowledging the fact of the
matter that this new media landscape has
to be engaged with the the people who
are influential within it it doesn't
need to be all of our fellows now but to
to neglect this this growing cohort of
people with huge influence many of them
more influence than brian Stelter move
further out for sure or even some of
them a little more influence than tucker
carlson or coming up to approach that
maybe jack not yet but we got to engage
with that community and try to teach
them and to the extent that they come to
us and say hey I want to learn what you
guys teach
you know we're very open to that and I
don't grade that's exciting as exciting
and I think that's why strategy and I'm
particularly interested myself - I'm
gonna be submitting application just so
you know right all right that's awesome
and you know there was another thing
that happened to you recently that's
pretty awesome you went to the White
House and received pretty prestigious
award hello everybody about that what
yeah what was that like what was the
award how did that come about and how
was the experience yeah I got a call
from the from Jon PD the head of the
National Endowment for the Humanities
earlier this year letting us know that
we've been slated by the president to
receive a National Humanities medal
we of course accepted immediately great
honor so I went out to Washington with a
group of my board members and we did the
whole East Wing ceremony have had a
photo op with the president the first
lady and then the mainstage event
alongside our fellow recipients and you
know I I just this is one of the
instances in my life where I where I
happened to be lucky and at the right
place at the right time it weren't
acknowledging me of course they're just
acknowledging the four decades of work
Claremont's done and I just happened to
be a president at the time so it was a
surreal day to be sure and my favorite
moment was you know I was sitting behind
Trump so I could see when he was riffing
off the teleprompter and he you know he
said well Claremont Institute you know
they've been working to restore the
principles of the founding teaching and
writing for 40 years and to recover the
American idea and he pauses and goes I
know it well it's just a wonderful
example behind the scenes quasi behind
the scenes I was behind the scenes of
just you know Trump's great comedic
timing and his his his knowing his
audience it was kind of charming it's a
side of him that I think you know the
folks who just get outraged about his
Twitter persona or are in the grip of
never trumpism were TDs you know don't
really get to see but you know in person
he's a pretty warm friendly and charming
guy yeah I'd imagine so I mean I saw him
on Oprah back in
80s when she told him to run for
president I'll never forget that that's
exciting do you think that the Trump
administration by doing that now was
giving you any kind of nod about your
turn your engagement with the younger
guys with the with the big online guys
with the peso vyx the perverts the yarv
ins of the world even given that we
probably we've established that he
probably is familiar with their work I
mean we know he knows jack he's we
traded him several times and I'm sure
Jack's connection to him is you know
sort of regular do you think this was an
acknowledgment of that or do you think
it was in the cake you know a couple
years ago or oh no I I think it no I it
bubbled up just this year you know and
that in that process so or you know I
hear rumors so bad I don't know whether
reflects how much it reflects our
engagement with the new online media
right but I think it was you know it's a
reflection of I think our willingness
you know from an institutional base
that's cultivated a kind of reputation
for seriousness over over many decades
our willingness to take this new
political phenomenon of Trump try to
understand it without being hysterical
and then through a you know to continue
to try to influence American political
public life for the good I think if you
look at those metal recipients for the
most part it was kind of a new breed I
mean I don't know if I would have seen a
former any previous White House having
you know the president the Claremont
Institute and James Patterson you know
novelist up there I think I think it
reflected Trump's sort of desire to to
do things in a little more populist
fashion folks that are out there
speaking to real issues to real
Americans and you know we were doing a
little more of that recently and then we
also just have this long history of
being really engaged in the humanities
business in our own kind of non
institutional wages from a free-standing
nonprofit so you know we had we got some
pushback on that too my favorite was we
got an angry voicemail from some woman
in Pennsylvania so
how dare we except well first of all she
thought we got the arts medal which was
the wrong one how did she said I looked
at your website you don't have anything
to do with the arts I've called my
senator and the white house how dare you
first of all though it's funny you know
how dare we accept a prize like huh but
it was it was reflective of you know if
you saw that all that from the outside
and you did a quick online perusal of
our footprint you'd go what the hell but
it made sense to people in u.s. and I
think it made sense the White House well
congratulations on that that must be
that must have been fun I don't know I
don't know to what extent you use it as
a signal that you guys are on the right
track but I certainly think that you are
and and I know we only have a few more
minutes here and I wanted to wrap up
with one last thing which would be
lately it seems like you guys have been
writing a lot about trumpism after Trump
that's like subject that people are
discussing to what extent do you think
that the ideas that he has written into
the presidency and hopefully into a
second presidency and some of the policy
proposals or at least just even the
concepts or the framework or just that
even the mindset how much of that is
going to persist after Trump's eventual
end of his presidency whether it's this
year in four years yeah
well the the most intangible part of him
is his sense of the media landscape and
his sort of showmanship that's a hard
thing you can't really train that sort
of thing you just kind of have it or you
don't
where you've cultivated it from some
some good base material so who knows
that side of the national politician
that is Trump or the national political
phenomenon that is Trump pretty hard to
replicate but I think the more important
thing is you know look he's the first
president since since HW Bush and really
Reagan to win any of those Upper Midwest
states I think there's a good chance he
wins one more this year than me than he
did in 16 you know he's kind of revived
the prospects of a blue-collar
conservatism and that's a little bit of
an anachronistic term but I you know I
mean I
political coalition on the right the
likes of which we haven't really seen in
a few times a few decades and how did he
do that well he showed that a certain
dexterity with a back you know suite of
policies that have been sort of locked
in stone on the Republican side you know
just sort of wrote Reaganism not there's
anything wrong with Reagan per se but
his world was a lot different than ours
it was now a long time ago we have
different challenges today and I think
you know and this ties us back to the
identity politics thing I think you know
I wrote on the Federalist that the only
way we solve this problem in a way is to
keep winning you have to sort of defeat
woke identity politics at the ballot box
if you're going to have any hope of
defeating it culturally and in the wider
sphere and the only way to do that
coalitional e on the right I think is to
follow Trump's lead which is to say you
know cultivating looking after standing
up for an American 'san dan ocean of
American citizenship that that looks
after the the middle and working class
that treats borders is a real thing
sovereignty is a real thing that
retreats a little bit from the madness
of our endless foreign policy
adventurism and that you know is a
little frankly quite a bit less
libertarian economically that's the way
forward you know the devil is in the
details of course and we also argue
vehemently over that that policy stack
but I think Trump has shown the way so
the the goal for anyone subsequent Trump
should be to to take the lessons that
he's shown us to build on that coalition
and to try to dominate American politics
for a generation because that's the way
you'll defeat the identity politics
leftism that threatens to bring us down
yeah I agree with that and I agree that
it's important and and perhaps one of
the failings of the Trump administration
is to the lack of the backfill infill
sorry the the backwards in filling of
institution and institutional support
universe not too
I mean you know I live in DC so when
Obama was elected it was just like a
tidal wave of people showed up and the
town took over the town changed a whole
tenor in the whole city um there was
none of that when Trump was elected I
was hoping I was really hoping you know
there's like one bar you can go to in DC
if you're if you're a trump supporter
and not get harassed or thrown out for
being public about that whereas Obama
just flooded the city whether the NGOs
all the institutions and nonprofits
everything everywhere there's just a
million new people I would have liked to
have seen some of that but I do believe
that these forces at work that propelled
Trump to the presidency are tecktonik
they're huge they're massive structural
things that aren't going to change in a
year or two or five or ten even and in
fact fighting against multiculturalism
and intersectionality and all the
identity politics is something that's
going to take many many years yeah and
working working these ideas out of
academia especially is going to be even
more difficult office because like
critical theory and intersectionality
they become the foundation the basis for
other other academic endeavors and other
fields of academic thought that are now
and being infected by this idea and so
we have to work all that out over time
that's going to take a long time but I
really commend you guys for the work
that you're doing the direction that
you're taking the organization I respect
it got my attention if the if the Bronze
Age Probert thing was was meant to be
that signal to the young and new right
and the in the internet right well we
heard it we saw it you know here we are
now we're talking and I appreciate that
as well and I think that there's going
to be a lot of synchronicity between
what I'm doing with the limo order and
what you guys are doing on a national
scale and so I look forward to
continuing our conversations and getting
to know each other a little bit and you
know congratulations once again on the
award and all the good work you're doing
so thank you very much and thanks very
much for coming on the show Ryan I
really appreciate it thanks jack thanks
for all your public spiritedness
America's a better place because you so
keep doing what you do well that is very
kind of you thank you very much all
right everybody where Ryan where can
they find you what is the what are the
websites where should they go from
information yeah our institutional side
is Claremont CL AR e mo NT org find out
our magazine at Claremont Review of
Books calm and then the online
publication American mine org and we're
all on Twitter at you know the usual
suspects at American mind at Claremont
hits to all that stuff so you're about
what search will handle homes yours mine
is rpw Williams my that's one drawback
of having a the third most popular last
name and the American language it had to
be gone but Babar PW Williams is my
Twitter and yeah I mean imagine for me
trying to come up with a Jack Murphy
hand yeah already well that's awesome
and guys everybody else find me on
Twitter at Jack Murphy live YouTube
Facebook Instagram Jack Murphy live come
to the website Jack Murphy like calm and
if you have any interest in joining the
liminal order please do come to the
website and put your name on the waiting
list because you cannot join unless you
are on the waiting list and that email
or that website is liminal - order comm
come on down and join up you'll get all
the information and you can find out if
the ello is for you so once again Ryan
thank you so much I can't wait to see
you next time you're out here in
Washington DC hopefully we can get
together
[Music]
you