right welcome to idea cafe today we are
discussing if we had a years to prepare
for the pandemic if somehow we knew this
was happening a year in the future or if
we knew about it a year ago what would
we have liked to have in place either
personally societally what would you
like to Patty place if you had some
forewarning would like to start is
welcome to or as per usual I can oh I'll
go I mean the obvious answer is vaccines
and tests right I mean if you know it's
coming and you know what it is that's
coming then there's no reason in the
world not to have a huge stockpile of
vaccines and tests and an antiviral
drugs and so on at the ready so I mean
that that's the obvious answer but of
course the reality is we never know
exactly what's coming down the road
right the best we can do is prepare
ourselves for as broader range of
eventualities that we can foresee as
possibilities right something like that
so yeah I mean I've come to this wanting
to promote is the wrong word that sounds
like I'm selling something right but
promote the idea of resilience just
generally up and down at every scale
throughout the economy that this is how
you prepare yourself for disasters given
the reality that as I say you don't know
what's coming down the road so you know
things like for example when the
healthcare system is under strain you
know people that it has all kinds of
knock-on effects in addition to that
right there it's not just the healthcare
system its financial systems its supply
lines its logistical systems its storage
facilities it's you I mean all of these
kinds of things are impacted and so the
the interconnectedness of everything
which is inevitable in a modern society
right thing once everything's computed
it the interconnectedness is inevitable
but what you can do is build things in a
sort of whole onok nature right so that
the whole world is not depending on one
you know wheat supplier or whatever you
know what I mean that these things are
broken down into much much smaller
autonomous units much more localization
much more much more distributed networks
of things rather than these giant
production sensors
which if that gets hit the whole thing
goes down right so that that's for me
the basic point is is smaller scale
everything where it's where it's
sensible to do so right and food
production energy production water
purification these can all be done at a
sort of neighborhood community at least
town level right these do not need to be
national infrastructures these can be
broken down these are much much smaller
units and that builds resilience in
right you know if one person goes down
you've got a whole bunch of other people
around them who have got spare capacity
that can help them out right it just it
just it installs a whole bunch of
redundancy spare capacity into the
system but yeah well it's going to have
to go is the efficiency profit motive
because while things are run as
efficiently as possible they're running
at full capacity all the time right
because to run it less than full
capacity is simply not as efficient
financially as running at full capacity
so that has to go so hopefully this is a
big enough kick in the ass that we can
actually reconsider these fundamental
constants of human existence on this
earth things like you know interest
bearing money and debt based currencies
and the profit motive being paramount
right that the company's primary
function is to produce profits for its
shareholders you know that these kind of
thinking needs to go right at sets over
three minutes I'll shut up now yeah yeah
I know no point just filling a sign for
the sake of it I've made my point like I
could make it again in a different way
but you know that's going to be boring
Karen would you like to go to America
um once you go oh sorry I have questions
to comment on Eric's after but what I
would have liked to have in place the
idea this question was basically that
there is stuff coming down the pipeline
so although we can't have this stuff in
place for this one we can always have it
in place for the next catastrophe where
it's a pandemic whether it's climate
change whether it's anything right what
I would have loved to have in place is
more technological infrastructure on
like how to facilitate in telehealth
right how to facilitate how we actually
help one another how to help people stay
in quarantine and when they don't
aren't they instead of punishing and
giving fines and doing an authoritative
why aren't you because there's a need
that's not being met if you're if you're
breaking physical distancing and so
meeting people where they are and
building those those things and I would
also I don't know if a year would have
been enough time but I would love to if
I'd known I maybe would have had more of
a gung-ho attitude to like starting an
actual physical community that isn't in
the city which has a lot more fragile
supply chain when stuff stops coming in
the city you don't necessarily have a
space to grow food you don't have you
know especially didn't grow food it
takes time for food to grow I just plan
started my garden yesterday I would've
had like to have more gardening help to
actually be able to like sit down and
have someone help me plan what I could
grow in my yard what I will eat what
could grow here with the mainly that the
sun exposure and although I'm doing to
the best of my ability to be able to
coordinate that to be able to say and
that is something that actually is gonna
happen six months a year down the line
not now right we're not in a food
shortage now but we could be in the
future and so bringing people together I
would also have loved to have more
mental health stuff in place for people
going through having to sequester having
options of couples counseling that don't
require a counselor where you're able to
sit down with a peer or have peer groups
of like here's what we're going through
and how do we how do we get through that
I would like basically an entire
infrastructure which is what I am
created of peer to peer support peer to
peer systems that help us meet our needs
without relying on our governments I
would have liked to have information
sources in place that we can trust
because we're seeing what a what a lack
of trust in our governments and the
media is costing us ie people aren't
social distancing and they're you know
in every conspiracy theory' abounds
because how do you know what's true we
don't have one place to go and the one
time we need them to we maybe need to
actually be listening
governments and the powers that be
they've cried wolf so many times that we
don't trust them
and so I would have loved to have a
system in place where we're able to
witness each other around the world so I
find myself constantly googling like
what's going on in Iran right now what's
going on in Italy right now and there's
no really option to know that besides
through the regular media I would have
liked to have something like periscope
with it's actually set up with like
there's you can watch a live broadcast
of someone's telling you what's going on
in that country once a day shirring
something like this where we are so
interconnected and would not something
like this a one-off event a war
hurricane and anything that's like that
here's what's actually going on in them
in the vicinity so there are lots of
things kind of like the physical
community the technology the food that
all of it which is what we're kind of
doing in solution raising or dinner talk
about the mental health period portion
tomorrow you're Shiloh and I said that
is my my turn so if I had had a year I
think along the lines Jubilee a physical
community I think the what I would have
liked to have had in place was a place
outside of the city to get to to be able
to we have we have the financial means
to be able to afford some space and so
you know having something where we could
have people come in order to you know be
able to build start building that
community in person having a stronger
in-person community then then what we
have currently I think the it you know
it's interesting I kept it I I was
looking at this more from the individual
like what if a year ago I had known that
maybe not that this this virus was
coming but that something that
you know it's like you know there's a
virus coming and until it comes you're
not going to know anything you know
you're not going to know anything you
know there's I think I would have been
working on gardening I would have been
working on having one kind of so like
that sounds like a a silly thing but I
don't know how to so and so learning how
to like learning how to call the garden
I have started my garden I have corn and
I have peas and my cantaloupe just
started German started to sprout it took
forever and you know so that practice
but also what else would in terms of
like the bigger things more in place for
being able to yeah have the Oh
like I'll say or the the peer-to-peer
counseling situation and I would also
want to be advocating for or or putting
into place the more of the tools in
terms of plant medicine to help people
deal with like the mental problems you
know it's like okay right now people's
options are psychiatric meds alcohol pot
like there's more options than that and
figuring out you know which ones make
more sense for who and how does that
work and yeah I know yeah Eric and I
already went so an idea cafe is your
first one we each take up to five
minutes to share answering the question
for for that week and this question is
if we had a year to prepare for this
pandemic and social distance II
what would we have liked to have in
place if we knew I had 4,000 and you're
allowed to share or pass you don't have
to be the hot see you ready to get in
but I guess I can share a little bit
I would I've been thinking a lot about I
guess you'd call it a cooperative social
structure so just like a counterbalance
to capitalism that values our
interconnectedness and so if we had
something like that already in place
where we had let's say at least one
physical hub and every community of
seven to ten thousand people plus
satellite hubs which are just I call
them hubs for like human Union buildings
where you can truly go and connect for
solutions or just to make connections I
think for our especially our mental
health our our interactions with each
other and our emotional support really
comes from hand come from people close
to us so also we have a way of valuing
all those things as well as our
environments and just kind of a mapping
of our collective instead of our
competitive side so anyway I feel like
that couldn't so now we can just check
open it up and chat for the next next
hour because I did have Eric was the
first one to share your first thing of
like well if we knew this was coming we
want vaccines and tests to be there and
although I get that that is a little bit
tongue-in-cheek it's like well how what
would that look like so if we didn't
know it was coronavirus this exact one
Kovach 19 we just knew that there was a
pandemic coming yeah what would it look
like to have the infrastructure in place
to get those vaccines out faster to get
out faster no matter what it is I've got
one suggestion a specific one along the
lines of what I was saying before right
about about making sure that there is
additional capacity built in at every
stage right and so when you're designing
a factory rather than optimizing the
factory perfectly for that one product
that is going to be producing in vast
quantities you general
so you build it in such a way that it
can be relatively easily repurposed for
a wide range of other functions now that
means that it's not going to be quite as
well optimized for its primary function
right because you're having to build you
know essentially unnecessarily things to
its primary function in order to allow
it to fulfill its secondary function so
there's going to be less profit for the
factory builder right less profit for
the manufacturer a larger upfront costs
for example but in the long term you've
got something which in the event of a
pandemic can be repurposed immediately
to start making test kits or syringes or
masks or ventilators or whatever it
might be you not I mean and if it's some
other kind of disaster it can be
repurposed to make batteries or solar
panels or water purifiers or whatever it
might be they sort of mean and so there
you've got this huge capacity so all of
a sudden make a load of whatever
you need in the face of disaster you
know really quickly really easily these
things can be repurposed this would not
be difficult to do this is not a
difficult technical challenge but it's a
there's a significant financial cost
involved I think the the piece of that
is how do you how do you convince people
or help people to understand that you
you know if you optimize solely for one
thing then you know there are trade-offs
and so you know Eric you're talking
about the in in that case the you know
manufacturing the one that I see is the
one in hospitals of being solely
optimized for efficiency so there so
demise for efficiency and they don't
have which means that they have no spare
capacity so if there is any load
whatsoever then there then the system
gets over what you know has the
potential to get overwhelmed but again
this is easily fixed right you have
spare Ward's which are just shut most of
the time right those beds and there's
beds and wiring and plumbing and so on
there and they just shut most of the
time but you've got the capacity there
to open them up at very short notice
equally you have in the same way that
they have reserves in the military right
and they go into a couple of weeks
training every year and they they're not
part of the folder you could do that
with the health service we can help you
kind of health professional reserves
right who are either retired or
they don't have quite a high level of
training the doctor but but in an
emergency they're really good you know
extra pairs of hands useful pairs of
hands around the place but again there's
financial costs all of these right
you've got a maintain train you've got a
maintained space but a maintained
equipment which is not in use most at
the time and that's that's the only way
I see you doing it well one of one of
the interesting things I've seen is I
was reading an article I think there's
an LA Times where the companies who come
in and build all of the the stages and
the tents and everything for things like
Coachella and all of these you know the
summer festivals immediately pivoted and
started building tents for hospitals and
so you know like the capacity you know
one thing is is like there's I don't you
know there's identifying where the I
think it's more about being able to
identify where is their rigidity in the
system where is there an inability to
pivot so that would and in a sense that
would be an area where there's probably
not a lot of resilience and and so how
do you help or how do you you know I
mean how do you point out to an
individual you're not resilient like
that's not a sin like that's not an easy
thing to do you can't just tell somebody
they're not resilient and but yeah and
you have to kind of have an event like
this to see where that stuff comes up
and you know it's fun exercise in terms
of the mental thing but you know it's
like yeah I think it would be
identifying where is their rigidity in a
system you know both and I think
rigidity would be probably like the
first like first thing you would
encounter and then underneath you'd
realize oh this this part of the system
it doesn't have any resilience hmm but
it's everywhere Kiera this is exactly
the point
I mean it's everywhere been doing this
for decades there we've been driving
towards efficiency and you know driving
down costs and outsourcing this and that
and right you know driving production
overseas to where it's cheaper and all
of this kind of thing we've been doing
it
for decades right there's very very very
little more efficiencies to be had and
so we have reached almost a point of
maximum fragility right there was
virtually no resilience left in the
system at all we've been doing it for
such a long time I think both because
you guys had talked about like having
extra wings in a hospital just in case
something like this happens and that
seems like a lot of real estate and
resources to be put into something just
in case these things happen there's not
just right well my point is then Kyra
talked about the stages and that those
people kind of pivoted and were able to
now a constant like to have everything
set up for every potential possibility
does the opposite of what we've done
with efficiency on a horrible scale
right like because it's not just the
pandemic we set up for we need to set up
our pandemics and floods and all of
these things the same suite aliens come
in zombies things we don't necessarily
even even can really comprehend except
in media and so there was something
about like having a brainstorming as
place or we could coordinate to say hey
here are the people we need right now
like there are people who are like oh
yeah we can build tents they are
probably the ones who instigated it but
if someone else could have thought I've
been like you know who's not employed
right now all the coachella people
signup stages and they would be perfect
to be able to orchestrate something like
it's like finding the piece working
together to find the piece that could be
best used and then yes we're we are
retrofitting factories like having them
set up to be modular which is what cube
spawn is kind of doing like it's in the
gaming world where you're manufacturing
anything alcohol because it's one of the
things right now that is is and there's
they easily pivoted to make hand
sanitizer that was awesome
I haven't at the same time we maybe
you're gonna have a shortage with
different problems but to be able to say
like if we own all the factories it
makes sense to be able to have them
pivot it doesn't make sense to have them
turning out at their hundred percent it
makes sense to make them produce what we
need and then be able to have them
pivots for like oh we're short on TVs we
need TVs this this year we need like to
be able to have it's like access
information kind of gets us all of that
because if we had mapped the supply
chain we could know how to retrofit a
factory to meet needs because they're
just gonna go back to making TVs that is
why they're there right they're only
making TVs and making TVs 24 hours a day
7 days a week and then the other thing
that you guys talked about certain
applies but is where you talked about
having like a reserve of medical
training stuff and I think that is
actually really important I know a lot
of countries Germany and Israel that you
become smite although I think what I
think Germany maybe switch third or they
have mandatory military having four or
five sectors that are absolutely
necessary that you pick one in to be a
mandatory training right so maybe when
you're 20 you make medical training you
take food train like whatever it is
that's like these are the four or five
and you get to pick which one you go
into and if there's so many people here
maybe we give an incentive to go into
one stuff you need but then you would
have this you don't need necessarily
nurses and doctors you need someone who
can administer a test right like you
need lower-level you need like millions
of lower level rather than then they can
free up the nurses and doctors to do
that work more like a lot of sadly the
Nerds as time is taken up right now
sitting with dying patients right who do
kind of their families in that is
something that anyone who's not
susceptible to it could do and probably
better than a nurse who's gonna have
that emotional impact with them to go on
like that's not what they signed up to
do they signed up to heal people no
they're not in palliative care there's a
million things changing sheets
delivering meals cleaning the floors
there's a million things that
non-experts could be doing which will
take a load off absolutely absolutely
well and I think I come at this from a
slightly different perspective of like
I'm not necessarily in favor of a
socialist type situation but not but not
opposed to it entirely either and so you
know it like how do you how do you
create a system where there isn't
somebody you know because you said if we
controlled all of the factories well if
we controlled all of the if there's a
you
if there's some centralized thing that's
controlling all of the factories there's
a there's a point of failure too and so
how do you distribute yeah you know I
like the concept of the distributed
cognition how do you distribute the the
knowledge that's needed throughout the
system you know I mean that what what's
been interesting and I think one of the
things that we're learning it and and
this is something I heard Jordan hall
say on a thing on Friday I think it was
Friday or Saturday you know we we seen
how people mobilize for the face masks
like people have mobilized and we've
solved this problem like a problem is
basically solved in terms of like air
lifting stuff from China instead of
letting it come over on a boat I mean
all of these different pieces and what
have we learned you know it's like what
have we learned from that that is going
to apply to when we have to feed people
because in Africa they're having put
plagues of locusts that are decimating
their crops and they're not going to
have it they're not gonna have a food
supply this year so what do you have you
know it's like so what if we were to
work backwards like knowing what we've
learned now about that how would we work
backwards in terms of like mobilization
you know it's like localization you know
can I rephrase can i rephrase your
question in a slightly different way
Cara because I think I think it might be
a more useful way to ask it right
because as you pointed out things like
the face mask problem you just leave
people alone to crack on with it they'll
figure out a way and they'll solve it
right and so rather than how do we
create the systems whereby this can
happen I think a better question to ask
is what are the barriers currently in
the way of just allowing that to happen
on its own
right and I and I think that's that's
much more the point right things like
intellectual property and what are
called patent laws and government
contracts on things that that kind of
stuff these are barriers to people just
figuring stuff out amongst themselves
remove those barriers
and I think the systems will create
themselves well and I would I would take
that one step further and say it's not
though I mean the the physical barrier
is those things but there's the one step
up from that is the difference in values
of you know and this comes back to our
original example of prioritizing
efficiency over over resilience or yes
since you have a resilience it's you
know okay we have optimized for this and
now we see that that's not going to work
all of the time and so like there's the
conversation of what are we optimizing
for that's putting those barriers in
place and what are we optimizing for
that's causing those barriers to be put
in place and what our emotion in a word
profit and and what is it that we want
to optimize for I don't know I don't I
don't know that I could have articulated
prior to this that you know hospitals
were optimized for efficiency or for
efficiency and didn't have the capacity
for the resilience I didn't I wouldn't
have known those but we can identify
that the profit part but what's the
thing that that we're not optimizing for
in the case of patent laws what's not
optimizing for maximum fluidity and
effectiveness of collaboration right
because you're it's exclusionary you're
saying only this small group of people
can work on this thing right and all of
the other people in the world who would
be interested in that we have a
contribution to make are excluded from
being able to make that contribution so
you're optimizing for profit for this
company at the expense of the ability to
actually collaborate meaningfully on
this important thing what does it what
does exclusion or the the
were the reverse of that what is
inclusion optic what does that what does
that optimize for and I'm asking because
I don't know the answer to that because
if you're not in law it's weird because
it actually optimizes both ways for we
depending on which is camp you're in
full innovation right there's people who
are like if we don't have patents no
one's going to innovate because they
don't get to own the intellectual
property of it and we've seen that
that's and then there's other people
were like what we can't innovate if you
have intellectual property because we
can't use it unless we do like there's
all of these barriers and innovation ok
not that sounds like more of a word that
I can't imagine yes correct yes of
innovation yeah because that inclusion
word I was like I don't I couldn't
connect with that and so I was trying to
figure out yeah yeah there's just no
evidence to support that first
opposition though jewbilee that people
don't innovate if they can't have the
intellectual property and make the money
off it afterwards people innovate
because they have ideas in them right
and they want to come out and it's as
simple as that you know what I mean
though the the and it's very often not
the person that has the idea that makes
the money off it anyway it's someone who
Nick's the idea or buys it off them
really cheap and then market it or
whatever you know what I mean Edison did
this time and time and time in the
number of inventions that Edison stole
his American Hero right and he
was a criminal plain and simply little
robber an extortionist I'm curious about
what show those plots are we're used to
each other so it's a really broad topic
and I guess I've been living with the
vision in my head for a long time so in
my mind the solution is an inclusive
society that has another level that's on
the ground that interconnects us so we
can plan these things ahead and we make
the connections like with our neighbors
and our communities in the bigger world
more solid and by having a system that
actually values that I think makes a big
difference and there is like you're
saying a lot of movement towards
innovation that is in the share platform
like the Creative Commons so there is
that trend towards people wanting to
share their ideas for free or really low
cost to get them out there because there
is that barrier I don't know it's
sometimes it's really hard to verbalize
when you hear problems but you have
inside yourself already this vision that
works through them really well it can be
very hard to verbalize that tell me
about it okay so the the word that keeps
coming up for me that I hear you guys
saying and I don't know why I'm like I
don't know the inclusion so what you do
if we assume that everyone within a
community might be at different levels
of development and have different love
different motivations how do you handle
a situation where somebody might be mode
where you might have a group of people
who are motivated by participating in
the community but another group of
people who are in their developmental
process motivated by money or motivated
by getting attention or you know by
something you know by something else how
do you accommodate or people at
different stages of emotional spiritual
mental development where not everyone is
necessarily motivated solely by and that
I don't know if that's completely off
topic but like it I think this although
a topic after we've answered the
question well but actually I think that
this this would be the type of question
if we knew this was coming you know a
question to be answered
Shilo you had your uh I think that
inclusion is that everybody is valuable
and everybody has something to offer
even if they're at different places and
I think that's the real difference with
a bottom-up system I'm not saying get
rid of the top-down system I'm saying
it's already there people are motivated
by money
people will function in that aspect but
giving other people an opportunity to
function in a way that's more beneficial
to the collective instead of just for
the individual profit I think is a way
to start to balance that out I don't
think that at all we need to control
people's ideas or stop them from having
their own passion or Drive I think by
providing incentive in a way even if
it's just recognition and support within
your community through this system you
actually get more participation from
people that might have very different
ideas and motivations than just money
and therefore more solutions more
connectivity more ability to respond in
times of crisis that makes coming up for
me when Charlotte was speaking that was
like I have this concept I talked about
this morning on the broadcast of like
people choosing to profit and purpose so
whatever industry you're in all of game
a is focused on profit you can't get
profit without having some amount of
purpose but you need to be focused on
profit and you can only leave two
masters you have to are you in it for
transportation are you in it to make
money off of transportation but what
came up for real Australia was talking
you know was that we do have different
value systems money is a placeholder for
all of them and then we maximize for
money somewhat it equals that out but it
actually destroys them all because it's
like your access to money you might be
for connection we think you're gonna get
people out of it my access to money
might be for to know that I can support
myself more though that what it is but
like it's the placeholder but it's also
the problem because it's the placeholder
like right now during this pen I gotta
keep
laughing about how the right it appears
to be the left and the left appears to
be the right it's like the left is like
wait I'm sorry the right is like we need
universal basic income how am I gonna
pay my bill I gotta pay rent and the
right is like or the left is like closed
and it's because aren't that like we got
to the point where we're desperate
enough that like the other person's
values like our values are still the
same I want myself to be healthy I don't
think having open borders hurt that in
any way until there's a condo until
there's like disease vectors walking
around it's not a critique on you as an
individual I don't think you're a bad
human we're all the same it's just
there's more of you and you can't come
in right now because we need to kind of
sequester up but anyway God just thought
that money was a placeholder for like
all of these values but it's also where
the conflict comes in because I'm
telling you not turn money but what
because whatever money was a placeholder
for I'm telling you we can optimize for
that for you right so if you want
security that was not security we can
make sure you feel secure in a different
way that we can make sure everyone has
money because that game just doesn't
work money is based on debt and you
can't even break even let alone be in
surplus you make a very interesting
point I I really like you said about you
know I'm going into transportation am i
doing it to make money am i doing it
because I'm interested in providing
transportation right and these are two
totally different things the problem is
and this is a systemic thing this isn't
really a choice thing this isn't down to
values until I mean it is but the values
have broadly shift right because let's
say you've got two people who go into
running bus companies right and one of
them's doing it for the money and one of
them doing it because they want to
provide a good bus service for the
citizens of that area right and the two
are going to take very very different
approaches right the one doing it for
the for the for the good of the
transportation is going to train their
drivers property they're gonna buy good
vehicles they're gonna have a frequent
service so that the things aren't
overcrowded bla bla bla bla bla the
other one is going to you know hire
people as cheaply as possible use shitty
clapped-out vehicles not maintain them
very well run as few as they possibly
can the things are always going to be
now which of these two is going to win
well person 2 is inevitably going to win
because if you're an investor wanting to
invest in a bus company that's the one
that's going to pay you more money right
and there and so until there are a
predominance of investors who care more
about the provision of the
transportation service than they do
about profits they go I mean they're
still going to make profit out of the
other company right but not as much
investors willing to do that to take
that hit if you like then Company B
always wins
but no because company a always wins not
enter the game a paradigm where you're
looking for investors right you're right
they're always gonna pick the second one
but if what you're looking for is to
optimize for the customer and the
customers the investor they're always
gonna pick the first one so it's
dependent on our entire systems built on
bankers and all they don't I mean in
investors don't they have the money to
invest all these things but in actuality
this is the difference being top down
like you have money and privilege so is
my idea okay versus hey let's optimize
for transportation it's optimized to
have it the best experience well of
course still maintaining profitability
in that we need the resources we need to
be able to maintaining this and what
came up for me is you know there's again
what you know what we're optimizing for
like I I was talking to a friend the
other day and you know there's the the
question of you know I can't remember
which Native American community but it's
like is this the best decision for me
and for the next seven generations and
there's this relationship between you
know making a decision that's optimal
for me and an optimal and optimal for me
in the future and I think that's one of
the things that we haven't talked about
the Jordan Peterson talks about that
there's a there's a thing in mice where
mice will if they're there are two mice
one
percent bigger than the other will win
every time but if he doesn't let the
smaller what rap win 30% of the time the
smaller rat will stop playing so the
larger rat will actually buy you know in
his neural circuitry let the smaller rat
win 30% of the time because that ensures
that he gets to play to the game over
the long run and so what you know we're
optimizing not just for what's happening
now but optimizing for what is the game
that we can continue playing you know or
where all of the you know over you know
not just the short run you know what
what helps me to win not just in the
short run but in the long run - and I
think we it's we've lost the ability to
have that perspective and so I don't you
know I don't necessarily think that like
that our I don't want there's part of me
that wants to say we are our values are
distorted but I think it's more of we
lost the ability to have that
perspective that those multiple
perspectives with the short term and the
long term yeah and how do you and how do
you encourage that being able to take
that those perspectives yeah he's been
the the problem is care and I'm not
saying that this is right I'm just
saying this is the thinking this this is
basically what you're saying right is
that the long weather the long future is
uncertain I can't really predict that
but I can predict that if I take this
exploit this affection now then my bonus
checking three months time is going to
be a fat one you know what I mean and
that's that's the primary motivated
those incentives have to somehow be
neutralized I have no idea how you go
about doing that but those those
incentives to focus entirely on the
short-term gain at the expense of
expense of the long term I think I think
that's a really nice thing yeah not just
what's not worth worth to there but
what's right for seven generate for the
next seven generations I mean I think
that's a pretty good source of
perspective to have in mind when you're
taking major decisions about things
right you know not that you can with any
accuracy predict seven generations down
the road
right but at least having that front and
say you know it is this likely to have a
near person adverse impact on my
great-great-grandchildren sort of thing
you know and and and and catch it in
those personal terms right how is it
going to affect my descendants you know
yeah or me in the future I machine in
ten years and I can visit myself in the
future how's it going to affect me in
the future
I'm really sorry bro but one more point
to make which is just popped into my
head along these lines I can't remember
what the Philosopher's name is he's
quite an obscure one his name may come
to me but his basic thing was it's a
really nice idea
imagine that you haven't been born yet
right and the circumstances of your
birth are entirely random you have no
way of knowing which country you're born
in what family you're going to be born
in and what the circumstances are you
going to be born you have no idea how
would you organize a world based on that
starting point that's funny because I
was just about to say that even if I
don't fully believe in it like I'm gonna
stake my I believe in reincarnation and
reincarnation me means you optimize for
that right there's people believe you're
coordinated in the same family I don't
if I believe in it I don't believe that
I believe I more likely be reincarnated
in China or India based on population
size so how do i optimize for the global
community not just me and my offspring
because quite frankly as much money as i
could amass my kids could squander it
away and that happens time and time
again it's like so let's get
billionaires that my kids will never
starve when seven generations from now
they're not going to be tied to your
wealth at all whereas we can create a
world that actually functions for
everyone and then it optimizes for your
best benefit and for the global best
benefit without needing by playing the
infinite game by saying yes I could be
that person because they all we are all
the same I am that person right now
and how I come I always come back to the
question of you know I have a similar
ever similar canoe Jubilee but I know
people who do not believe in
reincarnation and believe that this life
is the only one you've got and you've
got to make the best of it and you know
optimize you know they don't see that
perspective you know they don't they
they're not capable of seeing that and
not from a not from a like I don't mean
that as in a derogatory term I was I was
one of the thing with rebel wisdom over
the weekend and Diane who show Hamilton
what she talked about is that there are
some people in her mediation that she
comes across a mediation where she
realizes they're not capable of taking
other people's perspective they're just
not emotionally developed enough to be
able to do that and so have you know how
do you account for those right now I
think what we do is we put most of those
people we've worked we put a lot of them
in jail and I don't think that's the
answer so how do we accommodate how do
we accommodate for people who are not
emotionally or mentally developed enough
to take that perspective and and
encourage that and that's where Eric's
wording on the philosopher is a much
better than first we have to instilled
in court reincarnation do you believe in
that because there's all the religion
stuff associated with that right and but
there is a philosopher and I also do not
remember the name pump the person but
the concept Eric is talking about is
like the veil of ignorance
so you intellectually take on the veil
of ignorance to say I don't know where I
fit in society we're gonna let's say we
take a member of like a hundred
different classes in society and you put
them in a room and they know how society
works but they don't actually know what
part they fit in they don't know whether
they're poor or rich they don't know so
they're they're eliminating their
individual portion to
side on what's best for the group you
don't know what you're going back into
we can't actually do that there's a
Doctor Who episode where they did that
but there was like two warring factions
and they've got the leaders together
ever like but you don't know which side
you're on you're welcome
and uh you know it'd be like the
Palestinian Palestinians and the
Israelis getting together and being like
oh I don't know whether I'm Israeli or
Palestinian what am I going to decide on
this right not knowing what worldview
step out to once you you remove yourself
from the room something there's a way to
have but some people won't be
intellectually capable of that for sure
right well and so the thought that came
up as you're saying that is you know we
have an example of I think any tune or
you know a culture that tried to
implement something and I think it gone
horribly wrong and that by that I mean
the caste system in India like okay you
you were born into this and so clearly
that means that you can't you know like
you have these let like that means you
have these lessons to learn yeah and but
I there's serious problems with it and
there's also you know some wisdom in
that there are people that are at
different different ages and how do you
accommodate for those but yeah and I
think yeah it's know for me it is just
and just it's hard to actually implement
but like if this kind of human being
exists we have to make room for them
yeah and so there's a ton of people in
society that I might not want to exist
but they exist
so either we talk about we're actually
talking about which is annihilating all
of them or we need to allow them to
exist and I'm not talking about races
there's no race that I have a problem
with but like there's certain people
were like well they just know they can't
exist right and so our option is like
imprison them even if they haven't done
anything wrong or just like bleep
out of existence like no they're just
not allowed to exist because they're not
allowed done for more in Australia
that's what we used to do we go we need
a new Australia I know but that is part
of it is possibly because that's not the
same as like saying you don't get to sit
at my tip you don't get to sit at any
table or saying well you can go find
your own table but I'm gonna make sure
you can't sit at any of them isn't quite
the same thing and so that we are all
different is our strength but requiring
everyone see it that way isn't honoring
our differences like allowing for true
diversity means allowing for the
diversity that doesn't allow for
diversity without it breaking diversity
yeah allowing people to be their mental
state which you know racism sexism
homophobia sometimes in the moment
sometimes overall you still get to exist
because you exist right how do we work
with that yeah you've also got to have
room to get away from people to drive
you mad day because sooner or later if
you're around people that drive you mad
all the time sooner or later you're
gonna snap right you're gonna do
something you regret and you can take
back so yeah you do need retreat space
like this counter balancing system that
I hope we're trying to create actually
does as a part of its functioning is
trying to teach people to see from
different angles and really values our
differences in ways that is a more
personal it's not like top down I value
you if you're this way it's like an
inside out like I value these parts of
myself and now I can share them more
with you because I see that you have
something similar or something different
then I can share my side so starting to
value those that consciousness like
conscious living conscious connections
conscious affect on each other by
recognizing that and teaching people how
to do that I think we elevate everybody
instead of saying oh I need to separate
this part of society because they're
different I think it's more of a
connective sharing informational thing
instead of separating so it's another
inclusion
I guess but valuing it so we realized
like there is value in our capacity and
our ability to respond because of that
I'm I'm reminded of conversations it's
like there's also how do you deal with
the how do you deal with the people who
have personality disorders so the narcs
narcissistic psychopathic sociopathic
there's going to be some percentage of
those that are that's that is influenced
by nature or by nurture but then there's
also some percentage of them that where
they're you know there's just a
fundamental issue with their DN you know
with like it's not something that you
can educate them out of and how do you
how do you build a system like her that
I know so I agree with I either I would
have I would have agreed with you guys a
couple of years ago and there's been a
few experiences in my life that have
have changed my perspective on that
there's just a grand sense you can't
make sense of biology independently of
environment it just makes no sense right
biology is a dynamic interplay of
organic matter with its environment you
know what I mean that that's that's what
it is and so to say that something is
genetic is essentially giving up right
it can't be fixed you're stuck with it
doesn't matter what the we do
that's it it's unchangeable it's set in
stone forever and and and there's yeah I
listen I don't know I haven't had your
experiences in life right Kiera so you
know maybe if I'd had your experiences
I'd feel very differently there you know
that's that's that's very but then that
is also an argument in favor of the
environmental impact on one's behavior
and perceptions right you know the
experiences that you have had have led
you to conviction which you hold very
strongly the absence of my having had
those experiences all that having ever
had different experiences led me to a
very very different equally strongly
held convey
right so yeah it's very interesting well
I think both I think that there's both
nature and nurture involved in
personality disorders I think our
society both if you had any kind of
genetic and it predisposition it's going
to basically force you in that direction
because it's profitable to be a
narcissist its profitable to be a
psychopath or sociopath and so the
society set up to actually help elevate
those people I don't think doing the
opposite and vilifying all of them is
the answer I think that in a society
where we are more connected and there
everyone has access to their emotional
and physical needs met you're gonna have
way less of them it'll never reach zero
and I again then we have to say if these
people exist where is their place in
society because my guess is we have it
for an evolutionary real reason we just
don't need the number of them right like
there's a real need for sociopaths
and nurses even if I can't see it and so
allowing that and I don't need to have a
relationship with a narcissist I don't
and I don't need to feel bad about now
Peter like Gemma narcissus and I don't
I'm not someone who brings a narcissist
in my life and other people do and that
sucks right that they kept narcissists
after narcissists after narcissists and
then those people are also ones who
label every what is it or it's like we
all have a piece of it in us and to be
able to create society that there's a
cost to be in that way as opposed to a
benefit to being that way and the cost
can just that we can see you right we
can see that you're going from person to
person and feeding off of them with your
narcissistic energy that's more evident
and and therefore they're gonna have
less impact because that's what a
narcissist generally does is go in and
change the let they go and they feed off
of you until they've pissed you off and
off you either walk away or they keep
they keep keeping you there then they go
on to someone else once you stop feeding
them they're gonna go on to someone else
someone else if you can see that pattern
even if they can't you're like every
group you're a part of you see this hang
out for six months and then nothing then
there's more trust built into it and
then we don't cuz otherwise you're going
around with like narcissists radar and
everyone's a narcissist which costs you
more than it costs them right because
you've encountered it off of them you
see them everywhere and I still think
I'm coke because I do know of some I
have a narcissist in my family who has
finally at like if he's something
realized this about himself and is
trying I know it's very challenging for
him but he's trying very hard to do a
lot of self work and going to these
workshops retreats he's still it's still
challenging for him but at least he's
trying to break out of that realizes
that that's why his life sucks is
because of himself and I'm very amazed
that he's even stepping into that area
I'm very proud and I'm sure it's not
easy but it makes me hopeful for other
people if they can get there I mean
support is huge if that's like the one
pointing characteristic narcissist as
they can't even if proven they can't see
themselves as narcissist
so matters that weird we were part of it
yeah he probably wouldn't call himself
that but he is realizing wow I'm a real
ass and around me and I don't want this
for the rest of my life you know yeah I
like Jubilee said it's in all of us
right I mean I I'm well aware of my
narcissistic tendencies you know I mean
and they're not insignificant and so
yeah it's not a binary condition right
and I think again as Jubilee said Italy
there's at least a little part of it in
all of us right and so we should be able
to find some common ground with the
out-and-out narcissists right and be
able to have a laugh with them and even
if they don't realize we're laughing at
them they can be a great source of
entertainment if you you know if you
don't take it all too seriously don't
see it as a threat to yourself in some
way or another you know see as soon as
you know healthy a healthy population is
well aware of these traits in some
people right and just don't as you say
don't feed them right and if they stop
getting fed then
their emotional feeding we should
definitely be actually view and behavior
is gonna starve it is gonna starve to
death right you know eventually you know
over over several generations in an
actual healthy society where you know
nobody really wanted for anything of
serious consequence then all that I
really really believe all that goes
away so much as a signs of human nature
you know greed and narcissism and
violence and you know ugly competitive
Bo that the the stamping on people's
head in victory sort of sort of behavior
I just
IIIi absolutely believe that all of this
is drawn out of us of course the
capacity for it exist in as we see
around us every day right there is there
is no argument with that but but I I
remain deeply convinced that the
circumstances of our environment draw
that out of us and you change those
circumstances and it draws different
things out of us you know we have the
capacity we are unbelievably plastic and
malleable
in in in in the in the behaviors that we
can exhibit right and they are almost
entirely driven by what we witness
around us and we emulate that right you
change that environment you change what
comes out I I don't think I could be
dissuaded from that view and where does
our evolution play in that evolution
about individuals is it evolution is
about eCos is not even about species
it's about ecosystems yeah the ecosystem
which has the most effective feedback
loops and balancing mechanisms and
repair systems and so on survive and all
the members of that ecosystem benefit
from the survival and evolution of that
ecosystem the the whole notion of
survival of the fittest apart at the
individual or even at the species level
is actually kind of nonsensical you're
doing it absent of the context of the
ecosystem in which it exists
can't do that the only thing that
evolution really sensibly applies to is
his ecosystems as a whole it's not a
geneticist pretty much how Brett
Weinstein sees not every cuz like
Dawkins is like it's on the gene level
right it's the final unit wants
appropriate explain the explain the
development of the fetus in the womb you
know and explain these things from a
 list of letters I agree I think I
got every level I think it's an
ecosystem down to the G yeah I think you
go with the macro and the micro at the
same time there you're gonna have
individual gene expression that's going
to mutate and you're going to have large
you know means mutate all at every level
the organism level that gene will be
expressed with that gene will be
expressed or not expressed given the
circumstances of the environment and it
will be advantageous or not advantageous
given the circumstances of that
ecosystem in that moment right and so
the evolution of the species and the
individual only makes sense in the
context of the overall development of
the ecosystem I'm not saying they're
separate from it is part of it but but
but the actual thing which is evolving
is the ecosystem the rest are cells
within that ecosystems evolution if you
see what I mean and that is what I think
our society is slightly needs to be in
that right now humans we look at humans
as one species understandably but what
we really are are representations of all
of the species like you can't all be
Tigers there's no one to eat right you
can all be narcissists there's no defeat
other you can't all and at the same time
we still have even in biology like the
Tigers more evolved than the answer no
it's not it's not any more evolved they
have been on the planet the exact same
amount of time we are not more involved
than the ends we have different
functions and we don't get to say what
those are we just are they are what they
are right the ant can't be it can't be a
cantaloupe either organs look we still
like nearer individually ourselves and
we can't really be something else but we
have one species that we prop up which
is like the Tigers and the Lions and the
Bears and like those ones are not the
sustainable ones those
our there's a reason there's so few of
them compared to the rest and yet when
we tap into that we're truly our
diversity helps us evolve the ecosystem
that is how as it's one member of one
species I can't be everything to the
ecosystem it's impossible you can't be
an ant and a bird and a tiger and you
can only be one of those things and be
part of the coast and that's where
diversity helps us that's actually my
background is film where they
reintroduce the rules to this in I can't
remember where it was summer in America
reintroduce and and the whole ecosystem
just just it was it was miraculous it
really was I mean it brings you can't
watch it and not be moved by it you know
what I mean it was absolutely the most
beautiful thing so yeah that's that's
that's that's kind of what I mean right
whether the restored some balance to the
ecosystem and the thriving of dozens
hundreds of species comes about as a
consequence of it right but it's the the
ecosystem which is now private not this
species in this piece in this CD but the
that that organism the organism of the
ecosystem has been reinvigorated and
brought back to life and that brings
with it all over all of the biodiversity
and yet it's the individual who's
competing and the individual that if
they're active in their own
self-interest and it still exists yeah
you don't like no Angela like you know
no lion is like they're in their own
self-interest and it still plays out
because it's it's played by different
rules then it doesn't matter if you're
selfish just live your life do your
thing and I think that we are at the our
marks it does anyone have any closing
minute well I I need to respond to that
because you can be as selfish as you
like when you rely on right and if you
eat all the antelopes then there's not
enough food to go around and most of the
lions die away right and so either you
can be a substitute you like you're not
that that doesn't apply to us right we
can be as selfish as we like and there
is no end to the continuation of
extraction and refinement and alteration
that we can do to keep us going
Yujin Amin Lions can't do that they have
they have natural
Millenia we're coming to the end of that
right there's pandemic all of it is like
okay we ate all our Antelope not enough
that we can figure out where other
things are and eat those things but
eventually we kind of have to figure it
out on it like we can have lions and you
can have these we can have that but we
can't all be lions probably you know
well and I just want to I wanted to say
one quick thing Erik that the example of
the wolves being introduced a predator
brought balance to this district and
when I was bringing that question so
when I was bringing that question about
people with personality disorders like
sociopathy and psychopathy and our
narcissism they're predators predators
are needed as part of the ecosystem
there we go I like that yeah yeah yeah I
like that so so the ulema so you know
that the idea of trying to create a
society where we're eliminating that
you're equating human society with an
ecosystem though and the levels of
complexity and feedback loop to the
ecosystem far exceed those in human in a
way it's a microcosm of but but but the
the capacity for you know maintaining
equilibrium is not as great obviously in
human societies is in the system as a
whole but I was also good I would
disagree with that not assertion that I
I can't go I can't go into the
explanation but just your massive I mean
we're talking about 7 billion people on
a planet and I mean yes there's a far
greater number of bugs on the planet
than there are humans but I just I don't
I don't think that's about relationships
right the number of relationships that
exist think about you know right from
the sub microscopic tiny diatoms and and
bacteria all of the relationships that
exist between that not to mention all
the plants and the fungi and the
mycelial networks and and all of those
work that exist right up to the top to
the apex predator right there that web
of relationships
I can't imagine human society competes
with that that in terms of can
maybe I'm wrong yeah but I don't see it
personally we have to wrap it up they
talk about ecosystem and economy all day
maybe they'll be next week study a cafe
I just want to make one quick thing
about the wolves again and they were
reintroduced and thrive the whole
ecosystem but then what happens men who
need more money go out and use the
wolves Robin works with us I don't know
to make more money so that's what's
happening fewer will again probably
anyway sorry so little ecosystem yeah
all right well say goodbye to YouTube
like you take your shadow