you're trying to give the young people
something that will help you know know
exactly what it ought to be
welcome to the teach thought podcast
Terry introduce yourself my name is
Jerry Ike I'm a former classroom teacher
and now director at teach thought which
means I do a lot of different things
very badly and I'm drew Perkins on the
director of professional development
here at each spot and hopefully that
means I do a lot of different things
really well and together we're hosting a
podcast which hopefully makes teach
thought more accessible to you in more
places right drew well hopefully yeah
but mostly it's just me hosting it
because you just add episodes every so
often right well you know I've got
things to do remember I'm director
that's true
[Music]
as always thanks for tuning in to the
podcast my name is drew Perkins I'm the
director of teach thought professional
development and of course we always
welcome folks to visit or invite folks
to visit our website which is we grow
teachers comm to find out more about our
workshops and services and of course our
summer teach ppl grow a team learning
event which by the time this is
published our registration should be
just about wrapping up for regular
registration June 9th is the cutoff for
that and then of course we'll have late
registration so again you can find all
that information at we grow teachers
calm in today's podcast I spoke with
Zach Stein who builds himself at least
on his website as a writer educator and
futurist he is deeply involved in work
around social justice in education he's
a scholar at the Ronin Institute and
serves as co-president and academic
director of a think-tank of the Center
for integral wisdom as well as some
other things that you can find
information on his website which is
Eckstein org
was really fascinating and deep
conversation as we explored the role of
education and how that sort of looks in
the modern versus postmodern versus his
his work which is meta modern a lot
about social justice a little bit about
IQ constructivist and
progressive education and paternalism
sort of teacher Authority and what role
teachers should play in a meaningful
education and lots of other things
surrounding that so again really deep
and thoughtful conversation that I enjoy
and I
hope you do as well that further adieu
here at sex time alright welcome I am
here today with Zack Stein who's calling
in from Vermont and I'm gonna let him
unpack his varied background and the
roles and work that he does but I'm
anticipating a really thoughtful deep
conversation as we get into education
and learning and perhaps some
developmental psychology so Zack welcome
to the podcast
Hey thank you it's always a pleasure to
get a chance to speak with an educator
and to kind of speak to other educators
so a few words about me let's see I am
what is sometimes referred to as a high
achieving dyslexic and so I've been in
kind of a strange relationship to
schools from a very young age for so for
a long time I looked at schools a little
bit differently because I was in all of
the special education programs first in
New Jersey that in Massachusetts and so
you know that led to me have a natural
curiosity I think about the nature of
learning because I was told by my mom
who was a special educator and then via
the great you know the great teachers
that I had that I learned differently
than other students and so right away I
thinking well there's not one way to
learn right and I was noticing there's
people who learn different ways and etc
and so I went on this kind of very
non-traditional learning trajectory I
taught myself music and began to read
way outside of classes even in high
school ended up going to Hampshire
College which is also unique
undergraduate institution where there's
no tests and there's no grades and you
don't get you know you get these long
written reports and so I went there
because of that I wanted every kind of
mean yeah totally and that's why I went
there because I hate an F you know
actually as a senior in high school I
wrote or maybe a junior I wrote a letter
and circulated to the administrators of
the high school protesting the SAT and
specifically the monopoly of the
Educational Testing Services that was
well received by a couple
but not by the key people anyway so I
went to Hampshire because of that
because I knew it would be a crazy place
and it was and then I managed to go from
Hampshire to Harvard which is which is
an interesting move so I I didn't have a
GPA leaving undergraduate hmm
and bomb the GRE and through sheer force
of will and kind of getting really close
contact with a couple key professors and
of course the you know the writing
sample etc like I managed to get into
the master's program and then the doctor
doctoral program at Harvard and there I
continued my habit of reading way
outside of classes and ended up writing
a dissertation that became a book
immediately published through Routledge
on social justice and standardized
testing at the same time in graduate
school I was working with dr. Theo
Dawson who I met at Hampshire to to
build a nonprofit that could potentially
change the whole standardized testing
infrastructure but that's called electic
a-- Theo still runs that and it's going
strong it's great work and so I stepped
back from Lepke in order to continue to
write and to do freelance scholarship
essentially and so I've been working
with think-tanks focused on cultural
reform specifically the Center for
integral wisdom and I've got a seat as a
scholar at the Ronin Institute which is
very interesting again non traditional
academic institution that's housing a
bunch of scholars who for whatever
reason don't want to be or cannot be in
the traditional Academy and so I spend
most of my days writing and doing
consulting and speaking around issues of
Education education reform I'm
particularly concerned with the kind of
current rapid transformations in global
culture and identity formation
specifically with regards to the
internet and changes in the economy and
the biosphere which are I think altering
the things we need to consider
as educators and the things we need to
consider in the design of schools are
very different today and will be even
more different let's say ten years from
now than they were for the past thirty
years the the rate of change itself is
accelerating as it were and so that's
kind of a space where I hang out you
know my my graduate training was in
educational neuroscience and cognitive
developmental psychology so I did a lot
of research kind of in the field in
developmental psychology and some
neuroscience so I've got that that
background as well but my passion is
kind of basically philosophy which
allows me to kind of be
interdisciplinary by nature and right
that's why I tend to love talking to
educators because any good educator good
educator has to think
interdisciplinarily by by the demand of
the task basically so I find educators
actually more open to philosophical
reflection than specialists and many
other fields so that's why I'm happy to
talk to you today and I'm think it's
gonna be great conversation
yeah I'm looking forward to it and let's
kind of start with maybe a more macro
approach and one of the things that we
talk about here or is sort of our
mission statement or action a mission
question because we really believe in
inquiry is revolves around preparing
students for the what we call the modern
world which of course is you know we
have to really think what what will the
modern world what does the modern world
demand or what will it and I'm before we
get too deep I'm wondering if you have
any distinction or where you place your
place yourself on sort of the spectrum
between or around post-modernism and
what I guess being called meta modernism
and and how you see your work and your
thinking finding a place in that
spectrum right yeah great question I
would definitely identify as a meta
modernist and so you know looking at the
evolution of culture you know from the
ancient cultures into modern culture and
then from modern culture into postmodern
culture
which is the which is mostly where we
are today there are some who speculated
and you're aware of their work who that
there's a new emergent which is meta
modern and now this gets weird just how
many other prefixes can we put in front
of modern I'm not super thrilled about
the term but I think it does signify a
break from the postmodern and the
ability to consider the critiques of the
post-modernism and the complexity that
post-modernism adds and also consider
what modernity brought us the benefits
of what the modern revolution brought us
to consider the benefits of both is a
novel possibility so so before you go
further because I'm I want to be sure
that listeners I don't want to assume
that they understand what postmodern
means and so how would you
operationalize postmodern and I suppose
you're sort of doing the same with
matter modern as you're talking about
those differences but is there a clean
clean definition and so we can work with
that yeah so it's best and you almost
have to characterize post-modernism by
first talking about modernist right and
you know so modernism and there's many
different ways to define it of course
and there's whole books and whole
shelves of books no matter what what
modernism is but I think a useful way to
think about it is in terms of the
development of perspective taking and so
this is I used this definition because
of my training and developmental
psychology
so what modernism did in many ways was
find a way to really powerfully organize
reality around a single perspective than
a single abstract perspective so you
know one of the characteristics of
modernism which along with the
Scientific Revolution and the
revolutions of industrial technologies
that led to global capitalism you had
the ability to start to centralize and
to record keep and to make things
objective and make them make sense in
unprecedented ways and all that sense
making was done basically through a
single lens and this is sometimes called
the you know the grand narrative right
which is
say there may be other views of what's
happening when a colonialist empire goes
into africa and destroys all the small
local farms and builds a single large
agricultural venture with perfectly
geometrically symmetrical rows and you
know where you can actually predict crop
yields from thousands away thousands of
miles away you know based on so so when
they step in and remove the kind of
disorganization and organic nests of the
traditions and replace them with the
kind of singular kind of geometrically
perfect modern form you know they view
it from the single perspective this is
the advance right
what post-modernism does post monitors
and comes in and says well what about
the displace two people right they
clearly didn't have your modern view and
they had a very different view of what
happened to them visa vie the modernist
colonial impingement upon their original
tradition no farming practices let's say
you've met or educational or educational
practices so what post-modernism does is
it says listen modernity there's more
than one perspective there's actually
innumerable perspectives on what's going
on it numerable literally like there's
so many we can't get a comprehensive
catalogue of the perspectives and so
whereas modernity had a pathology of the
monological single view post modernity
has the pathology of the a perspectival
madness this can Wilbur's phrase right
and this notion is that well if there's
so many perspectives on what's happening
let's say about a colonialist farming
venture there's so many which one's the
correct one and the post modernist says
there isn't one right the modernist says
it's us the the correct answer is the
one that's progress that the Green
Revolution so called which brings more
crops more people etc post modernist
says well first of all check your signs
because your yields are actually not
higher than the traditional practices by
this perspective right from another
perspective what you've done is that
of an unjust and destruction of
traditional cultures etc and so it's
very basic conflict between how do you
view the world do a view it from a
singular perspective or do you view it
from a multiplicity of perspectives so
there has to be something after
post-modernism
that's culture evolves evolution go at
those places and evolution often works
by taking something singular breaking it
into multiple pieces and then
reintegrating is a higher level some
kind of new organic unity and this is
what a meta modern view attempts to do
or a my favorite meta modern view which
is integral theory or another one like
rooibos cars critical realism what they
do is they say okay we're gonna let the
perspectives of post-modernism
proliferate there's many many many
perspectives on that Colonial farming
venture right each one has a moment of
truth and yet we can organize them right
and yet we can make judicious decisions
about which views are most reasonable
and eventually get a kind of catalogue
of the viability of different views and
so one of the things that characterizes
the move beyond post-modernism is there
really are key and the evaluative
distinction and a reemergence of
objectivity but not the simplistic
modern objectivity an objectivity that
has to do with the refraction of
different perspectives and so there's
many different kind of currents of meta
modernism I tend to like the ones that
are that are more strongly theoretical
and but there are others that are simply
aesthetic which is to say there's a
large artistic movement that is meta
modern and then there are meta modern
cultural styles which are seeing with
the kind of new eclecticism of a kind of
positive global multiculturalism which
is different from the postmodern view of
always in conflict always competing for
power oh right there is a view where you
can see actually a set new synthesis a
global Renaissance that's more than that
a modern view there's got to be a
reuniting of the fracturing and not not
going backwards to murder
in a single narrative but a weaving
together of multi narratives into a
single narrative so how does that play
into or juxtapose with sort of I know
you like you said you've done quite a
bit of work on social justice and you're
mentioned the hierarchical structures
and the the postmodern connection with
sort of identity politics and that
fracturing but then bringing that back
together so what how does that social
justice picture advance from postmodern
to meta modern yeah no I mean it's a
it's a very good question you know the
term social justice is that actually a
difficult one to use these days right
you know the terms the terms become
politicized right that's some of my
response which is to say you know meta
modern moves whether they're political
or aesthetic and the same can be said of
integral moves these are moves that are
always seeking to foster synthesis and
integration and master multiple
perspectives and so some of what you're
seeing from the social so called social
justice can are actually moves that are
not that they are moves to scapegoat and
moves to deepen infraction and actually
to dismiss the possibility of mutual
understanding right so the meta modern
seeks to understand even the degraded
and guilty why why aren't they why
aren't it this way not finger wagging
and burn him at the stake so there's
something about the move to restorative
justice
that's meta modern and to many so-called
social justice Crusaders or whatever you
want to call it I think it's it's a
travesty that the term social justice is
being dragged through the mud but that's
another story
the point I want to make is that the
tactics and ideology of some of the
protest cultures are so obviously
conflictual and antithetical
reaching out mean mutual understanding
that they become unjust themselves and
this is a tragic irony and so that what
that means is that the real work for
social justice is hindered because now
social justice is a bad word and
rightfully so in the mouths of the
intellectual darkweb when their
castigating some of this behavior that's
taking place on campuses and so that
makes my conversation that's someone who
thinks about social justice actually in
a very clear way having worked on Rawls
for my dissertation and read deeply with
Martha Nussbaum you know that there's a
way of thinking about social justice
that's always reconciliatory and that
always is predicated upon deepening
mutual understanding between parties as
opposed to deepening misunderstanding
and animosity and yeah yeah so the and
you talk about that intellectual dark
web which is folks are not we're not
familiar with that probably are perhaps
more so with the New York Times article
and sort of the the push by the more
mainstream media so Sam Harris and
Jordan Peterson and and Ben Shapiro and
Weinstein all of those folks in and as
you mentioned sort of the things going
on on campus about free speech and that
that position that unfortunately some
some are placing themselves in what
you're different than me then because
you can't understand me we can't have
you can't you because you're different
you can't understand me
which then for me in my mind is a place
where now we how do we bridge that gap
as you're sort of talking about that how
do I understand who you are and use that
as that difference but then then find a
place where we can come together and you
know that it that's a really difficult
piece I think going forward as we think
about equity and you know the the the
work that you've done around IQ and and
we have charles murray in his book that
talks about IQ and the associations with
race and
how reductivist that is because it's
really so much more and I mean I'm all
over the place with this sort of ran but
but it makes sense it makes sense to
free-associate to the IQ and yeah yes
because the IQ is actually one of the
perfect examples of an instantiation of
the modern perspective right because the
IQ says that in mind is this thing that
can be understood in a single number and
the result of that number is a
simplistic hierarchy of capacities all
right so you know there's a deep
critique of the IQ which I brought them
through in my book and you know we can
rehearse it here if you want but I think
that the issue has to do with you know
the the reason we're seeing what we're
seeing in the public culture has a lot
to do with the structure of the
educational system and this really messy
transition in educational institutions
between the modern perspective and the
postmodern perspective and even the
emerging metamodel because for a long
time and in fact most of the people who
are in power now which is to say the
baby boomers these people were educated
in modern educational institutions with
desks and rows I mean my mom was slapped
on the hand with a ruler by a nun yeah
that may happen in some places now but
you be sued right though things have
changed and you had many institutions
and the ones that I attended are
included were this strange amalgam um of
the modern and the postmodern where
there were still the strict
authoritarian structure in many cases
and yet intellectually there was a
questioning and a critique you know and
a multicultural emphasis and so some of
what we're actually seeing play on the
public culture is the failure of our
broader educational institutions to
navigate through the post the modern to
postmodern shift and and into the Menem
honor which is what I write about in my
book that's coming out later this summer
which is what would a meta modern school
or an integral school system look like
beyond both the modern and the most fun
and so the trick with postmodern
education is that as soon as you go into
the a perspectival where there's not one
curve
perspective of every perspective is
equally correct come very hard to teach
and actually very hard to learn because
you know teach really Authority depends
upon some type of it at least minimal
hierarchy of competence and
understanding and that relies on some
minimum relationship to a world that's
real that both the student and teacher
stand in relationship to so as I know
you take that away and then all sudden
you have a crisis of teacher really
Authority at all levels of schooling and
that's an interesting situation and a
very big problem that is interesting and
one of the the disagreements that I have
had with a guy named Gary Hutchins who
has been on my podcast before he's a
Western Kentucky University professor
he's really big into school choice and
has even gone so far as to say
competition you know drives excellence
those kinds of things which i think is
not and i looking at your work i think
you would hold that in and as a value as
well that education in the education
realm competition is not what were is
not going to produce the results that
were after but his his mindset is around
giving parents ultimately choice so that
they can choose an education for their
child which sounds great and my question
is how do we make sure that teaching and
learning is of high quality and those
choices aren't driven by superficial
things like test scores or even IQ
scores or you know just those simple
reductivist things and you know how do
we keep that quality that lens of
quality teaching and learning as the
main driver and his pushback is is that
he felt like that's paternalistic so it
it's in conflict to what he's pushing as
sort of school choice saying that we
shouldn't be is sort of the what's the
the term you used the teacher lee
authority or teacher lee authority yeah
which is I'm thinking is Sonam
- paternalistic right I mean well it's
interesting so that's an act when I
write about teacherly Authority in my
book that's coming out I use exactly
that phrase paternalistic and
paternalism this is again an interesting
place with a modern and the postmodern
come into conflict and where the meta
modern transcends and includes the
conflict like so the the idea of
paternalism and something being
paternalistic is pejorative in the mouth
of someone who is postmodern right
there's they're saying essentially how
dare you put your norms upon me your
rules and regulations if Heath
perspectives correct then you can't
impose your perspective on another
perspective the modern and of course I
think of dr. Spock and I just met many
people prescribe parenting techniques
for them but the Myers says actually no
there's a kind of a developmental thing
going on here and we need to in fact
very strictly regulate and you know kind
of lay out a geometrical grid of
progression for the child to go through
stepwise perfectly and that's the modern
view where they at this age you should
be this height at that age you should be
that light if you're not that
something's pathological don't mind that
growth is not linear so so that's that's
it that's a conflict and what that means
is that right now there is a crisis of
yeah parental and teach really Authority
to be quite ominous which are very
similar um so but there are obviously we
all admire parents and parenting and
there's something about a good parent
and the appropriate exercise of
paternalistic instincts that's one of
the gifts of nature to the human and so
what I feel is that yes paternalistic
there are bad forms of modern
paternalism which is the classic white
man's burden we have to go to Africa and
colonize
it's our Christian duty to civilize the
savages that's a great example of a
paternalistic modern attitude but any
parent knows that you can't just lay out
all the utensils on the take
and let the kid pick cuz he could pick
the steak knife right you you want to
lay out just the actual options that are
safe given the developmental stage and
the situation etc so there are
appropriate forms of journalism and
teach really Authority it's easier to
see in a situation like that with
concrete operations or sensory motor
skills where you don't want to let the
kid totally circumnavigate the room
you're gonna put a you know a fence
around the fire is that paternalistic
you like it now yeah that's the instinct
to to foster the life of a child and so
similarly appropriate teach really
Authority is done with the child or
learner let's say more broadly
inappropriate is done to the child or
learner right and then sometimes you
have to do it in such a way that you are
in a sense imagining their future
agreement with you so these are three
different styles so the negative
paternalism is done to the child right
this is not who could care what the
child thinks or what the child's goals
are learn this right the the next step
is well listen kid if you knew it was
good for you you know / you'll thank me
later is the healthy paternalism of the
child who's not quite cooperative you
know which is to say that you do a
thought experiment you know it's not
arbitrarily exercised Authority you're
taking to account the kids uniqueness is
future trajectory all these things you
know about him and the intimate
relationship you have with them and
you're saying listen I'm gonna push it
on us
now I'm gonna push you just a little the
best teach really Authority is when it's
a it's a journey together in learning or
you're both sharing the same learning
goal right there it's different to the
kids says listen I want to learn how to
read I know you know how to read teach
me to read different from saying list
that we're gonna have to sit down and
struggle to read and also different from
you know read every day 15 minutes this
time or you dead so so I just think
there's through these different forms
and it's too easy to mix all of them
together and just dismiss parental and
teach really Authority entirely
when in fact that's a very dangerous
thing to do and parents of teachers know
that and no one really does that there's
just this confusion in the postmodern
modern conflict which makes many of the
post modernists overstate their claims
essentially when what they could do is
move to the meta modern and say listen
there's there's a moment of truth in the
modern need to take the stick night up
off the table and to measure kids in the
basic way to make sure which ones have
such unique learning needs to need
special attention like my case with my
dyslexia right that was a modernity that
allowed me to be identified and kind of
sorted into a different category right
so it so is the I guess I'm hearing then
there's the parallels from modern to
postmodern to meta modern that might be
with a much more traditional industrial
schooling prescriptive model - or maybe
it's not the parallel but the the
pushback that sometimes we get when we
talk of talk with teachers about
teaching and learning from an inquiry
inquiry perspective which is a pull-pull
dynamic as of course opposed to the push
so kind of as you said we have a
challenge a driving question and a
problem in which from which all our
questions should be stemming and ideally
and this is hard hard to do so I use
that term ideally with with all do you
know process there is that what we're
trying to do is get students to voice
those content pieces as need to knows in
order tain so that and that that
challenge and that driving question so
it's not because what we don't want is
is if I if I come in and ask a student
what they're doing and then why we don't
want them the answer to be well I'm
doing this for a grade or because this
teacher told me to or kind of as you
said I'm gonna need this in the future
which is really doesn't resonate with
many kids but we want them to do is is
ideally say I'm doing this because we're
trying to answer that driving question
we're trying to to solve for that
problem that challenge and and in the
best of scenarios those are authentic
and meaningful and real not
tribe from content but you know again
there's a spectrum there so one of the
push backs we get when we work with
teachers and schools and in folks that I
think are much more modern in their from
their perspective is that well they
can't I mean if we start the tops of top
of Bloom's taxonomy and ask them to
create something without first teaching
what they need to know and remember the
bottom of Bloom's taxonomy they can't
think about nothing well of course they
can't think about nothing that's not
what we're saying so it's it's just this
reductive approach to that that push
back and as one of the things that you
sort of a quote I think it was a exact
quote here from from one of your
writings is talking about most
open-source content platforms and I
think you're also talking about ed tech
but cede all authority to the user and
I'm assuming that's sort of the the
utensils on the on the dinner table
analogy here and talking about the
classic mistake of progressive and
constructivist pedagogy so is that is
that what you're talking about there is
it were were that there are some
constructivists who are basically saying
just put all the knives and everything
out on the table yeah no I mean I've
never actually seen someone say that
again one of the problems with the
public cultures that were we build
characters of one another and straw men
but but yes taken to an extreme and you
see this occasionally like and let's go
back to John Dewey cuz he's he had this
problem he wasn't trying to initiate
what you're describing like how do you
get the emotional goals of the child
aligned with the emotional goals of the
teacher and and the curriculum and I'll
get back to emotion in a second you know
but yes the the classic mistake of the
progressive constructivist educator is
giving too much freedom and what Dewey
said essentially was you know that
freedom is best which enables more
future freedoms right now there are some
forms of freedom that actually if you
allow for them now you're actually
cutting off the possibility of future
freedoms
and so this is you know the Dewey school
classically a University of Chicago
laboratory school once do we relinquish
control became a place where a child if
he didn't want to learn the alphabet
wouldn't have to learn the alphabet or
if you didn't want to multiply wouldn't
have to multiply right and so they were
giving the child the choice to do other
things but at the same time that's a key
freedom that is actually made like
you're cutting off the future freedom by
not giving them constraint now right so
you can think of like you know we want
to constrain freedom only in the
interest of more future freedom right if
you're like this is this abstract as you
can get thinking about because it's a
basic issue again in this dynamic of
teacherly Authority how does that work
and when are you rightfully able to tell
someone to kind of do something or think
some way and how do you get to
participate with someone such that they
ask you to correct their thinking and
this is the other thing we talk a lot
about the mindset of the teacher but
there's a mindset of the student right
there's the learner mindset and the
learner mindset flix with the consumer
mindset it's just worth mentioning the
consumer is always right the customer is
always right whereas the student
actually wants to be proven wrong but
the true student goes to the teacher and
says please you know correct the way I
think help me now help me learn and so
there's something about cultivating the
virtues of learning and being a student
that needs to be discussed as well and
again some of the cultural things you
know move against that so yeah so that
sense of you want to promote freedom but
not so much freedom that you inhibit
future freedom and then you want to
constrain freedom as as little as
possible right you want to put as few
strengths as possible and those that you
do put in place are put in place in the
interest of again future freedom future
ability to learn that's the kind of
Dewey and way to characterize that and
you know he was me he worked very hard
to try to get progressive educators to
see that he saw
a lot of the free schools and really the
interesting and artists and innovations
and education that we're going on at the
time that he was most active and they
were again putting all the knives on the
table and you know but this was also a
time when children had been in mines and
been used as farm laborers and were
actually could probably wield a knife
pretty well all right so that's another
that's another conversation about you
know the degrees of freedom change as
technology is changing culture change
and so right now the equivalent is more
like YouTube in the hands of you know
like totally open at YouTube in the
hands of a child is the equivalent if
there's knives on there they can hurt
themselves and get traumatized just from
watching YouTube and randomly navigating
through it and so again who's
responsible for that is it the
technology companies or the parents and
you know these are the kinds of things
that are emerging now in our cultural
milieu they're gonna force us they think
hard about again teachers Authority
parent parental authority
what does Authority look like where does
a healthy if form of hierarchy look like
after post modernity if we don't answer
that then the educational system is
going to be a mess for a long time
because there'll be no way to lock in
any dynamics of teach really Authority
in a way to embrace the role student had
no way to you know with dignity and
expertise work as a teacher well it's
that that word authority even I'm sure
you'll get some pushback and probably do
get some pushback just in so far as that
that that has some stink to it people's
oh yeah that idea certainly not the
postmodern because but here's your right
but here's where the post modernists
always steps on their own foot because
by whose authority that they get to
critique me is the post modernists
actually wields a great deal of
authority in our society the post
modernist has a tremendous amount of
power in some ways and with the
authority of all the other academics and
post modernists will condemn people open
with you know so there's a way in which
you can
the dynamics of power and authority what
you need to do and learn the unhealthy
of the healthy forms of power according
right and the idea that that hierarchies
should and even could go away is is just
patently absurd but that kind of and I
don't want to stray too far from
education but that just seems like one
of the the pitfalls that just
continually resurfaces in this pop this
postmodern mindset it does and again it
to me it's it's a simple conceptual
confusion in some ways again there are
there are pathological hierarchies no
doubt from day one in humanity and in
fact if you look at mcdr natee you can
think of modernity as a way to propagate
you know rapidly propagate unhealthy
hierarchy like that's what modernity did
in many ways so but there are very
healthy forms of of hierarchy - and
they're like health enforcement
authority and so it's it's about moving
past the moment of critique and
post-modernism into the moment of
reimburse and that's again it I think
that emotional dynamic and without the
right training in educational context
where there's an emotional openness to
learning at an emotional openness to
mutual understanding and these things as
you're saying how do we change the
emotional life of the student such that
they become equipped to learn in a
different way so yeah so I hate to say
it again but I do think some of the
pathologies of our public culture are
very clear manifestations of this broken
kind of slapped together educational
system that still can't figure out if
it's modern or postmodern or meta modern
and I think we're gonna see situation
perhaps with the biosphere and
geopolitical conflicts such that we're
going to be I think thrown into a
situation of either regressing back to
modern practices or moving into a very
dynamic very interesting meta modern
form of Education and that's what I'm
writing
and most of these days yeah
the pushback and the chasm that seems to
be widening widening between what I
don't really want to get into liberal
and conservative as labels but they
certainly surface but the left and the
right and you know the postmodern being
certainly more on the on the left and
then the right being much more modern
and it just it's just this battle and
and I hear I hear people who I think
Dave Rubin had Tom's soul on his program
recently and he has lots of great ideas
and then it comes to education and it
just seems such a reductionist modern
approach that I'm just banging my head
thinking such a smart guy and any it's
not him alone but it's just like like he
said so this sort of call for going back
to much more traditional at least that
the the language that I've heard I'm
certainly not an expert in his work but
I think we can't think about going back
there but we also can't live in this
postmodern censor this meta modern seems
like a way forward where we are really
thinking more deeply about the landscape
and I guess as you as you've written and
talked about the the traditional
education system and your thoughts of
where should be going and perhaps could
be although as IRA as I read it it seems
just so utopian almost mind-blowing ly
impossible from where we are right now
so I guess if you would kind of dive
into that a little bit like what what
explain that that difference between
where we are right now where you think
we should be in the future yeah I mean
great I think the best bit of
characterize us so you know in my book I
think about meta modern education
emerging as a result of the intensity of
global dynamics
in terms of the economic systems the
biosphere and identity and culture which
means I've seen many modern education
emerge out of the pressure of global
crisis and the crisis is a multi fold
crisis and right now we're living with
educational systems that are more or
less pretending in the back the multi
fold crisis of the world system isn't
occurring so now if you imagine that
this crisis is occurring that actually
ten years from now it may be hard to run
actually literally like logistically if
for a bunch of reasons hard to run
schools the way that they're currently
being run so we're gonna be forced to
read think it in a major way and we're
gonna have all of this new technology
and so what I'm predicting in the sense
as a futurist as an educational futurist
is that we're going to see the emergence
of what's more like a network of
educational hubs that so instead of the
large single high school you have a
dozen or so small locations which serve
as nexus points for teachers students
and community to come together around
intergenerational help and transmission
of the youth so it's essentially a kind
of a vision for a Redux of Paul Tillich
you know D schooling idea which is the
idea that in many societies there
weren't schools and in fact that kids
just picked up all kinds of stuff
through their spontaneous interactions
with the elders who would allow them to
observe work participate in work hold
special sessions etc you can imagine
giving like something like an
educational credit card which allows you
to redeem for time with an elder some
kind of educational interaction and now
fast-forward to the internet and you see
that we could set something up like that
with a skill and time sharing network
that's focused around the single
educational hub and so so I've talked a
lot in my book about that contrast
between the kind of large centralized
modern / postmodern school
system which is straining under
resources and all kinds of problems and
this kind of agile flexible meta
moderate educational hub network which
will actually free the youth and the
parents and so again you're right that
it's utopian and I explicitly say in the
book that some of what we need to do now
and some of what characterizes the meta
modern is concrete utopian theorist
which is to say realistic alternative
futures that are adjacent to this one
that would require some miracles but
that are very real given what we have
available this is like the work
Buckminster Fuller did it when you said
listen we have everything we need to
feed everyone and live happily we have
everything materially that we need it's
a question of politics and the moral
will and I feel the same way about
education we don't need to make
education a scarce resource anymore we
don't need to have all of this
competition and all of this elite status
and all of these accoutrements and
problems with the hierarchy of
traditional modern education we can
begin to think very differently but it
requires a whole bunch of things
changing not just the schools and that's
what I'm saying have to see in the
context of this meta crisis you have to
see in the context of economic systems
changing for example like technological
unemployment it's something that
basically can come guarantee I've
changed a game in education you also
have a collage achill crisis which can
change the game in terms of disrupting
supply chains and bus routes and things
of that nature you have the cheapening
of educational technologies like
computers which can now be put in every
kid's hand in a very realistic way and
do stuff unimaginable even five years
ago so all of these factors are going to
congeal and I think it's it's strange
actually to think about the educational
system ten years from now and wanting to
think of it as like a better version of
the one we have you know like we need to
think about something totally different
emerging yeah we sometimes joke here
think about you know like when we think
about the the schools of the past the
same way that we thought about seat
belts in cars like how could we ever
have ridden around and
without seatbelts and that's absurd
right but you know when will we get to
there and how do we get to there because
as many have pointed out we continually
try to refine a system that is doing or
has done things that are not obsolete so
what we have to redefine how we're doing
that and you know what is what are the
what are the commodities in education
that will be I guess non-negotiable for
success of individuals as in 10 20 30 40
years is it it's clearly not content
mastery and we talked about just
yesterday had a conversation was with a
school talking about how different it
should be it's not that we should expect
people to come out of any course or
class or school with content mastery but
to be able to think like a Content area
expert if you will and the difference
between being an expert and having
expertise and the the ideas and that the
even to go so far as is how that looks
as a teacher right so we're not
delivering the content we are
architecting the design of our
instruction so that we're creating
scenarios in which we can find just that
fine razor line as we demonstrate the
artistry of teaching to know when to
push when to pull that come back you
know sort of what you were talking about
earlier is that's the artistry of
teaching but we also have to be
architects of the design so that we can
that's those situations can arise and
you know that that therein lies the
biggest challenge so is there is there
any difference in your mind and what
what adults will need in 10 20 30 40
years from sort of the conventional
wisdom of what's being pushed
I mean if anyone's telling you they know
what the world's gonna be like in 20
years from now you know raise your
eyebrows and be skeptical all right so
that would be my first response and I
think that is in fact the novelty of the
meta modern position you know like the
postmodern kind of denies the historical
and denies the unfolding almost denies
reality so it's very hard to know what
they would predict about the future you
know the modern had this lockstep
progressive definition of linear history
and it was getting better and better and
better
you know the meta modern stands and
looks at both and then looks just at the
concrete situation and says wow this is
a very dynamic moment in a historical
unfolding and we're caught up in certain
logics that are moving like threw us
into something unknown and so I think
that means we need to teach people how
to learn like and this is again the
classic constructivist idea is that
education should be about how to forever
be educating yourself educating should
be about how to forever be learning and
in contexts that are unpredictable and
uncertain and you know in contexts where
the future really is on them that means
that we need to prepare people to be
ready to learn it should be always
curious and observant of their
surroundings
and you know all of these other factors
which are very different from a kind of
very domesticated modern predictable
form of Education you know in fact being
a very good student in some schools
today may make you ill-equipped to be in
other contexts that are more you know
dynamic and if you look at the people
who are like leading the charge in some
areas of technological development real
innovators often they have very unusual
educational histories and fact often we
didn't do traditional modern schooling
well at all
so if we could give those types of
unique experiences ever get instead of
getting some of them to be these nicely
packaged modern products of Education
which no longer fit on the Shelf because
turning michelle's anymore for that I
don't wear that kind of product you know
that's is very outmoded and it's
uncomfortable to hold that complexity
indictments of them you know and we need
to learn to turn the kind of almost
anxiety of the unknowing into curiosity
and so that's again the modern and the
postmodern step back from that awareness
of that the world is the world is to be
known in the world is to be is an actual
exploration right it's not the modern
building of progress where we're gonna
build this perfect things that's a
society humans are evolving and continue
to explore so so yeah I would if I was
going to build a curriculum it would be
about specifically teaching adolescents
about the learning sciences and about
their own brains and about their own
bodies and how the body adapts and heals
and how the mind learns and evolves so
that you would give them sovereignty
over their own future development both
physically and psychologically I had
that metacognition that that is rarely
we rarely have time for in an industrial
model and even in lots of classrooms
today that that being okay with
uncertainty and not knowing and the idea
that we we certainly know lots of things
but there are there's an infinitely
larger amount of things that we don't
know so what questions do we need to ask
right what are what are the most
beautiful questions that we should be
pursuing because there's just an
unbelievable amount of questions and we
should probably choose wisely yeah
that's right and you know the dominating
question driving education in modern
context is how do I find a spot in the
social system eg how do I get a job
and I don't want to reduce all of it to
that because of course has always been
streams of the humanities and other
things but that's mostly how the modern
system was built in terms of human
capital Theory where the educational
system is actually designed in order to
produce workers for the economy to
defeat the human capital into the system
and it sounds critical in both modern
but it's just it's just right there and
from a modern view it's it makes a lot
of sense you know and and so that was
the dominant question for such a long
time and postmodern kind of said just
make up your own question you know and
any questions as good as good as any
other
I think the meta modern may signal a
return to the questions humans have
always asked themselves my favorite one
being what is the human human yeah what
is a human and and so you know even
beyond civics and the teaching of
nationalism the nation-state of the rino
reflecting on the human condition itself
is something that's gonna have to be
done at scale in something like a meta
modern education system you know even if
only to deal with all of the crises that
are happening and you know to find unity
we need to get answer to that question
and what is the human and right now
we're very confused about that question
in particular it is it is a very
confusing time and and mning back to
education and and the reform or the
growth or wherever education needs to go
is limited in so many ways I think by
the the reality that for so many people
still even though the future seems
clearly moving away from that human
capital theory but there is the reality
that we do have to eat and we probably
are better served by having a job than
not having a job so you know it does you
do have to keep at least one toe if not
in many cases a full foot and half your
torso in that that world because you
still that's part of the game at this
point even insofar as it's changing
piece by piece and it is as you noted
earlier
a really large ecosystem that and I'm
fine to say so we move one piece then we
can move another piece and of course
there's there's lots of pieces I'd be
I'd be remiss if we didn't talk a little
bit more about IQ especially if you
don't mind is as you have worked with
Howard Gardner which you know every
educator or almost every educator I'd
guess wouldn't would be very familiar
with Gardner and the multiple
intelligences and so what what's your
what's your take on that or maybe just a
very basic question is you talked about
intelligences and talk with educators
where does Howard Gardner's work where
should it find its place in a meta
modern landscape mmm-hmm that's a great
question I mean the theory of multiple
intelligences itself which is at this
point I don't even know how many decades
old I mean it's it has really stood the
test of time in many ways and is an
early meta modern late postmodern view
you know clearly in terms of the problem
with housing that construct of the
single unified intelligence as I
mentioned that's the kind of pinnacle of
the modern way of viewing the mind
isolated to a single number Howard said
well actually the mind evolved over
evolutionary time and there are these
different kind of modules that came out
of evolution and populated the mind with
these different capacities aren't our
intelligences and there's been various
lists where he's added a few and and so
you know I really appreciate that theory
so that I think is important you know
now Howard was very careful to say like
there aren't many measures of the
different intelligences you know so you
can't reduce those to a standardized
test which is of course what precise
everyone it's like the first question
people ask you especially the principles
and stuff you know well there are tests
for these different so you know so I
think that's important to understand
about his work but I'd rather actually
talk about Howard's work more recently
which is his work in ethics and
professional ethics and this to me is
actually where I see his greatest
contribution tobogganing
I totally honor Howard so much and sort
of privilege to work with him and his
theory of multiple intelligences was
with Baron has had this impact I think
he's the work in ethics has been less
talked about by educators in some ways
and in fact what he identified were
forms of engagement and excellence and
ethics that constitute quote good work
and so that one of the answers to that
question of what youth education be
about is you know it should be about
giving people prepared to do good work
you know it's something we just people
laze around if there's a basic income
guarantee even if there's a basic income
guarantee people are going to want to do
good work and what does that look like
and so Howard's answering these deep
philosophical questions in about
education and it's the return to those
types of questions that are going to
need to characterize the educational
system going forward because you know
even how we get food and how we get a
paycheck it's going to be very different
weaving forward so that means we need to
think basically about how even under
those conditions can I be a good person
what does that mean it's just
interesting to note that he saw and
documented empirically the kind of
breakdown in professional ethics in
journalism and this was in the 90s early
2000s and we're seeing that play out of
course and a lot of it had to do with
the intergenerational transmission of
the ethics themselves break down between
the older journalists and the younger
journalists in terms of transmitting
those kinds of professional ethics so
it's just again something to note and so
yeah when I think Howard Gardner I
always think those two things and I
always want to talk about the ethics
because everyone loves the multiple
intelligences but in fact I think it's
the ethics work where the most radical
implications unfold because many posts
because many post modernists embrace the
multiple intelligence theory it makes
modern is uncomfortable
madam honors of course love it but the
ethics and the idea that there are right
and wrong ways to be and better or worse
forms of journalism
and the idea that we should strive
towards professional ethics and educate
for ethics it's hard to say in some
contexts so there is is it hard in ways
because it's it's a value Laden approach
yeah yeah it's evaluative approaches and
it's my definitions gonna say listen
some people are outperforming others in
the area of ethical behavior and again
this gets back to what who's allowed to
say that well by what authority can you
condemn someone and these are deep
pedagogical or issues of of Education so
so that would be my response is we bring
all the powers work you know forward but
I think the hardest work to be done is
not gonna be around bringing in the
intelligences but instead bringing in
his focus on professional ethics and
curriculums that foster deep ethical
reflection that's a it's a it's really
interesting and thought because as you
noted and we certainly know secret or
well maybe it is a secret to lots of
folks but you know as the development of
artificial intelligence and machines
continue the world of work will
inevitably change which i think is a a
reasonable argument for universal basic
income whether you're for it or against
it but it certainly it is a reasonable
discussion to have which of course then
leads to the incentivization and why
would people work if they already get
money and all of that so is there a
resource or a book or something that you
would recommend because I'm not as
familiar with Gardner's work around
ethics just like most people apparently
ya know the book is just called good
work and then there's a few other that
follow from that research project and
you know he picked up with some people
who studied with Larry Kohlberg who was
the great moral psychologists of the
6780
no Kohlberg lay a stage model of moral
development that went from egocentric to
ethnocentric to world centric and that's
a very kind of meta modern hierarchical
view of psychological development you
could interpret it in a modern way and
think of it just as flattered that you
climb towards growth to goodness but in
fact Kohlberg was much more complicated
thinking about ethical matters and he
saw the possibility for very abstract
complex forms of evil so the the stage
amount of Kohlberg also factors in here
and again resuscitating her or bringing
life back into these developmental
models I think is an important part of
the future of Education you know these
are some of the ways that you foster
growth in people is by actually showing
them a map of their own potentials so
know if you read Kohlberg and you read
the six stages of moral development when
you read that sixth stage you usually
there's an aspiration to try to attain
it unless you're so unless you're so
simple you think you're already there
right but let me ideal would be the idea
would be oh yes you know this is this is
a better way this is higher and the same
thing when you see sports excellence in
sports there's a developmental path that
led from learning to just kick a soccer
ball to becoming a soccer star to
becoming Pele there's this sequence of
development developmental half and and
you map that path and any soccer player
is gonna want to climb that path and so
I I think it's been a one of the
liabilities of the postmodern approach
to kind of kick PJ out and kick the
developmental models out when I think
they're actually very inspired mmm-hmm
so that was a long-winded answer to
Howard's book good work and he worked
with people who worked with Kohlberg
well I'm mindful of your time and and
perhaps that developmental psychology
conversation is for another podcast
episode because I think we could talk
for days and days about yeah so his name
is Eckstein and you have a book
certainly that is already available it's
called social justice and the IDI
measurement and the history of testing
and feature of education or something
like that right well the
show notes but yeah so where should
people find you what should they look
for all those good things yeah so yeah
social justice and educational
measurement yeah that's on Amazon I've
got a website
Zack Stein za k st ein org and my email
is on there somewhere and I welcome
emails of course and then I've got
another book coming out called education
and a time between girls and this book
will be out late summer early fall
okay social media and other places I'm
actually silent on social media so maybe
for you yeah so you'd like to get and
maybe that's another conversation of
this but yeah if you email and but yeah
I no Facebook no Twitter send a pear
carrier Pidgeon your way yeah that's
right an actual letter no bombs
yeah all right well Zack it's it's been
a pleasure like I said hopefully we can
reconvene and talk about developmental
psychology and perhaps I in an electoral
dark web and EdTech and there's all
there's all kinds of things that we
could talk about so appreciate your time
right on that that'll do it for today's
podcast thanks so much for listening and
if you didn't hate it please leave us a
review on iTunes or wherever you're
listening and share it on social media
wherever you feel comfortable speaking
of social media you can find us in all
the normal places like Facebook Twitter
Google+ LinkedIn Pinterest and please
share us on those places as well and
don't forget about teach thought
professional development you can find us
there at teach comm /pd