[Music]
this is gonna be on the content of the
kind of existential risk where are we
this is not going to be getting into
nitty gritty kind of strategic or
tactical assessments of things this is
more meta conceptual ways to think about
our thinking right so hopefully they
wherever we are we can come to better
conclusions for ourselves and the people
we lead okay and then I and I and I want
to try and lay as many of our cards on
the table now so that everything's
transparent and you can triangulate for
yourselves principle stands we take we
are huge fans of encouraging self
authoring versus socially defined
behaviors that comes out of
developmental psychology many of you are
probably already familiar with that but
socially defined is I'm following
scripts the first ones that everybody
comes up with is you know what I was
born and raised in to get a job get a
car get a degree you know marry they get
the nice one your wife or husband the
house the car etc many of us then break
out of that socially defined script and
then we just go straight into another
one you know and now it's groovy country
culture and I was trying to be
enlightened and use our whisper talk
voices and make uncomfortably long eye
contact whatever it would be it's still
socially defined I'm even though we
think it's liberated even Punk's are
remarkably conformist right so the
question is that how do we support
constructivist action learning in
service of self authoring behavior which
basically means and the russian
educational theorist Vygotsky hadn't had
it has a great concept known as
scaffolding and scaffolding are those
tools or training wheels that help
support and guide and enhance our
intelligence and one of our colleagues
at Harvard Zac Stein has done some
fascinating work on that basically
saying intelligence is absolutely
plastic there's not a fixed thing and it
depends entirely on the scaffolding
right so for instance you can have
somebody take an intelligence test and
they'll score a 3 out of 5 but then you
introduce the notion of a mind map and
you're like hey draw and scribble for
half an hour organize your thoughts
understand you know linear and non
linear connections between them test
again they can score a 5 a dyslexic
would spell check on their MacBook right
presents as an entirely different level
of social intelligence so all we're
gonna be trying to do is share some
scaffolding right that helps okay and
then finally the other thing is we'll
say we do take a stand Oliver Wendell
Holmes the US Supreme Court justice way
back when had a great phrase he said I
don't give a fig for the simplicity on
this side of complexity but I would give
my life for the simplicity on the other
side of complexity so what we would
advocate is that the spectrum of where
we all come down on what's to be done
you know where are we what's happening
and what's to be done is entirely our
sovereign choice but we would absolutely
advocate that a more considered position
is better than a less considered
position cool all right so with that
said now can you guys even see this this
is pretty done washed out but basically
this was a this is a line from the
Talking Heads will probably trot out the
song at some point nothing but flowers
out and if you guys have to remember
that but I do remember back in college
being baked as listening this line
and and you know Don see little diddy
and sit and as things fell apart nobody
paid much attention and that really rang
true then it seemingly has been true for
quite some time something might be
changing lately and it feels like more
of us are starting to pay attention and
notice that so the question is is
mapping and modeling how do we take a
look at things so I I think I opened our
talk on Thursday night with this same
quote from Buckminster Fuller because
it's it gets us to the point where he
says quite clearly our task is
predominantly metaphysical but it is how
to get all of humanity to educate itself
swiftly enough to generate spontaneous
social behaviors that will avoid
extinction now he read that half a
century ago sure what he was on time
all right there were many many things he
was well ahead of the curve on so this
is not to say New Age escapism right we
just get to all keep going to our there
passing the retreats and hope that that
will sort it but it is to say hey wish
it we're in a shared project here of how
do we get this done
so I'm just gonna share some potential
sessions I want to make very clear
that's all they are you are absolutely
free to agree disagree challenge refine
iterate okay but this is just kind of
again to the laying the cards the first
is that things are likely to destabilize
before they Rico here I'm not sure many
of us are following the science and the
research but there are certain cats that
have squarely out of the bag and we are
not getting them back before there will
be some degradation and conditions which
is important when we start thinking
about potential solutions because if a
solution is lies above the level of
evolutionary biological encoding meaning
me looking after myself and my family
and at a maximum my tribe that is a
fragile solution if it requires us
sitting in a circle and smoking five Meo
DMT until we all assembled Galactic
Voltron you'll save the day that is a
fragile solution all right so we need to
just be constantly scanning what
actually gets done quick round of
acronym quizzes
does anybody know that first one t o2
Aki anybody knows what that means where
are we
yes good ol michael stipe REM these guys
had it in the 80s man the end of the
world as we know it how about the next
one
yoy lo yo yo you're on your own as San
Francisco is finding out repeatedly in
this last month with PG&E and the power
grid WT sh t out that's a pretty easy
one when the hits the fan okay and
the last one I actually saw this on a
bumper sticker in my neighborhood we
were walking our dog and I'm like oh
dear God there's one of them right next
to us w WG o w GA yes
ding-ding-ding-ding-ding where we go one
we go all which actually sounds pretty
baller until you realize it's the all
right fortune whack nutsack you dong who
have this is their rallying cry
retweeted by Donald Trump jr. by the way
so these are the acronyms that are on
the message boards these are the
acronyms that circulate in prepper land
in fact NatGeo if you want something
sobering as far as what's in the
zeitgeist in the upside down right not
gatherings like this a National
Geographic in 2011 debuted a film or a
series called Doomsday Preppers right
and it outpaces Stephen Colbert it is
that it is the most-watched show the
National Geographic has ever had in
history they didn't understand it was a
complete surprise breakout hit and then
they went and surveyed their audience
and they realized that now more
Americans believe it is better to invest
to cash out of their 401ks and invest in
MREs me openly meals-ready-to-eat like
military rations basically canned goods
and prepping over 401 KS white picket
fences an upward aspirational mobility
so this is the conversation that has
happened
on the other side of the divide right
that we find ourselves on socially or
politically right now all right and if
we'd like to think that the conscious
folks walking around shortage and
Brooklyn and Venice Beach are the ones
that going to carry the day with their
man buttons and their own broth we are
sexy do you mean right
we're sorely mistaken there's folks that
have been at this for a decade right
there's conferences there's gatherings
like right and the question is if we
want to talk about like the Scandinavian
seed Bank right the idea of like keeping
all the heirloom seeds and storing them
so that in the event of disintegration
there's a chance to re seed the garden
we ought to be thinking of that
culturally as well right because right
now the seeds of culture that are best
best positioned to persist are not that
pro-social the Mormon Church has
actually been actively buying up acreage
tens of thousands of acres in Vermont
New Hampshire Utah northern Idaho and
setting up viability cities already so I
mean not to create us in them situations
but just to understand there are lots of
folks that are taking this far more
proactively and tactically than almost
anybody on the Conchie progressive side
so these are just a few books that if
you haven't come across them can be
helpful
none of them are definitive but they are
representative of certain genres and
they are also helpful to be sharing with
others so my assumption I'm going to try
and make everything explicit anytime we
are not just sort of stating a mutual
fact so my assumption is that you
wouldn't be here today if you weren't
already actively self educating but that
one of the challenges in most of our
lives is then how do I communicate and
enroll people around me without freaking
them the
alienating them doing whatever all right
so what skillful means right in building
consensus around where are we and what's
next right so the first one just to give
you a quick thing Bill McKibben is in
fact his organization is at 3:55 I think
it is which is parts per million that's
where we need to get back to sets in the
name of his organization he is a he's a
McArthur genius he's a long-term
professor and eco philosopher and now
activist he sort of after calling this
out for decades he's like all right we
got to do stuff you know the time for
talking is done and his newest book
falter which is has the human game begun
to play itself out is a you know current
and thoughtful and considered and
pro-social reading so it's not alarmist
it's not doom and gloom if you want the
TLDR
there's a good article in Rolling Stone
that came out three months ago when his
book launched so you could read that the
next one Jared Diamond Pulitzer Prize
winner of the book Guns Germs and Steel
many of you may be familiar with this
this is the third his middling book and
that trilogy was called collapse which
sort of speaks for itself
Keeble is a cross political analysis of
countries everything from Chile to
Poland and Hungary to then you know
coming to the u.s. and the UK today and
so it's a cross cultural analysis of
resiliency and fragility in basically
contemporary democratic systems so that
too is helpful it's I didn't personally
find it as like riveting as I was hoping
it was going to be but nonetheless it's
Jared Diamond right so you've got high
signal and legibility and you can put it
in people's hands you can quote from him
etc the next one is actually skip one
and go to the knowledge Lewis dono is a
PhD who worked with NASA and I think
he's actually uk-based but it was a Mars
colonization and so he's deeply been
deeply into how do you establish
resilient and anti fragile community
systems infrastructure and support and
this book is fascinating it's called how
to rebuild civilization in the aftermath
of a cataclysm
so as an extended thought experiment on
what happens when you experience a drop
of one-third of the population and then
what do you need literally like alchemy
and I mean alchemy what's the word I was
looking for
smelters not a work metallurgy that was
it it was close
metallurgy food sources all these kinds
of things I mean actually would make the
most amazing science curriculum for high
school kids I could possibly think of it
is so cool it is so hands-on
it is in-depth it would give kids the
chance and we can come back to this
about what does what do resilient
communities might they look like you
know but that's a fascinating
fascinating book and the final one is
Neil Strauss on his extended Redemption
tour after writing the game about pickup
artistry this was his his experience
post 9/11 and post 2008 collapse and he
got kind of freaked out that he's like
holy you know like I'm a clueless
urban zoo animal I'm dead meat if this
thing goes tits up and so he embarked on
this sort of really fascinating two or
three year journey
do you become anti fragile himself and
he studied everything from
permaculture to primitive skills to
urban escape an invasion to becoming an
EMT and plugging in with his emergency
services it's a it's a you know it's a
really good read and it's uplifting
because the morale was even dual
passports the whole bit right he was
looking to bugger off and saves us and
he said I started out being the guy that
was looking to run away from these
problems and by the end of this journey
I found myself becoming a man who is now
walking towards them so in that sense
BAM you know it's a good galvanized er
okay so yeah soft landing crash landing
hard landing water landing TBD but that
the plane is not likely to stay on its
current flight is it meaningful enough
likelihood that it's important for us to
wrap our heads around them right the
next one is and we've just been riffing
on it teasing about it but magical
thinking of any stripe
won't save us and that's really
important it's really important because
particularly you know yeah in in circles
where we have access to transformational
festivals things like Burning Man
psychedelic Renaissance meditation yoga
all of these things there's there's
there's a few pathologies that seem to
show up and one of them is the just
straight-up spiritual bypass the idea I
think I spoke a little bit about a
variant of this on Thursday night which
is a sort of rapture ideology the idea
that there's an inflection point coming
at the UM on the other side of the
inflection point everything will be
different
therefore we just need to fingers
crossed and squint our eyes and get to
the inflection point and then we'll be
saved from any of the creative linear
challenges we face we just get to skip
that somehow and whether the skip comes
from you know interdimensional contact
and benevolent alien saving us whether
it comes from an asymptotic blossoming
or flowering of human consciousness
whether it comes from blockchain
disrupting you know destructive
late-stage capitalism whether it comes
from everybody getting to do MDMA and
healing their hearts all right and I
don't mean I don't this is not to be you
know cynical but this is still like ah
this is a loving bitch-slap right
whether it comes from any of those
things right the answer is probably not
probably not and you know my graduate
studies were very much you know I was
going through basically environmental
ecological studies like this stuff so
came to a lot of these conclusions a
long time ago based on structural things
like even just hydraulic societies like
if you rely on irrigation you go the way
of the Egyptians you go the way of the
Anasazi this is how it's always been
okay and if you look at the American
West from Denver all the way out to Los
Angeles you're like they're sticking
giant straws down in aquifers that took
millions of years to charge they're
sucking out all the water they're puking
them onto the surface they're becoming
salamis
needed and polluted with petrochemical
and you know fertilizers and pesticides
doesn't pencil out we're consuming it
faster than we're restoring it that
isn't that is a terminal condition that
was that was twenty years ago now we're
looking at a whole additional level of
ways we think it might be saved when the
classic is the Steven Pinker version of
the techno utopianism like actually hey
all you naysayers right we've acted the
news cycle if it bleeds it leads that's
telling us all the doom and gloom it's a
bad thing actually things are getting
better and they are things are getting
exponentially better right childhood
mortality literacy right decrease in
wars despite what we see in our news
feeds right there's all those beautiful
trends and that is the promise of the
Enlightenment right the trick is that
there have been massive externalities to
that progress and the tragedy of the
Commons
and so even if you take for an example
of things like ocean acidification and
warming right the ocean has been
absorbing all the excess heat of the
entire industrial revolution and the
burning of hydrocarbons for over a
century it did it way better than we
thought it possibly could but we're
actually and now in the last two years
realizing holy there was way more
latent energy stored than we knew it was
doing it was a buffer alright and now it
is actually very very close to capacity
so when we try and wrestle with things
are getting exponentially better but
they are also getting exponentially
worse and to try and map those trends in
the intersection between them in a
complex chaotic system beggars the
imagination just anybody ever felt that
pillar to post kind of thing in your
social feed like someone will be coming
from one camp and then yeah oh my gosh I
can relax thank God and the Hans Rosling
and his TED Talks or Steven Pinker like
those those guys you know and then
someone comes in pisses on the parade
and it's like yeah but what about this
other yeah sack of that stuff again
dolphins
yeah it's crazy making and then how
about anybody in a psychedelic or
contemplative experience and you're like
actually no this is this is absolutely
okay this is unfolding as it must
this is this - as part of the plan has
anybody had that experience of kind of
you know non-dual transcendent
equanimity yeah
and how on earth do we hold all that
right how long have to be hold of that
so yeah I mean we've been we've been
riffing on some of these things I don't
think we need to go deeply into it other
than we've talked about I mean I don't
want to repeat the conversation we had
on Thursday night which was about belief
systems and those notions of rapture
ideologies I think one of the other
tricky ones is the techno utopianism
because that is so deeply baked as a
script and if has anybody heard any
lately people try out the old chestnut
of Oh in the 1890s
we thought we were you know we were
literally up to our knees in horseshit
in London in New York City and then they
invented the car and that saved us don't
worry we'll fix this - right I mean
there's that what is this become an
absolute trip and you're like yeah
absolutely that's a great example and
horse manure has a half-life of about 14
days we are dealing things with a bit
more of a hang of it right we're dealing
with things with literally thousands of
years in their half-lives so those are
some of the tricks and some of the
challenges so if you ever find people
what I notice is that when when people
are doing this this there's a consistent
pattern of kind of denial and one is
okay we'll do the consciousness thing
right and then you're like well look at
the tibetan lamas right the tibetan
lamas will woke us back right and 17
year old chinese kids with rusty
Kalashnikovs could wipe out a thousand
years of dhamma just by pulling a
trigger the ghost haunts Lakota warriors
right in the 1890s right literally would
go into the peyote ceremonies would be
convinced that they would become
invisible if they wore that ghost on
the Cavalry's bullets would not hit them
and a cap you know a Gatling gun
repeating howitzer mowed them down in
short order so for those folks that are
posting up in Costa Rica
you know pura vida you know setting up
the hito or Bali or these places with
like histories of colonial oppression
life is cheap machetes a shop you know
look at Zimbabwe go back to those
studies like study our history actually
think what is actually happening when
conditions decohere and do not think
that we're special cupcake you know like
history does repeat so if I haven't
thoroughly inspired you yet well no I
will say this now I I probably end up
saying this quote so many times because
it literally it's it is my North Star at
this point which is the poet and an
activist with Sonia an activist he's a
convention but he's about us Wendell
Berry who you know way back in the 60s
had a literary career in New York City
and he basically he said well it
this isn't legit and then he went back
to his family home place on his farm in
Kentucky and he lives in a town with six
hundred people in it and he continues to
write he doesn't have a computer he
writes by typewriter
he's an absolute you know he's an icon
of this land based human-based movement
and he has a poem called the mad farmers
manifesto which I would highly recommend
reading
it's crazy pressing it I mean it's
basically the first half is like unplug
yourself from being a socially defines
you animal
but there's a line in the middle or he
says be joyful though you have
considered all the facts and sort of
link that back to the all of your
wendell holmes right i care not a whit
you know or I acted I don't give a fig
for the simplicity on this side but I
care deeply I'd give my life for the
simplicity on that side I think we can
kind of conflate those two quotes and
say I don't give a damn
about the happy thoughts on this side of
facing the facts I would give my life
for the joy on the other side that
facing the facts because here's the
thing right
part one was hey it's likely to
destabilize and obviously I mean brexit
you should have a UK elections on us
elections all of it right and this is it
these are in this this is in the high
watermark democracies I did is getting
far worse far faster everywhere else one
of our friends is a former
special-forces a u.s. guy he just came
back from Mexico he just came back from
Cancun and we were actually we were
surfing together and he's like and
everybody's hanging out partying having
a great time and he's like yeah you guys
have no idea what it's like in
the rest of the world right now because
he's doing private security and he
travels the world he has to get his
adrenaline fix it's a little bit of a
dark thing you know I think he gets
twitchy when it comes out off-duty so he
goes back into the war zones as a
private mercenary security you know
security guy for high net worth
politicians families etc and he's like
it is a ship everywhere else in the
world and the projection of force is
what is the only thing holding things
together right so this idea we might do
everything we can and not all of us are
gonna make it 7.5 soon to be 8 billion
of us that's twice as many as when we
crew out when we were born
that is mind-bending it's not just
nostalgia to go oh we're back in the day
we used to go to the beach and it looked
like this or we used to have this little
lake house and it was fantastic we were
the only ones they are a little boat
it's true and if we think about the
psychic impact of these things let alone
the ethical and actual demographics of
it just think psychic impact for a
moment right 3,000 people went down in
the World Trade Centers all right
seared into the memory right of the West
less than a million refugees from Syria
that effectively crashed the European
Union and potentially the United Kingdom
the UN projects a hundred million
climate refugees in the next 10 years
right the build the wall a Central and
South American caravans right this is
what this is our well and how do we stay
open to that without just collapsing how
do we manage this psychic load and then
like I said that sounds incredibly
selfish right I'm sitting here on my
flat-screen TV learning more than I
choose to about the suffering of people
in the developing world poor me how will
I manage but even that just that the
substantial so I think that's the trough
folks after this we come to the happy
place but it's a galvanized happy place
because the thing is is that I am
constitutionally unable you might have
detected this already
I am constitutionally unable to spout
platitudes right which is a son of a
bitch because it means I have to keep
going into the mud
and keep digging for the lotus flower in
the hopes if I have something halfway
worthwhile to share so I wouldn't have
done that if we didn't come to the other
side of something that is actually
potentially durable potentially useful
right and that thing is this this is I
think this little guys name this was Tim
Ferriss I absolutely it was his fault he
sent this out and one of his newsletters
he's like this is an amazing TED talk it
made me cry and I'm like oh cool okay
maybe Chris make Tim cried maybe it'll
make me cry that's great clicked on it
and I'm like hey kids let me make my
kids watch it maybe they'll open their
house maybe we'll all cry together it'll
be a great family night and this kid is
named Sam I think same burners and he
was born with a congenital defect he
knew he was going to die effectively and
he's given a little a TEDx talk it
wasn't even on the mains
and and it has 30 million views and he
is plucky he is funny he is filled with
piss and vinegar
he likes rat he wanted to be in the
marching band he was only 55 pounds
soaking wet so they created a special
little drum so he can go out and play he
had all these dreams that he wanted to
live and he lived full on with no regret
and that little guy on a side stage TEDx
in New Jersey right rippled around the
world with his testament to being alive
and that power that absolutely
asymmetrical power is what Gandhi out of
that of the Sanskrit tradition called
satyagraha right which in in that
tradition was alignment of self and
action with truth MLK popularized it
right as soul force both of them
leveraged it right for some of the most
potent social justice movements of the
20th century they took that deeper stand
they said this is who we are
damn the consequences with love in our
hearts not hate this isn't suicide by
cop right this is we are brothers and
sisters this is this is obi-wan Kenobi
cut me down
Vader right I'll only come back stronger
because this is it I mean this is washed
out sadly but here please remember this
is the old Robin Williams film Dead
Poets Society he gave a lot of Americans
and us doubt it hit for English boarding
schools this this was done this was
before Harry Potter I mean it had to do
with something and this is that moment
right where everything's gone sideways
and I think that young star has hung
himself tragically and and Robin
Williams is about to be run out of the
school by the headmaster and then all
the boys stand up on the desk and say
and recite the poem Oh captain my
captain and they do it knowing there's
hell to pay
right they do it as a testament to how
they've been moved by their teacher the
middle one is you know that's Susan
Sarandon and gosh what is her name
Geena Davis all right
cornered at the edge of the Grand Canyon
you guys remember that story I think
maybe Geena Davis had been raped earlier
and then they'd end up killing someone
who tried to rape them again they were
pinned down Hobby cartel is the sort of
FBI's the sympathetic FBI officer who
gets it
but the rest of them is just
locking and loading and doing the thing
they know they have to do in these
situations and they're like there's no
way there's no way that patriarchal
system that broke our hearts that put us
in this mess there's no way we're
submitting to that again all right she
said you want to just do it you want to
just go and that you ran I mean think
about that I mean we all know that film
it's the first time we realized how
 sexy Brad Pitt was on the final
one which is potentially you know the
most germane to us these days is Titanic
not the film the actual story right and
this is that string quartet
and they and they realize and that's
they survey the scene they're like it's
women and children first and there's not
enough lifeboats for all of us and that
hole is big
the night is dark alright and the water
is cold so we can scrap for our place in
line right or we can we can seek refuge
in our Donna so we can seek refuge in
the thing we're actually here to do
which is makeup so they sit down that
compose themselves then I played near
and my God to thee
and we remember that we remember
Leonidas and the 300 right against
10,000 Persians
I think of the the immortality to these
moments it's not just 30 million hits on
TED talk right this Ripple's think
of the mean of Jesus not the idea not
which version of it we believe just the
notion that no matically all of them
have been true for 2,000 years and have
shaped history right in a way that
beggars the imagination and ultimately
the Cathars right most people are
familiar with the Templars and there
were the sort of ones who supposedly
got the secrets of King Solomon's Temple
in Jerusalem became the adepts who came
back from the Crusades and just ran the
table in Europe right there were
soldiers they were what they were they
were warriors they were finding seers
they were strategists and they were
mystics but I had some kissing cousins
that were the kathas and they were even
more read alright in fact they were so
awake that every every town and village
that hosted them defended them at risk
of their own life as did the Templars
the Spanish Inquisition
jinda specifically to go and shut them
down
but rather than submitting to the rack
rather than submitting to the horrors of
the Inquisition and their final stand in
this castle in the South of France they
chanted and prayed themselves into
ecstatic trance and leptin to the
bonfire flames themselves normally write
that kind of powers reserved for
lunatic jihadis right bent on
destruction animating from fear and hate
what's possible if we can initiate
ourselves in joy and love all right it's
the samurai notion of meditate on the
thousand ways you may die so that when
it comes time to take your stand on the
field you do not flinch
and that's not McCobb that's not morbid
that is not a death wish paradoxically
having no regrets having no hesitation
knowing what my life is for actually
massively increases the odds of us
getting out of this in a good way
right in the final example of this I
mean I'm sharing these example because
hopefully one is one one or more two
lanes for you you know I can feel
galvanizing feel club phone but my
advisor in graduate school was Lakota
elder and was also a Yale lawyer and if
anybody's familiar with Leonard Peltier
Sandra heard of like free Leonard
Peltier it was a rally he was a Lakota
that was set up by the FBI in the early
70s and put in prison during one of
these earlier American Indian Movement
conflicts but he he told the story of
the Lakota warrior society the owl and
sash society and they were kind of the
ballers around can right that was like
the baddest-ass warrior club to be in
and they had their sash for a reason
which is when they when they took the
battlefield not every time but in the
absolute mission critical times they
would their sash was tied around their
waist and then they would tie it to
their lawns and they would spike the
Lance into the ground and they would
basically be yoked to that spa and it
meant either I'm the last man standing
or today is a good day to die and that
stand right is arguably the stand we all
need to make for ourselves with each
other but there's a beautiful twist to
that it's the only way out of that
almost certain death sentence was to
have another member of the owl Society
release their brother
so what's possible with these metaphors
right we don't need to fumble blindly
into the future all right we've got
right the answers are always in the text
the answers are always in our culture we
have these examples humans have been
doing this they've been sending out
pulses of satyagraha we've been feeling
the ripples of soul force it anchors us
it inspires us have mobilizes us but we
still often just forget it or it gets
kind of lost in the shuffle but it's an
initiatory process it cannot be faked
and how might we do that and well you
know we can talk about that a bit more
this afternoon so let me just talk
before we get into a little bit more
practical how are you guys doing let's
just do an emotional conceptual pulse
check okay is this okay
I mean this is so much in the realm of
like sorry not sorry okay okay so things
to do because obviously it's not-it's
not helpful just to scare the out
of people and leave them fibrillating
it's the galvanize right be joyful right
like that little kid Sam be joyful
though we have considered the facts so
the first is prioritization this is a
picture from Pompeii and I've always
thought men like as we've been kind of
watching this trend you know you're like
are we a Jewish family in Berlin and 33
37 39 uh-huh Kristallnacht too late
are we there in Pompeii caught reading
the paper on the Sunday morning it all
went down turned to ash I think was
going off I think was smoking and
belching for weeks
right this one is an especially
egregious case study guy literally died
with his dick in his hand which you know
either men he was a compulsive wanker or
decided it I'm going out with a
bang so no matter what let's not be that
guy and this one I'm not through this
yet I feel like I keep getting like
ratcheted further and further along but
is the idea of like at what point do
accept do we accept what we must do you
know and then Campbell's hero's journey
this is the belly of the whale this is
the backstory for Jonah right Jonah is
you know given the memo by God to go and
save the wayward people of Nineveh next
door he's like no I'm not a successful
businessman I got to do I got game
time you have to wait I don't want to do
that and then God's like nah man you got
to go do that
no I don't wanna do that he's like you
got to do that he's like a and
running away so he hops the slow boat to
China storms come up the sailors freak
out bad luck shutdown and Jonah eaten by
the Leviathan and there he is in the
dark night of the soul it's like okay
okay okay I get it
three days later spat out right and it
goes and does what he must all right
Maslow is well known for his hierarchy
but he also had this idea of the German
a complex which he borrowed from this
myth which is that we are actually you
know and marianne williamson has
thoroughly buggered this one up but you
know the idea that we are actually
afraid of our own greatness we are
afraid of our call to deep
transformative purpose to fully
surrendered leadership for two reasons
at least in Maslow's understanding or
articulation which was number one could
I keep that up has anybody had a
profound transformative ecstatic
experience
and then somehow unconsciously or
subconsciously let the air back out of
the balloon right it's like almost
famous where they do standing you're
tripping ball standing on the roof he's
like I am a golden God I'm on drugs
right owning our full power is
terrifying because it requires us to
live up to and into everything you know
all that we've been shown it requires
setting aside the childish things
besides it requires no longer self
sabotaging no longer bailing to our
comforts and our conveniences and our
indulgence and our addictions and our
prescribed to prevent projections and
our distractions now the other part
right that's the first part internal the
other parts external back to socially
defined it's like what would my family
or the neighbors think they're not gonna
let me get away with this I fit in a
tiny little box in their world I
suddenly show up upsetting all of our
collective Apple cards I'm gonna make
people feel uncomfortable I'm gonna
threaten them I'm gonna stress them out
I'm gonna scare them they're either
gonna be freaked out or they're gonna be
direct you know dismissive or derisive
it's not going to be fun I promise that
no one's gonna say thank you so much
really glad that was a wonderful
inspiration I think I'll do the same you
know and in the New Testament it's that
story of the Nazarene going to the Sea
of Galilee and I think I don't always
wear those classical mouthfuls it's like
James and John and Peter called Zebedee
or something you know like one of those
but it's like through for three or four
dudes and they've just bought two new
fishing boats and they're out in the Sea
of Galilee they've got new Nets the
whole bit and Jesus like yeah no no I
said they're like look at us we're doing
it we're kicking ass we're finally gonna
make it there's like not when are you
gonna put down your nets and come and be
fishers of men so for all of us the
answer to that question right is
uniquely personal
but weirdly it's getting transpersonal
all right
marshall mcluhan famously said the
personal is political that became the
rallying cry of the sixties but the
transpersonal right is political even
more so and how do we answer this
question I know for myself I've had that
one on the corner of my eye back in my
vision I've been dodging it for as long
as I possibly can let me just make this
amount of money to make sure my kids can
go to college make sure they have a safe
place to be to make sure everything can
sort and then if I have to then okay I
will but please let me tie up all the
loose ends please make sure that if I
have to do something hairy or scary that
it won't affect anybody else I love and
while that sounds noble and beautiful
when it's again back to evolutionary bio
it's hard encoded in all of us if I
really sat in front of the burning bush
would the answer not be that - there's
an attachment of your ego that - there's
a false presumption that you control far
more than you ever could and what is
truly surrendering into all of this
actually looking to you like it's scary
super scary feedback I often get in
conversations like this and a little bit
less in the last year or so cuz I've
just been I'm sort of officially out of
ice I actually went was it actually a
specific workshop trauma thing that I
went through and I'm like okay I accept
my yoke like so there was a legit pivot
point for me in this last year but it's
not done you know it was that sense of
connecting ahead and hot because we
actually do both together then it's such
a gray huh we invoke the archetype we
take our stand and dear God none that is
really really hot
and really uncertain and scary until
right until we did this until we walk
each other home and then then it becomes
like a roving dance party right I mean
we sort of like I've been down so god
damn lot like going down the road
feeling bad don't want to be treated
this way but someone's singing it
someone's dancing it and like oh
yes this this right the redemption songs
that lifts us up again and again what
does I want to know that was that okay
so the next thing this is tactical but
the intention of this bit is to advocate
moving beyond the binaries because the
binary I've experienced and I think you
know maybe nod or whatever if others if
you have is is the pot the pillar to
post of is this or go blind
territory right in which case I should
change everything in my life I should
reorganize all of my priorities
effective yesterday or if that's too
much to wrap my head around
there's too much uncertainty there's too
much it's just it's I'm not there yet
back to I guess I'm not going to do
anything and I'm gonna keep kind of
going the way yesterday was and that's
sort of fibrillation and exhaustion and
confusion defaulting back to the norm is
where it feels like an awful lot of
well-intentioned folks are but it's not
free right because every time we do that
we're juice to the gills and of
hyper-vigilance response we have a sense
of urgency we have cortisol we have all
kinds of things leading us alive and
priming us for the moment and then we're
like stand down but part of us isn't
really standing down and the algorithms
help they looked on what we've clicked
on they looked on what we double clicked
in red they just keep saving more
up that's all the same right we can't
get away from it so what I would
absolutely advocate is the Pareto split
on taking the next steps it's too soon
to go all-in on anything right now and
probably misguided but what we can
absolutely encourage to say do the 20%
of the things you think you might now
that will save or protect or preserve
80% of the things you care about in
value next
that gives us agency that gives us
forward motion that gives us a sense of
things to do so what might that look
like and people might say you know back
to the spiritual sect it's like oh I
don't want to bring that kind of fear
and negativity into my board tags like
 you it's coming anyway right your
vortex is about to be overwhelmed by a
tsunami so this is loud misses Suns ooh
better to be a warrior in the garden
than a gardener in the war so we're
still in our gardens we're blessed for
now
amen right train train so I think simple
stuff I my background is in mountain
guiding so I get down to brass tacks
very very quickly as far as like what
are their like reality filters the
reality of filters do you have water
purification do you have fuel do you
have food can you have shelter
do you have layers and protection can
you sleep warm and dry
can you drink water do you have calories
do you have a map communications and
medical gear and equipment to traverse
the terrain you're in if you have those
things you can handle all kinds of
shows and uncertainties and actually
have a blast doing it miss even one of
those things and you get yanked down on
the hierarchy of needs quicker than you
can imagine and suddenly any of your
objectives are trashed and you're back
to you now how do we get back to
refilling one of those things as soon as
possible
so this is presumably a gathering of
leaders right and one of the most
profound lessons I ever got was from an
Everest MD so you know base camp dealing
with all that kind of stuff and he was
training us as wilderness EMTs which
said I don't know what that
classifications are in the UK but sort
of a paramedic II kind of thing but also
for the for the backcountry so not
dialing 911
triggering emergency services but you
know you're building traction splints
out of skis and that kind of thing
and he said and you know it's really
empowering stuff and I'll make a case
for that you know for everyone in a
moment but the natural thing is you
start if you're practicing your training
you're kind of going through real
scenarios and you're fishing yeah doing
doing drills on the mountains or in the
river and fishing people out and it
feels great like wow I'm beginning to
feel competent right and I'm beginning
to feel like I can be part of solutions
and he's like not so fast not so fast he
said when you have these skills
it's me first me second me third my
partner's fourth the victim fifth I
don't know what that sounds in
constantly selfish no I want to go help
and he's like now look if you go over
8,000 Avalanche and you go running in a
notch I came to see if there's about to
be another one that's coming down on top
of that all right
you have now put yourself in the way of
danger you're right they're about to
become another victim and who has to
look after that other victim your
partner's what happened to all that
knowledge that you had and the victims
didn't have gone right if you're a
fireman and you go into a burning
buildings you haven't decided you
haven't asserted whether the structure
is stable and isn't gonna collapse on
you you are creating additional hazard
so lose the Cape right and the other the
other just embodied one that came up
with that is if you're the most informed
person in the situation and obviously if
you know somebody's broke and they fall
a car accident or a tree or or a
mountain or whatever you know the one of
the first things you do is stabilize the
head right in case there's a you know
spinal injury so you get there and you
stabilize the head the only trouble is
is that once you're on the head you can
never let go until there's actually on
the backboard fully strapped down which
is often you know an hour or more away
so if you're the most experienced person
you come rushing in and you do the thing
that it's needed to be done next you're
out of the game and you're down at
ground level you've got no perspective
and you kind of actually help manage the
incident from the elevation you need to
so for us right rather than thinking I
will be a gardener in the war all right
I think it's really critical for us to
take the steps and that would be
literally very simply you know look into
solar power look into having a well look
into basic wilderness medical training
and that's not because you necessarily
plan on living in a bunker in the
mountains is to say when emergency
medical services go down right we are
needed and by the way there's not a
single one of these recommendations that
I'm making now that I didn't make to our
students 20 years ago because it's just
simple grown-ass human and it's
profoundly empowering a ton of fun all
right
and you can't lose having done it so
like what happens if I do the 20% of
prep and the world just keeps trucking
on awesome my lights out powered by coal
fire or nuclear plants right julie has
saved us thousands of dollars in plastic
surgery pills and stitches because she
knows how to patch up her kids in her
fan and me and herself by you know
without going to the doctor the number
of times that she has helped friends of
ours or us and then we finally gone to
the doctor because something was gnarly
and nothing they're like oh yeah I'm not
doing that that's perfect right so just
and we would have prefect sin a boarding
school that we used to teach that take
the wilderness medical training because
it was the single most psychoactive tool
to advocate situational awareness
antifragility and leadership skills so
never mind
using the tools right you have kids
right how beautiful is it to say I mean
how many people have ever fantasized
about the cruising lifestyle on a yacht
like taking your kids around the world
on a sailboat or taking them to a farm
anything that gives them like a little
bit more experience in life in the world
right how about this is the battery this
is the energy turn off your lights not
because I keep saying so but turn a few
minutes because look what happens do a
square for a garden in the back garden
the worst case is you have fresh herbs
for your cooking not such a bad thing
so take the steps right that just
empower us and take us out of fragmented
deconditioned zoo animal consumers all
stop and then we're not the ones waiting
queueing for water at the fire
department or at the hospital
we're the ones able to be standing and
still functional as leaders because
here's the spectrum the spectrum is Me
Mine now
can I look after myself it's biohacking
optimal psychology I might do I have
nutrition do I have health do I have
basic decency though can I stand on my
own two feet if I can stand on my own
two feet and I still got gas in my tank
can I look after my family great if I
can do that I've got gas in the tank and
I look after my Dunbar community up to
150 people fantastic after that still
extra my country after that still extra
the world and that's fluid and flexible
is going to depend on conditions if I
suddenly have a concussion back to the
bottom of the slide right if I haven't
eaten for three days back to the bottom
of the slide right so it's a sliding
scale and there's a time component as
well which is me and mine now that's us
in a refugee camp that's us after a
plane crash right something gnarly boom
tunnel vision naturally all the way to
everyone everywhere
everyone right true Bodhisattva all
sentient beings playing the longest of
games
all right time am i aware of time I'm
completely unaware of time where are we
is this 10 to 11 10 to 12 is that where
man
sweet Jesus all right that's it
I'll leave us with this then which is
the notion of grief and then the and the
requirement to metabolize it so I think
the simplest way to think of it is is
weep don't whimper get rid of all the
neurotic egoic distractions right grieve
the real stuff the human condition get
it out and then get back up Shakespeare
settings in Julius Caesar right he said
a coward dies a thousand deaths the
valiant but once
I think I said as I'll leave with this
this was EB white the author of
Charlotte's Web they said each morning I
wake up torn between the desire to save
the world and savor it
but then I realized that the savoring
has to come first because I didn't save
it as well there will be nothing left
worth saving all right folks thank you
very much