[Music]
[Music]
[Laughter]
[Music]
[Laughter]
[Music]
[Laughter]
[Music]
welcome to the second of our roundtable
discussions restoring the future
regenerative strategies for the
Anthropocene transition
I'm your host Ken MacLeod coming to you
from the land of the gadigal people of
the eora nation the Australian first
people who cared for countless
generations for this country on which
the city of Sydney now stands once again
our roundtable panelists are more a
gamble permaculture designer and trainer
educationist author and eco village
pioneer Daniel Christian wall author
researcher educationist consultant and
activist welcome Daniel Charles Marshall
indigenous ecologist marine biologist
land care Ranger and researcher and
Jason twill regenerative urban planner
land land care sorry developer and
consultant today's roundtable discussion
is going to be led by Daniel and our
theme will be bio regional economies and
subsidiarity enabling life to create
conditions conducive to life but first
I'd like to invite chills to acknowledge
the ancient cultural traditions of this
continent now called Australia unike
everyone welcome
tonight I just want to start by giving
acknowledgement to the forests and the
ocean that binds us all the totem of can
be near Bury my jug on which is my
area's totem and our language group as
well to my family all the fish in the
ocean I also will take this time to pay
respect and to honor the indigenous
people of the world who continue to
speak with with truth for equity on this
planet also to the people who wake up
each day and step forward to making
planet Earth safe and a better world to
live in for all life
thank you chills
so it's indeed a pleasure to welcome
Daniel tonight to be our discussion
leader Daniel was originally trained as
a biologist and holds degrees in biology
holistic science and natural design he's
a director or adviser to a long list of
institutions and organizations around
the world and teachers regularly at the
famous Schumacher College in the United
Kingdom Daniel lives with his partner
and their daughter on Majorca and works
locally and internationally as a
consultant educator and activist
Daniel's 2016 book designing and
regenerative cultures quickly gained
international acclaim his blog on medium
is followed by over 20,000 people and
his social media ad advocacy has a
combined audience of over 450,000
so we're very privileged to be in this
group tonight with Daniel a small drop
in the ocean Daniel over to you thank
you so much and the privilege is all
mine them and really enjoying we had a
wonderful conversation last time and
this is such a nice panel to have a
conversation with that I don't really
want to take up a huge amount of time
because I think the richness is in the
conversation but maybe I'll unpack that
long title by a regional economies and
subsidiarity in abling life to create
conditions conducive to life a little
bit maybe the first one to start with is
what is subsidiarity because that's a
bit of a mouthful and a lot of people
might not have heard this term I looked
it up on Wikipedia and wikipedia says
it's the principle that central central
authority should have a subsidiary
function performing only those tasks
that cannot be performed by a more at a
more local level and another way of
saying that is also it's a change in our
structure of governance that enables
true participation of everybody because
people will only fully participate in
the fate of their community and the fate
of their region if they feel that their
voice actually has a way of being heard
and matters and this idea that we elect
national political political
representatives at national government
level every four years and then trust
that they do
a less bad job than the ones we didn't
elect is something that is actually
holding us to my mind back from really
enabling people to come together and
take the fate of their bioregion into
their own hands and really start
co-creating and we're now at a point
where that is increasingly important I
think for a lot of people who've just
lived through the lockdown scenarios of
the pandemic we've began to realize how
important
Mourad spoke to that strongly as the
last time important our local farmers
are how important our local producers
are because those just-in-time
production large international supply
lines that are ramified all over the
world where even the suppliers of our
suppliers are on another continent and
we we just we don't really know quite
yet we will see in the next few months
the unfolding of the repercussions of
this lockdown on global supply and
demand and in the historically in this
enormous push towards globalization that
started in the mid 90s where even
companies that were proudly producing in
their region for the region or even in
their region and then also for
international export but but trying to
keep
the production and the resourcing as
local as possible just didn't have a
chance if they didn't globalize and in
plate that international game and now
we're realizing that that that's
incredibly fragile and that in this move
towards economic efficiency
we have cut so cut at local and regional
level the redundancies and the the
capacity to meet basic needs for people
in a way that is biting us in the back
now and to my mind in order to truly
address this issue we have to put a lot
of effort into real localization and re
regionalization friend of mine Helena
Novick Hodge Right Livelihood award
winner and author of the wonderful book
ancient futures just recently on Sunday
and organized a wonderful event called
the world localization day with speakers
from all over the world it's still live
if you just google a world localization
day they've put together for our program
with Noam Chomsky and what Hopkins and
so many other people from all over the
world contributing it's it's really
worth watching and for me this
bioregional term is is something that
comes out of my own 20 year journey in
all of this for a very long time I was
very active in the global eco village
network and eco village movement lived
in an eco village in Scotland at Finland
helped to spread the news on the
transition town impulse and work with
forests transition town and and number
of other transition towns around the
world and so my focus was very much on
how do we create the whole systems
design at the community level how do we
put all the pieces of the puzzle in
place to create a sustainable community
and I've moved on a little bit from that
by under it through understanding that
very often these these
intentional community projects which are
wonderful laboratories of innovation and
and learning in the very effort of
establishing themselves not by any
militia but because it's hard work to
build a village from scratch often
forget the link to their region and then
it takes a long time afterwards to
retrofit that and reach out again to
thereby original context but beyond that
even I've also realized that there are
certain things that do need a little bit
of an economy of scale they don't need
to be globalized and and scaled up to
massive mega projects that in their very
nature cannot be sustainable
or regenerative but it is at the bio
regional scale that we can begin to rien
habit the earth like I in my book I
speak a lot about the fact that what
we're called to do now is to redesign
the human impact and presence on earth
within the lifetime of the generations
of life today
and we have to redesign it in such a way
that the overall impact of humanity
stops being degenerative exploitative
and negative to people and planet but it
becomes regenerative again and
replenishing and restorative em and the
only way we can do that is to fit back
into the patterns of our ancestors that
she'll spoke to of the oceans of the
birds that land animals the community of
life as a whole not just humanity and if
we look at a map today we see these very
straight lines that were literally drawn
by the rulers of rulers by colonialists
by but these nation-states the two
hundred and a few nation-states that we
now have around the planet I actually
relatively recent sorcery political
inventions
and it's in that era of power over of
nation-states suppressing parts of their
population and other people the first
inhabitants of many places that that
during colonial ISM people just arrived
in a place planted a flag and said
that's ours now and and it's that very
structure that I think we need to it
will take generations I'm not saying
this is right this is a fast-moving
change but but if we begin to redesign
our human impact on on earth we need to
pay attention to the biophysical reality
of the bio regions we inhabit and what
do I mean by bioregions it's some people
to make it easy speak of watersheds is a
good idea good first approximation of a
bio region the watersheds of rivers give
you a that's a biophysical reality they
often connect a number of local
ecosystems into a wider area that is a
biophysical and geographical reality and
not a political socio-political reality
and also of course now that so many of
our human the members of the human
species have moved into cities although
that's beginning to now change again
post pandemic a lot of people have
realized that cities are hyper dense
cities are maybe not such a pleasant
place to live you know in a world where
pandemics might become more frequent but
we do need to if we want to be effective
in redesigning the human impact on earth
we need to also think about how do we
redesign cities and one of the founding
fathers of town planning a Scott named
Sir Patrick Geddes over a hundred and by
now one hundred and ten years ago in a
book called cities and evolution spoke
about the only way to plan a city well a
town well is to do so within the context
of its bio region and yet there's one
the full image called the valley section
where from the mountains down to
see he he kind of situated the city with
regard to its resource base and
began the first movement of really
connecting people to place again he
worked a lot with the French sociologist
Lee clays idea of people work in place
and I think that triad is is still very
functional today we need to if we want
to create bio regional economies we need
to pay attention to reread analyzing our
economic system as well again because
right now the globalized economy is
stacked against by regional production
for bioregional consumption there are so
many externalities to the mass
production far away social social
externalities and environmental
externalities that are not figured into
the price of things and then there are
international trade rules that actually
make it difficult for people to create
any kind of law at the local or national
level that says we should favor local
production because it's has less climate
impact it creates more vibrant local
economies and it helps our people in our
place and the IMF would come comment and
take issue with that and so we in order
to enable people to really begin this
riri generalization Riaan habitation
process of becoming native to place
again even Chelse is going to talk about
this in the next series that the notion
of rhe indigenous asian that that all of
us are indigenous to Planet Earth
all of us if we choose to we can reroute
ourselves in our places but we need to
really begin to learn our places and so
many people don't know what the
migratory species in their area are and
what what people ate before we started
to reduce our dietary habits to just a
few
commodity crops that are globally traded
and we need to really relearn from our
elders and if in some some areas this
has been eroded for so many generations
now that we can't even speak took the
people anymore that have an idea of what
it was like before globalization but a
lot of areas in the global self in in
Africa in South America and parts of
Asia still have this knowledge in living
memory and that is a really enormous
human resource that we shouldn't ignore
and that we need to harvest and learn
from before and these people pass on and
M the whole process of building
regenerative communities has to be in
the context of the next greater whole
that these communities sit in em the
whole process of building regenerative
cities has to be in the next greater
context that the city system and that's
the bio region and of course because
place is fractal if we work in our local
community and in our bio region we are
also healing the planet we are
regenerating the planet it isn't an
issue of well the problems are now so
large we all have to work at the
planetary scale and how do we scale it
up the whole notion of scaling up is a
mistaken notion and regeneration is
patterned by the bio cultural uniqueness
of place we have to really pay attention
to what we can learn from the history of
our places people who lived there before
us that what we can learn from the
uniqueness of the ecosystems we inhabit
and then once we think in that way we
can actually create a whole new era of
innovation and in the process of
regional ization create vibrant bio
regional economies that pay attention to
em
what is the kind of biomaterials
feedstock that we can grow in this area
in a way that we regenerates or soils
regenerate red forest cover locked down
carbon from the atmosphere into
biomaterials and into the soil and with
other processes like like using fungi
and there's certain biological processes
that allow us to capture carbon through
by a sequestration in plant matter and
then turn that carbon the biological
carbon into geological carbon through
bio assisted processes often through the
fungal processes because in in terms of
the responding to climate change issue
it isn't actually enough to just by a
sequester into biomass and because the
biological carbon cycle is only 300
years so we would very quickly hit a
ceiling on how much carbon we can draw
back down into living matter and soil
but through this coupling it with geo
sequestration but again as geo therapy
in humble attendance to the uniqueness
of peasant none of these large
geoengineering projects of sending
mirrors out into space or ferrous oxide
seeding the oceans and it's it's such a
hubris to think that we can safely
Geoengineer at that scale every time
we've done things at that scale we
messed it up
hugely and we we've already made the
global system so brittle now that that
we better not mess around too much
because we don't have a lot of lot more
chances to get it wrong and we need to
begin to get it right and the place to
get it right to my mind is at this
bioregional scale and what I learned
from working with with eco villages and
sustainable communities is that um it
simply isn't like it's it's not a scale
where you truly
are forced to include all the diversity
present but when you move to the
bioregional scale then the conversations
really hit the messy wicked problem
complexity that that life is all about
then you have to look at what are the
current strong economies in this region
and not see them as evil and other but
begin to have a conversation with them
of how could they regionalize how could
they like even large international
companies are beginning to explore what
it would be like to move into becoming
regenerative to my mind
many of these multinationals are too
large not to fail they're just at the
wrong scale but what they could do if
they looked at instead of if they really
looked at the potential that is in the
people that are part of these companies
most of them good people who also have
children who also care about the future
and they could reinvent themselves to
enable global networks of collaboration
that decentralized manufacturing again
towards a regional scale and in that
process we would begin to answer a lot
of the the problems that we have now
with mass unemployment in many places
and and we at the core of it is building
food sovereignty at the local and by
regional scale water sovereignty at the
local and by regional scale energy
sovereignty from renewables at the local
Empire regional scale and building
transport systems that did and/or based
on private cars but are non emitting non
carbon emitting transport system based
on electric cars and in some areas it
might be hydrogen but clean hydrogen
made from renewables and there's there's
so many technical aspects to this and we
pretty much have the technological
solutions for this regionalization
process but I really want to stress that
this is not a technical issue it is
really also a narrative issue a
worldview issue
a community in a social issue that
through this process of really involving
people to care about their place in
their region again to begin to read n
Tafoya that place and to to ask the
question how can I most express my
unique essence my unique gift to life in
service to my community and my region
because the the the way we can
regenerative ly express ourselves is
always in the context of the next by the
whole it can't really live a
regenerative life without serving your
community and you can't create a
regenerative community without that
community serving the region and if if
we do that then an important thing here
is that because there's there's another
current on the planet which is very
dangerous at the moment which is
right-wing nationalists also jumping on
a sort of regional agenda but from all
the wrong for all the wrong reasons and
the importance here is that we also need
to address the scars of the past and the
damage and trauma of the past of
colonialism and environment your liberal
globalization and we need to in
privileged regions in the global north
not just pay attention to our
bioregional life bolts and safety for a
turbulent future as some people always
like to frame it but we need to enable
people everywhere to do that and that
means knowledge exchange technology
exchange and probably that Jubilees
helping people in the global south to
build a capacity to help themselves and
in understand that this is not a issue
of being also generous in offering some
development money to the global self
this is a reparation payment for the
damage that we've done over centuries
for for
the the plundering that has gone on for
400 500 years around the planet and if
we don't heal those errors of the past
then we won't be able to create a
regenerative human presence on earth in
time because that
the time is ticking climate change is
really upon us and if you've followed
the news the temperatures in northern
Siberia are scary like we've never seen
this before of having 38 degrees
centigrade in more than Siberia and
that's an area that's normally under
permafrost and once that permafrost
melts and releases methane the runaway
feedback loops in the climate system big
get to a point where where we seek
westering that carbon will be
increasingly difficult or impossible so
the time is ticking
but I feel that more and more people are
identifying that this bioregional scale
is actually where the action lies
whether it's the planetary Health
Alliance focused on by regionalism or
the capital Institute's regenerative
communities Network creating by regional
initiatives on many parts of the globe
from from southern England Isabella
Carlisle's wonderful by regional
Learning Centre in the UK lots of
initiatives in North America in Costa
Rica and New Zealand wonderful Maori LED
initiative in the Auckland Bay Area and
they had so many hopeful initiatives and
I'm here on an island in the
Mediterranean called Majorca the reason
why I moved this because Islands are
wonderful case studies for bioregional
regeneration and in this process
of regional izing we actually create and
and healing the local ecosystems putting
effort into building by regional
economies that are restorative and
regenerative by design that that have
the incentive to heal the soil and
replant the forests and heal the local
watersheds built into their economic
structure we can not only create a
system that is much more able to weather
the next three four decades which will
be bumpy with climate change and which
will probably have a seat a number of
pandemics of the one of the severity of
the one that we're currently in the
middle of and it's this building that
redundancy and resilience at different
scales again that allows us to come home
to really come back to community to
really and I really don't just mean the
human community but I mean the wider
community of life that we so critically
depend upon and in our ancestors all
over the globe knew that the land does
not belong to us we belong to the land
and I think that is a and we are
expressions of the land and creating
conditions conducive to life what life
does best that's the central lessons
lesson of biomimicry is something that
we can life builds from the ground up it
doesn't build the top down
we need to retrofit all these levels
from local to regional to global em that
we've eroded over the last 400 years and
I would love to hear what the other
panelists have to add to that I know
Jason's working very much with cities
and there's a real like the whole bio
regional urban development issue is
something that that'd be wonderful to
hear you speak to and chels we have so
much to
to learn from the knowledge that you and
your ancestor Stewart for 40,000 years
of how to live in place again and and
and and more like we need to re-record
the last session because we had a bit of
a clip of not recording it he spoke so
wonderfully to the importance of local
food economies and and and the whole
notion of not just the watershed but a
food shed a fiber shed and biomaterials
shed meaning what is the region that we
draw our key the key resources from
where we can meet human needs but in a
way that we actually become a
regenerative presence on the planet so
that's I leave it open to the panel from
here or which you can well who wants to
pick up the many threads that just one
of them to begin with the many threads
that that daniel has just woven don't be
shy first this is Jason and I want to
acknowledge Daniel for this incredible
gift his contribution to the movement
you're one of the best writers I've come
across and one of the most brilliant
beautiful minds and you give 110 percent
of yourself to this movement in the
world so thank you for sharing that I'm
really grateful to call you a friend and
learn from you and there's a really
crucial issue I saw a note in there from
a panelist on Q&A about what defines a
bio region was genuine was just talking
about like for me I've always understood
it as the biodiversity and ecosystem
services scale it supports the
conditions conducive for life so it is
that kind of watershed scale a life shed
that has the food provision soil
nutrients you know water cycle
that allows life to happen in that place
and I think about how we grew up on West
Coast us traditional Eurocentric
American school system you know my first
association with maps were all political
boundaries like you're playing little
puzzle games and you're putting little
States into the map right so my mental
model for a mental map for maps was
always associated with political
boundaries and you really don't you get
older and you learn about science and
then you see that blue marble view from
NASA you know the first time that's fate
you know the earth was viewed through
space and there's no lines on that
planet
so the construct of human you know
economies political economy is the
drawing lines across the world is
largely a Western paradigm right and
I've learned you know seeing the it ASIS
map of Australia it's very very
different actually I can share that and
I'll give a little visual cue if it's
okay Ken and permission to show one of
your slides gels all right let's see if
I can do this can we go can I even share
slice I can
if people can see this this is just
basically helps you understand a
visualization of if you can see the
screen you know the Western paradigm
political the strong lines for seven
states across the country straight
through the country versus on the right
is the you know pre Western contact of
Australia like the I would say the
bioregional governed clans or community
groups of original peoples and towards
other peoples on which they're a Miria
all associated of some Shore with the
food source with water source or
custodianship of dirt and certain
species of flora on the phone and that
associated with those boundaries and
bioregions that's missing from our
political economic context where I
started to learn more about this from
the realm of cities Daniel was in
Seattle
okay so New York I didn't either the
Croton water system I kind of as a
Manhattanite you don't really get to see
much nature it takes a while to drive
through cities to get that although I
also learned from an with since firm
that cities are nature and it's just the
way that we think about them but really
were I saw by regional collaboration and
my original thinking was when I was in
Seattle and we talked about the Cascadia
fire region it goes from northern
california up to alaska and we started
to look at how we harmonized political
discussions or policies way to climate
change water protection life shed
protection so to speak and was
collaborating across that broad spectrum
of area primarily thinking about salmon
which had a strong context for the
cultural identity of that region going
back to the first peoples that was their
economy that was their livelihood that
was their totem and when we started
bringing city making in the context of
how we protect salmon it changed the way
we localized bioregional thinking and
our impacts of urbanizing you know the
northwest in a way that had no adverse
impact on the salmon habitats so we
created a I guess a place-based program
called salmon safe that looked at
how we designed our roads building an
infrastructure that we knew would have
no adverse impact the there we go
cascaded by region on salmon and that
required us having like Janine taught me
to have but you know biologists and rain
biologists at the design table for
teaching me as a developer that we
couldn't use certain facade materials
because they were endocrine disrupters
for fish or other species so it really
taught us things that we wouldn't ever
know unless we have those experts around
us giving us diversity of thought but
also when were teaching and educating
our kids in schools K through 12 or
higher ed it's crucial that we give them
an association I mean Charles will talk
about growing up in a in a in a culture
where there's tannic relationships and
more which he talked about last session
associate with you the mental model of
your bio region and your your nation's
kind of footprint I had to take my
graduate students at u-dub is to take
them out to the watershed in the
cascading Mountains and then I took him
to the waste treatment plant so they
actually saw the full drop of rain cycle
from where the catchment was all the way
down through the city how it got there
and then where it went on the back end
but then we also went to non point
discharge did kayaking down the Duwamish
River to pick up way so they saw the I
guess the non point straight off run
from urban environments so that they
sort of developed a mental map of our
bio region in Seattle because they just
don't there's all their whole
Association was like here's our square
block of land we're going to plug in to
the infrastructure and build this thing
and not really think about worth coming
from where it's really going so most
people don't know where their water
catchment is if you ask them so that's
something that we have to reprogram into
our thinking and there's so many
incredible lessons that I've learned
from some gels and first peoples all
over the world on you know how the story
of my regionalism is ingrained in the
culture and the storytelling and raising
the children only formally in school but
in the home and how it's talked about
and how people spend time on a country
it's hard to have that as our
association in the cities or so you go
to the supermarket you don't know where
your food really is coming from most
people and you go visit nature to go
hiking on the weekend right so it's
really changing that paradigm we're
starting to get into that dialogue of
how do we even change our in-place
naming like I I can't wait til we get to
a point where I can say hey what
watershed are you from you know think
about the way that we name places in our
mental activity a place you know if you
start to change that dialogue you know
we can start to shift some of the new
community as a child and I've been
involved with planning here we're we
were deciding around water catchments
and hoping that we can basically build
that culture a new new community so
people can say that where's your
watershed but I'll pass on to the other
wonderful people kind of continue to
thread
you
I can have a go okay so I'm glad that
you put that map up Jason and yeah I've
noticed a comment here from from Sandra
yes yeah the the cultures that are
existing on that map are still ongoing
and strong and continuing and I think
that's part of this paradigm shift that
we're sort of trying to make people
aware of is that um yeah indigenous
people and culture in Australia
throughout time you got it right and had
it right and you know if we look and
draw upon the the aspects of those
paradigms and thought processes to help
as something in the toolbox to move
towards you know people understanding
you know the restoration of this planet
that yeah our mother is in essential
yeah palliative care and anyone that
that's sick
yeh you usually have the emotional
intelligence to then assist yeah
and that map I was going to talk to that
map Jason so you was zoning into my mind
frame if you look at those that the
existing language groups in Australia
and how diverse it was yeah you're
looking at more than what 250 you know
300 800 sort of dialects and and
variations of language and then groups
you know all these areas are an example
of these these local and regional trade
areas and that's how things functioned
and yeah in a lot of places still to to
do today yeah so that that practice is
is basically embedded
yes so much that yeah a lot of this this
regional trade and regional get-together
or dialectal or exchange you know was
embedded that it was actually timed and
planned around ecological seasons so a
lot of that movement and that you know
action of of regional trade and regional
interaction was around seasons and
that's something that more AG spoke to
before is that whole eating and
operating and working within the
constructor of seasonality but also
think goes with those local bio regions
and the local happenings within the area
yes things like you know when when when
mullet are migrating yeah you've got it
you've got a food base in a resource to
be able to host your visitors you've got
something that can then you extend into
offering as your you know you're giving
all your contribution yeah
to just showing people your country and
what's going on in your country and the
functions and systems within your
country yeah these these ecological
cycles and these each ecological systems
or atmospheric systems as well and
geological systems yeah that they also
had social constructs attached to them
so you know in these social constructs
you had things like ceremony we still do
and and harvests and dance and art so
this whole social construct of existence
yeah revolved around you know these
these this seasonality and ecological
time and then which then came back to
the local areas and regionalism and bio
regionalism within those areas yeah it's
not a new ideology it's it's been around
for a very long time and it worked it
worked a hundred percent and it worked
so much as daniel said that yeah it was
in existence for forty thousand years
and still exists today as we sit here
and a lot of that sort of mindset that
paradigm that mine frame is
still existing in Australia and you
would all be idiots if we don't start
drawing upon that knowledge that's left
and that logic that's still existing and
not only in Australia but in other
countries throughout the world where
indigenous people you know lead and
showed you know what true sustainable
sustainability is and the principles and
the Nexus and the foundations of what
that consists of and a lot of it has to
do with that equity and its equity in
knowing your place you know within the
planet and not taking too much and as as
much as you need it's about you know
knowing that every living organism has a
right to exist
I think thanks Charles gosh thanks
everyone
such a rich a rich conversation in so
many threads and I'd love to pick up on
but I think I'll start with what Charles
was just saying there about the need to
to really have that emotional
intelligence to respond to what's
happening and something that I wanted to
to bring up with and I think that really
the way that we need to focus on this
restoring bioregions is through an
economy of love an economy of care and
it's and it's through those enriching
relationships that we build with
community with the place and when we
begin to really have a sense of who we
are in that place and to actually really
love and respect and care for that place
that things start to shift that we start
to live in a way that we're actually
taking care of the waterways of the
resources of of the people who are
living there I just wanted to give like
a really little example but of when we
start to think about all different
aspects of our lives being more placed
based and and and connected I built this
little house that we we have here at the
eco village at Crystal waters I've been
living here for for 20 years and one of
the so my benches in the kitchen for
example benches that are made from the
timber from the ridge across I know
exactly where the timber has come from
and I know why that particular tree was
removed it wasn't just part of a big
clear cutting going down to the hardware
and picking some timber the right size
the tree had to come out because it was
about to fall on some cabins it was
rotted out so we we harvested that and
we slabbed it up and stored it under the
house for four twelve months until it's
right and then we picked a shape of it
we actually designed the benches around
that and my dad helped me do it and
there's part of this when I look at that
bench it this deep sense of connected
like we take care of that bench it's not
like old it's just well if we damage it
we can just check it out it's a this
sense of deep respect and
when you have have a relationship to the
resource you have a relationship to the
place where it's from you have a
relationship to the people that are
involved in the process another example
when we're making a little chicken house
here at Crystal waters is a guy called
Peter who has a woodlot 20 years ago he
started this woodlot on the on the south
side of the slope where it's no good for
building houses or growing food and so
it's with pretty much Maine half of
crystal waters the Eco village which is
about 650 acres is regeneration and so
no one touches that bit but there's a
pocket where we can create harvest zones
for the for timber so I needed some
timber for building a chicken house so I
went over to Peter and I said okay what
have you got and so we walked around the
first and he and we picked the
particular trees that we thought would
be appropriate for it and he said come
back tomorrow so you know when I every
day when I walk down past my chicken
house and I go in and look after them I
have this sense of relationship to the
forest to the land to the soil to the
people and and there's a and as a
respect and so I think when we start to
get that relationship of love and care
we're far less wasteful of the things
that we use we're far more appreciative
of all the different elements of of that
and so you know there's a few things
that I wanted to touch on to just about
this idea of the local economy I live in
it I live in quite an extraordinary
little place I realize every day how
wonderful it is the local Mullaney
community so Krista waters where I live
is an eco village that exists within
this broader sense of of living a more
ecological life not completely but there
is this broader sense of that so very
much a connection of where we are in the
catchment connection to indigenous
culture there's the there's a banya
festival that happens here that's been
reinstated after a hundred years and the
burner is this amazing tree which has 10
kilogram
our pinecones that that fall around
January and so every January there's a
there's a Vanya Festival and there's a
whole this is a whole tradition that's
being going for you know I don't know
how long chills it's been going maybe
you can you know anything about that but
it it stopped about a hundred years ago
but it's been reinstated but
interestingly our local currency is also
called Hibernia and so we have a local a
local economic exchange system we also
have a local bank when when people
started doing the back to the land thing
here in the Mullaney region there was
not much going on it was dying rural
town and so one of the things that was
the first thing to get started was was a
local bank and a local food co-op and so
through a whole lot of cooperatives
we've been able to sort of revitalize
this local area and and to really shift
how that how the community feels about
this place a lot of regenerative work
land cooperatives and the bank is
interesting too because it's owned by
the community and they have eco anion so
if you want to actually get a loan for
something and you're doing something
more ecological they'll give you a
better rate sometimes when you go in
there there'll be a whole lot of trees
there from the local land care group so
you go in there to do some banking and
you get some free indigenous trees for
your landscape at the end of the year
when they've got a surplus it's not
sucked away somewhere else the community
decides what they want to do with the
surplus and so when you start to have a
sense of control of your view local
money even your local currency of your
local food system of connecting with the
indigenous celebrations that have been
going on for a very long time of of
creating communities such as coastal
waters where eighty-six percent of the
land that this community lives on is
common land so there's again that sense
of Commons and and you know all of this
has been done consciously over the last
30 years and the restoration that's
happened in people's minds as well as in
the landscape is so evident and
and it's a it's a choice it's a definite
choice and it's a sense of design its
design of how we live its design about
economic systems its design of how we
actually cultivate our relationships
with one another
and with the land and with indigenous
communities
thanks Nora there's a couple of
questions that came in early there's
there's a few that are that are
scrolling over on the chat and the Q&A
but there's a couple that came in early
from people who couldn't be here
one was from yarn Sebastian in Colombia
who for who this time is very very
difficult because of time zones and he
addressed a question which I'll just see
if I can find to Daniel he said what
does Daniel think about blockchain not
not only related to Bitcoin currency but
blockchain based smart contracts as a
technological means to build a world
wide food safety network of producers
and retailers should we trust companies
tech tech the tech giant's such as IBM
and and Microsoft which are using their
cloud infrastructure to build custom
block chains for their customers Daniel
[Music]
hmm I think I just want to pick up on
something that Chelsea also spoke to
that that really our species has been a
bioregional species through most of our
history it's it's almost when we when we
moved away from that that that we went
down a track that we started to be more
regenerative than regenerative doesn't
mean that they have been examples of of
our ancestors also overstepping the
carrying capacities of their region or
degrading certain areas but in most
places like we now know that most of the
Colombian Amazonian rainforest is a
forest garden that people as place
stewarded and and helped grow in the way
that it it's there today and to come to
this technological question I I think we
need to be really aware that technology
is always a double-edged sword we we've
been aware of this through most of our
history it's in the Torah that the story
of the golem is about watch out the
technology a good as Faust the wizard
apprentice is about technology and watch
out what magic you are unleash the magic
becomes your master and as alpha C plug
says any sufficiently advanced
technology is indistinguishable from
magic
I'm saying this because I have to hold
up my hand that I increasingly want to
watch out very carefully where to use
technology and where not to use it and I
think we need to have a much more open
conversation as a global species and in
our local communities and regions and
how we apply technology because in in
the in the language of Buckminster
Fuller M if you want to change the way
people think don't tell them what to
think give them a tool the use of which
will change the way they think and if
you reflect on that statement with
regard to what we're doing here right
now this virtual presence a wonderful
we're having conversations across
spamming literally spanning the globe
from the Mediterranean to Australia and
that's the wonderful side of it but it
is restructuring how we interact and I
see lots of people in the global
regeneration movement spending days on
zoom calls on global networking on
building the network of networks and in
my life I've realized that over the last
four years I've actually somehow missed
the right balance I got sucked into this
oh we it's time we need to build the
global movement
I've literally lost grounding my I've
started my roots that have been growing
on this island for 10 years have have
atrophied over the last four years and
they've not become stronger I need to
redress that balance and and very long
roundabout way to talk about blockchain
and I I'm worried read a once these big
tech giants get into the game um as I
said earlier some of them are just
simply too large not to fail and they're
what they what they're trying to build
is to retrofit a food system that is
still global in exchange and we of
course we will have global trade and I'm
in but but but I I think building lower
tech local solutions will create a yet
again the the redundancies and and the
capacity to buffer the failure of large
global technological solution so I would
always I don't want to be radical saying
I don't go there but I also don't want
to endorse it in in in a huge way and
because again there's this like I know
that they're wonderful people out there
in the world that for example people
from the region Network trying to create
protocols by which to demonstrate the
regenerative impact on a piece of land
so a farmer can begin to be paid not
just for the produce that they create a
surplus from the regenerative farming
but also for the actual act of
regenerating for the carbon
sequestration for the the proof of state
changed the the positive impact they've
had on a piece of land they were farming
sounds great is great and if that then
means that only farmers who were willing
to have a smart phone who were willing
to sit a certain amount of time in front
of the computer to do this work and to
get to buy into this system we
your your colonial izing the mind of
peasant farmers which true this day are
still feeding more than half of humanity
it's the light that large global
agribusiness and the green revolution
feeds the planet it's killing the planet
it's killing the soil and and so in this
strange transition phase of a dying
system that we need to hospice and a new
system that is much more regionalized
again that we need to Midwife we are in
the middle space where we have to
navigate the dilemma between how do we
deal with these impulses that large
companies are trying to do they build
these technological platforms to do this
kind of work em but we also have to be
vigilant of how they do it and in
understand them at very best as
transition strategies to build stronger
regional networks we we don't need to
have strawberries out of season we don't
need to have a global food system that
makes butter from New Zealand cheaper in
Scotland than the local butter from a
Scottish Highland farmer it just doesn't
make any sense whatsoever and yeah be
aware of the double-edged sword of
Technology it is colonial izing our
minds in a way that very few of us are
fully conscious of I think Helen oh no
book no big Hodge who you referred to
earlier had produced some very
interesting figures on how much
international trade is a kind of
exchange at great cost of things that
are produced locally so that you know
one country produces X Goods and it also
at which it occur exports and it also
imports the same goods it's just it's
really quite crazy anybody else want to
come in on that question Daniel Jason
yeah I think it's a really important one
and it's always important to record
as technologies usually he evolved to
the mental model of his creator so I
must be company's checking that and we
chosen I have a colleague here that's
doing some really interesting work and
embedding indigenous knowledge systems
into artificial intelligence and machine
learning so that mental model is
programmed in that different you know
epistemology and ontology which is
crucial to looking through the
technology it's always going to struggle
in this movement because like the
technocrats come in they're like they
start from that technical level without
having the mental model governance
process culture that beliefs and values
that should inform that technology to be
useful to a place just crucial so we're
actually looking at I'm involved with
some people in Europe right now looking
at an app that has nut technology
they're in behavioral sciences to help
people make them more aware of their
lifestyle decisions and habits behavior
towards unsustainable like living sort
of it learns their behavior and creates
an avatar of their best possible so the
regenerative self maybe the regenerative
life so it helps you know the same way
we use it for help and exercise more
holistically looking at our footprint
and they can learn you can learn from it
and teach you can teach it a little more
regenerative life and in how we do that
with kids is huge the whole education
system has to be redone this whole
notion of regenerative education you
know getting into the K through 12
graduate school level like we're all
hardly miss teaching sustainability
across the planet I had a really good
chat with Mase about this this week as
well because we're looking at you know
there's a woman which what we talked
about this last week at our prep call
this is such a huge topic in the work
that you're doing with youth Morag what
happens with how you raise children and
your clamshells you know how that starts
to fold into this institutionalized
school system that you know our youth go
through but don't get this kind of
education or they get a very
technocratic education green education
not regenerative that's actually
shifting their minds and teaching and
think
how to think they actually start to come
up with the solutions maybe technology
maybe not and actually meet the science
of the challenge at the scale of the
challenge I'm dealing with the speed of
the challenges go away blockchain
I like blockchain as it relates to
enabling a more cooperative economy and
supporting power back to people and
owning the institutions in their society
that the financing institutions in the
hands of people and not in corporations
so I have been following the pattern of
that movement you know that how
blockchain plays a role in democratic
socialism right and moving shifting
power back to communities so that it
enables them to track these things and
hyper localize their economy in a way
that they up they're empowered don't
it's not just in the hands of some
company back in Europe or in the u.s.
somewhere anywhere else so China and
it's there they can see it and they have
an ownership of that economy in front of
them I see it for that I haven't seen
anyone really fully unpacked that maybe
someone on the panel have seen that I
know there are people working on that
but I'm tracking it as it relates to how
we how we redefine cooperative housing
cooperative food systems cooperatives
mobility cooperative banking in our
community is an how blockchain can
enable that facilitate that in a much
more cost-effective way with power back
into people's hands I just want to
briefly comment on that because on the
one hand it sounds so wonderful kind of
using brought blockchain protocols to
create the enabling structures for more
subsidiary decision-making in taking the
power back to people but um I've been
tracking the countries like Switzerland
where where referendums are quite common
where a lot of issues are taken to the
people and not all of the referendums
come out with wonderful results like
they had a referendum against the
building of mosques in in in Switzerland
and they the reason why I'm mentioning
that is that I feel like you mentioned
education if we bring power back to the
people which is absolutely necessary
we also need to do that coupled with
education because after decades and
centuries of mass manipulation of media
poisoning the minds of people and and
and and most people don't really want to
spend their days learning and studying
up on every decision in their local
region and then vote through blockchain
on every issue in their region and
because they won't this is open for
demagogues to them very popular in in a
populist way influence people through
social media and then rather than having
equally informed participatory decisions
at the local level we just get mobs
being hyped up to go in quickly and just
press the button to vote and have a
voice but they've actually not really
had a voice they've been manipulated by
the social media infrastructure that is
playing with our mind so it's it's a
it's a double-edged sword yet again I
think well it's I don't know anyone here
has have seen the film the rise and rise
of michael rimmer.bless it precisely
deals with this question and of course
it's i think this debate often loses
sight of the fact that democracy is
essentially a deliberative process it's
not just pushing a button and voting
it's not about polling that's a
marketing technique it's not a a
democratic technique we've got a
question from Matt who says so many
regional communities are in stress here
in eastern Australia we have had
droughts then fire and now curb it 19
what skills are needed to be developed
in regional communities as a whole
all jumping first you guys are biting at
the bit I can see it one thing I wanted
to add on that map of Australia if you
have a look that and if you really go in
and have a look at it
yeah the language map of Australia
you'll see that all those different
colors represent different resource
partitioning and those resource
partitioning boundaries are basically
based on the landscape capabilities
within that local or regional area and
the seasonal functionality of that those
capabilities yeah that's that's really
smart that's yeah that's essentially
where we want to be in in that whole
sort of direction
and you know in eastern Australia yeah
that's that's essentially you know on
the coastline where I'm sitting and yes
you know the the the impacts that we've
had probably over the last 15 years you
know it's it's it's it's making its its
it's forcing people actually to realise
that you know as humans we're not
invincible so at some point in our
intelligence we need to become resilient
and adaptable and these are the two
primary things that yeah indigenous
people throughout Australia in the world
we're able to do
as experts was be able to come through
these natural disasters these climatic
fluctuations and changes to be able to
manage and control fire on this
landscape and to utilize it to the to
the the ability of basically you're
turning this whole continent into water
call like a yeah and another eco garden
where things were so finely tuned and
managed that you know you didn't have to
have any fear the fear came from you
know your actions in harming this
landscape that's where the fear came
from of stepping over the line stepping
over the boundary of taking and pushing
too far yeah that's when the forces
would come back at you and bite you on
the bum it wasn't so much about the fear
of you know having flood the fear of
having droughts or the fear of having
fire in the landscape it was the fear of
overstepping the mark of you know what
you were doing environmentally and it's
that reason very reason why we're having
these issues in the first place is that
we have overstepped the mark and yes
it's coming back to bite us in the butt
and yo one of the things when you talk
about fire yeah if Aboriginal people in
Australia didn't have to succumb to the
treatment and you know all the horrible
things that happen in Australia you know
we'd still have the landscape that
looked like a immaculate Park or yeah a
botanical garden it's when these sort of
this intelligence and when these sort of
things are shut out of the debate and
shut out of you know the conversation
that things then start to get railroaded
and overridden by other people's you
know ideologies and concepts of how the
world and the globe and the planet
should be and these people's ideologies
and their points should not be the
dominant forces
that then force us to be able or force
us into a position where we have to
become adaptable we have to become
resilient and we have to start changing
yo who we are and how we live yeah it
should be a natural progression of
intelligence
anyone else want to take that up before
we had take another question
yeah there was another early question
that yes but very briefly and some
resources and the more X doing wonderful
work with youth in permaculture and
education so that lot lots lots to learn
there in terms of skills the whole
global permaculture Network the
agroforestry Network guy education the
online course that guy education offers
and design for sustainability is a great
place to start because it maps out all
sorts of other places where you can
deepen your learning guy-guy a
university is another outfit that runs
very practical actual learning courses
where you can do a course and also
implement your local project at the same
time there every year more offerings to
build that capacity at the local scale
so very easy to to find on so start
looking I'm I just jumped in there
thanks Daniel for the link thanks Jill's
linking into the a few of the parts of
the conversation and I think something
that jason said earlier too about how he
immersed his students in understanding
you know the whole catchment and I think
that's a really important part is that
that that immersion process of the
education you know we can we can create
technological ways of offering people
information but until they actually feel
it see it taste it touch it know would
have it unpacked and and have an
immersion in that mmm I'm not sure that
they really get it it's still always
just knowing about sustainability or
knowing about regeneration and in our
heads we can do it and and I and I was
one of the volunteers for for Helen and
AH boycotting Ladakh in 1992 when I was
about 20 something and I remember
meeting with a young young Ladakhi man
there and he was telling us about the
education system there and how it was
failing their young people and he was
saying and and I think this is even in
the
film he was saying at the film 18
futures you know we're learning we're
spending six days a week in school and
we're learning how to read and write I
can the students can write how to make a
cup of tea you know you put the tea in
and you boil the water and do all that
but you know they can't actually make a
cup of tea yes I feel the same with that
you know the sustainability and
regenerative work like we we can write
it we know it we read we have great
theories about it but how will be
actually living do we know how how to
live do we know how to live without the
fear that Charles was saying of the loss
are we surrounding ourselves with
abundance and knowledge about how to
have a you know rebuild things if
something goes wrong you know where is
that with resilience you know with when
we make things so efficient and just in
time there's there's not the slack you
know whereas if you're surrounding
yourself in a landscape that has that
level of abundance and robustness and
you understand how it works and how to
fix stuff and how to make things and how
to plant things and how do you know you
have a sense of how you can be if
something goes wrong or who did go to or
how to manage it and where you know you
have a deeper sense of what it means to
be in that place and it isn't a fearful
thing and I and and so this emerging
experience and so that's why I actually
think places like the ecovillages Daniel
there and you know places like crystal
waters like that they're not the
solution to everything but they're
places where people can come and dive in
and really experience what that might
look like and then start to get the
skills and the thinking to be able to
ripple that out into their own
neighborhoods in their own communities
and and I think it's important I don't
want everyone you know that the answer
is not everyone moving out ecovillages
that would never work I mean we but the
idea is about how do you take the
lessons from those types of ways of
connecting with place connecting with
community connecting with culture having
a deeper sense of what it means to live
a regenerative life and to understand
your impact
and where and how you can meet you back
basic needs and to be leaving a
beautiful and abundant life it's not
about going backwards it's about moving
forward in a way that that brings all
the things that are really important and
will actually enable us to continue and
that's where I feel like this the
education that's what I focus to a lot
on on the permute because the education
that they're not getting that they're
getting at the moment is not at all the
type that they need and my daughter 14
year old girl is just quit school and
she said it has no it's there's nothing
in there that's really addressing what
we need in the world today and I can see
you know I work a lot with kids Oh
courageous I can see a lot of kids who
are that age 13 14 15 year-olds they're
being impacted by hearing everything
that's going off they watch what's
happening you know they're aware of all
the climate action there but still then
they go back into the school system and
then they just not hearing anything then
they're not even learning the SDGs let
alone anything to do with regenerative
Koch designing regenerative cultures so
this is where the permute for me is
coming really strongly I actually had a
I'm as well as linking them together
with each other around the world they're
linking in with refugee groups with
indigenous groups well I just had had
them online with Fritjof Capra the other
day there was a group of them and they
prepared some questions for fridge offer
and so we thought you know the systems
view of life we're actually going to get
a group of young people to try and work
out how to translate that into something
that makes sense for them and and so we
we're actually taking a group of people
through this regenerative education and
then trying to find ways to share that
out as far and wide as possible to lift
the lid on on on the type of education
that young people are getting
particularly that age and it's super
exciting I just feel like that's yeah
that's where I'd like to spend a lot of
my time focusing give you a some slight
inspiration on that like when I was with
the living future Institute we did a
living we wanted all schools should be
living buildings right so the immersion
that the building represents the kind of
mental model were trying to inculcate my
next generation so there's a school we
built in Seattle at a river going
through it you know water was there
they're growing food so the students had
to learn how to grow their own food but
just because it was in a city that was
the beam I was trying to break that
bring that natural environment by likley
into the school so that they were using
so you know everything around them was
any normal solar panel told energy
electric cars food growth nature coming
in birds and animals around so it kind
of re-program them as kid that was
preschool a primary school but every
school she'd like that it should be a
cathedral for like nature and learning
and being immersed in the living world
maybe this I'd rather my kids spend
three months up with gels and learning a
mega understanding of her country than
sitting in a classroom being crammed
with like you know knowledge and because
there's so much disconnection between
understanding the teenager the young
brain and its development space and how
we teach them this new worldview I think
that book is going to be incredibly
awesome to reinterpret it through the
lens of a teenager I mean they'll be
amazing and we need yours my next one
too Daniel would be I have I have them
all stacked up here then it's that one
and this one from worried you know Rob
Hopkins so these are the this is these
are the new textbooks I believe for
their where we need our young people to
be focusing on and of course this
discussion draws attention to the fact
that it's not just about young people I
think we all have a lot of unlearning to
do we've mentioned was made by Daniel
earlier about efficiency and Morag you
talked you mentioned just in time
approaches to management we've succeeded
in creating extremely brittle systems
because we've paired them back to be
efficient and of course from that point
of view from that engineering modern
modern management point of view nature
is hugely over specified you know if
there's so much redundancy in nature and
that and that's what creates resilience
Daniel there was a question for you and
it might have to be the last question
that we that we take tonight and I just
can't find it here it is it was about
the sustainable development goals to
what extent do you consider the United
Nations sustainable development goals
account for and they're far for provide
for regenerative developments and
endeavors is there scope for more
thorough such considerations through the
context of the SDGs and if so how might
that happen
I'll keep it really quick because I'd
like to hear other voices before we I've
already put a link to a set of resources
I developed for guy education which is
set of flashcards to help communities
ask the right questions about how to use
the SDGs as a platform at the local
level where they can bring in business
and they can bring in local authority
and kind of hold them to the words that
they are pronouncing now that they are
aligned with the SDGs I then do an
Aikido with the SDGs to really make them
sensible at the local scale because one
thing they'll say is a systemic
implementation of the DSD G's is
impossible unless we reframe SDG number
eight which has the growth imperative
built into the like if it still speaks
to that we need to continues economic
growth and that is actually what is at
the heart of the degenerative process if
we don't dream design our economic
system to not have this growth
imperative built into it and we won't
get any implementation done but that
that said I wouldn't just dismiss the
SDGs but use them wisely because they
are a wonderful platform and there's
there's also just putting another link
in I had a conversation with Fricke of
couple about the the SDGs which which
people might find useful because we have
done some really interesting work on the
systemic implementation of the SDGs but
I leave it at that I know Jason needs to
go very soon so maybe we can give Jason
a another opportunity No maybe we can
squeeze one more question well there's
another one here from Liz Morgan to some
degree various responses to kovat 19
pendent pandemic evolution had
Illustrated
how subsidiarity can work in an
emergency for example here in Australia
the states had different responses to
different circumstances
Scotland's breakaway response to the UK
does this offer any hope that
subsidiarity is a principle that can be
more broadly applied in defiance of
globalization's dictates especially in
light of Daniels comments about
multinationals but as I certainly feel
that that's an opportunity now for our
movements to use the examples of covet
and how things have become possible that
were previously just unthinkable in a in
a matter of just a few weeks to
basically say well we can if we want to
build structures that are much more
regional and on the island I lived in
live on the response was stunning with
regard to the support of local farmers
within no time
local farmers built up a online platform
where people in their households could
order from local farmers and could get
the bench box delivered to the doorstep
I've been doing that for since I've
moved here but but within very short
time almost everybody on on this island
had direct links to local producers and
even because so many of the local
produces the local milk factory was
selling 60% of its production not
through shops but directly to hotels but
then the hotels were empty so the
government stepped in and made a public
announcement please buy local milk and
and so we like just use in your local
conversation use this as a leverage
point to to keep that conversation going
that it's not about some sort of hippie
self-sufficiency dreamed to build local
self-reliance and self-sufficiency it is
actually the way that we shockproof
ourselves against future pandemics in
climate change disruptions and all of
that and so yeah there is a huge
opportunity and and again very briefly
to the education question
let's not believe that there is an end
point to the journey we are are on the
whole idea that we can create if we have
the right things in place we can create
the sustainable place or the sustainable
community life is a journey of learning
the journey of being regenerative is an
evolutionary journey of continuous
change we need to once we understand
because gel spoke to that is well with
her people over 40,000 years knowing how
to weather disruptions the disruptions
will come but if we know how to weather
them and we don't if we believe that
we're on the path that just continues
and that we need to walk together
collectively as a process of learning
that is lifelong that is not in the
first third of life and then then you
forget about learning yeah em both
commune with sustainability and renew
regeneration is a community based
learning process and we will never stop
being on that journey and we will never
get there the whole point is the journey
Thank You Daniel that was a nice segue
into something that I want to say to
people give a notice of and then our
last chills and Morag if they would like
to say it make some closing comments
Daniel mentioned earlier on that we had
a bit of a computer stuff up last time
in that the software on my computer
froze and when we got it going again the
recording dropped out and even though it
was set to record automatically and so
we we did not record the wonderful
session that that that Morag led last
fortnight however here's the good news
on the 30th of June
Morag and chills will both participate
in a session called
regenerative agriculture hands food
systems shelves bringing in that
tradition of australian indigenous land
management and more AG with the work
that she talked about last time plus
many other things I'm sure and we'll
also be joined by Ann Gibson from the
malloon Institute who they specialized
in in regenerative agriculture and
predict particularly REE hydrolyzing the
the landscape bringing water back into
the landscape and Robert Pekin who was
the founder of the food connect project
in Brisbane in and the food connect
foundation so that should be a very good
session it will be on Tuesday the 30th
of June it will be in the morning
unfortunately for people like Daniel
it'll be in the night it'll be 9:30
Australian Eastern Standard Time so let
me know if you're interested in getting
an invitation to that will also we're
also hoping to do a fifth round table
which will reprise the the first one if
we can fit it in to people's schedules
after the fourth one so you're not going
to miss out on anything
so chels
words of wisdom to send us home with
words of wisdom to send you home with
I'm going to share with you some words
of wisdom that I had this week from my
11 year old daughter who like your
daughter Maura she's obviously been
influenced by really cool woman in her
life and we were in the process at the
moment of planting you know 5,000 trees
that we've made making part of our
property a koala sanctuary after the
fires and you know everything that's
happening in those yeah just taking on
yes some of that burden and journey of
the Koala yeah and we were going to get
some patches made up for the ranges for
the indigenous ranges that yeah in
solidarity with our brothers and sisters
throughout the world that had you know
black lives matter and I had my 11 year
old daughter you know quite quickly
remind me that yeah all life matters and
I think that's would be my sign off
tonight is just to remember that all
life matters and that's equity for
everything every living species on this
planet deserves to be here and deserves
a place
thanks King Thank You Charles was a
lovely note to finish up on the Morrigan
you've got some words of wisdom no I
think they're beautiful words of wisdom
to end on thanks Charles
thanks Daniel thanks Kerry and thank you
thank you Daniel for your contribution
tonight leading the discussion covering
so much ground and so much of it so rich
in content and in heart and I thank you
for that and look forward to seeing all
you all again same same time same
channel in a fortnight good night
everyone
[Music]