welcome to the conscious pivot podcast
with international speaker business
mentor best-selling author of pivot and
your host Adam Markel the conscious
pivot shares the stories and wisdom of
people who have successfully reinvented
some area of their business and personal
life you'll gain powerful insights into
how you can fully embrace new
opportunities increase your performance
and master the art and science of
innovation and resilience so please join
Adam as he guides you on your conscious
pivot either pivot audience welcome to
the podcast on pivot radio I'm so happy
to be here with you today and I'm also
super scientist the gentleman that I'm
gonna get to share with you is really
somebody special I'd like to say that I
know him well but that would be a lie I
don't know him well I've just met him
recently but the people in my life that
think very very highly of him I know
quite well namely my daughter Chelsea
and her boyfriend Matthew and I meant
you to say that they are they're not
often wrong about these kind of things
and I got to meet this gentleman at
recent ETL meeting it's the Association
of transformational leaders and he spoke
and moved an audience of
transformational teachers people that
are have been in the space of helping
folks find their there the higher
versions of themselves people on the
road to actual izing the best parts of
themselves and very open-minded folks
and people that are very committed to
performance and what it what it takes to
really perform at our best in in all in
all arenas including business and
personal affairs relationships health
etc and I did get to speak with this
gentleman's brother who is also
spectacular guy James but today we get
the pleasure of speaking with Daniel
smacking burger and Daniel it's just so
great to have you on the show
I'd love to you don't mind I my audience
is pretty familiar with me doing this
I'm going to pass the baton to you
to just sort of with with no false
humility let us know a little bit about
yourself whatever you think is kind of
salient for for us to know about you and
and then we're going to get into a great
conversation thanks Adam I'm happy to be
here and dialoguing with you and sharing
with your audience and I think what's
probably salient about me the
conversation here today is I'm director
of research and development for neural
hacker collective which is kind of
Applied neuroscience biotech company
it's focused on new kinds of approach to
neuro technology for my brain
optimization so as you're talking about
performance the physiology side of brain
performance and then the way that
affects cognitive and psychological
performance that's primary thing that
we're focused on
but the relationship of physiologic
optimization psychological optimization
interpersonal optimization and then
optimization of the complex system of
civilization biosphere at large that
inner dynamics between all of those are
things that we beautiful and this is a
fairly new company is it okay to call it
a start-up is it officially a starter
sure the company started just under
three years ago and we've only actually
moved from the R&D phase to the company
phase which means we're selling product
in six months and so it is early in the
venture and it's going really
fascinatingly yeah we've heard good
things in fact we're going to circle
back at the end of the show just to find
out a little bit from you about the
products that you guys are offering
exactly they're pretty spectacular
actually and been using a few of those
products for the last little a little
bit more than a month and it felt really
terrific from it so we'll save that for
the end but what I'd love to do I I
shared an article with you Daniel
earlier and you haven't had a chance to
read it but we but it led us through a
conversation initially about performance
and the article is
Business Review article that are making
of a corporate athlete so I'll just I'll
post our team will put that link to that
article in the in the podcast post so
you guys can get it as well but it's
actually fascinating that these
researchers were looking at top athletes
and to see if the little corner of a
connection between the best athletes in
the world and the best executives in
business in the world and what they
found this area commonality was recovery
and rituals for recovery and you know
many folks know read my book pivot I'm a
big fan as part of the momentum section
of the book I talked about resilience
and I also talked independently about
rituals but in connection with
resilience the ability to bounce back
from setbacks to be resilient you know
to be that willow tree in the wind
versus the oak that kind of you know
breaks branches break off etc well what
does it mean to be resilient and and you
know mentally emotionally spiritually
physically what what contributes to that
ability to recover quickly and and I
wanted to get your thoughts on that and
if you could share some some of your
your feelings of your research in that
area that would be terrific and so
there's a number of things that
contribute to what we call resilience or
the capacity for the system to continue
to perform very well so rather than just
a homeostatic state of the system the
homeostatic capacity to continue to
operate well even in the presence of
stressors and one of the things that is
important for resilience is recovery as
you mentioned and so you were giving the
example earlier of that athletes that
were very successful had faster recovery
cycles and that means recovering from
heavy workouts faster but also even just
in short breaks between their
performance still within the game having
quicker cycles of recovery
heard of why this is an important thing
is any kind of performance is going to
have a certain load to it right there's
going to be a certain set of
physiologic processes psychologic
processes that are going to be any non
performative time to be processed and to
the more effective the non performative
recovery time is and the faster those
cycles are the more one will be able to
continue to operate at peak rather than
a diminished rate because some of the
repair hasn't happened yet and so this
is why sleep is such a big deal because
while we are regenerating while we're
awake and restful a little bit the
deepest regeneration physiologically and
psychologically happens during sleep REM
sleep is a major part of how memory
consolidation from the day happens and
say psychologic processes we get to
process the experiences of the day into
long-term memory and then Delta sleep in
particular is how the deeper aspects of
long-term memory memory consolidation
happen and most of physiologic repair
the antioxidant pathways and
inflammatory pathways the immune
pathways tissue repair are all happening
sympathetic nervous system is at its
minimum parasympathetic is high
corresponding with melatonin high
cortisol low that's when all the repair
gates that primarily happen so when
people start decreasing the amount of
sleep from what their body actually
needs even a little bit even you know an
hour per night the decreased repair over
not that long starts to lead to
profoundly decrease performance we see
this principle everywhere if you are
doing agriculture and you grow crops the
crops are pulling nutrients out of the
soil if you take all of that crop out of
the soil and you're not tilling anything
back into the soil so you're not
actually regenerating the soil you end
up taking fertile agricultural zones and
turning them into deserts and not that
many cycles this was the Dust Bowl I
mean this is the lesson of the Dust Bowl
era that led to wrote crop rotation
right what it was the Dust Bowl yes but
it was the reason that most of the
ancient civilizations collapsed you know
one of the big parts of I think collapse
was over agriculture over agriculture in
their soil actually leading to early
desertification leading to resource
shortage and then resource Wars and that
whole thing so
he's been kind of doing that simple not
that long after agriculture and the
areas that figured it out and did
appropriate crop rotations and tilling
the nutrients back into the soil and
closed-loop process in other words
regeneration we're able to continue
because for anything to be sustainable
it has to be regenerative because there
is a load performance and so this is
true at the level of economics right I'm
spending this is trade the level of
agriculture at the level of ecosystems
of global fisheries you know and at the
level of psychology and physiology right
we're talking about depletion that's
another word for that right because soil
yeah and when you talk about load I
don't I don't want to kind of go down
too many rabbit holes but what do you
what do you mean by the lay before me
well the when you're taking nutrients
out of the soil converting them into
plants and taking the plants out of that
soil there is a load to the soil right
there is a burden of how much toxicity
can get into the soil of whatever
byproducts of the plants and how much
nutrient can get taken out of the soil
basically there's a cost right so then
we have to regenerate proportionally to
be able to stay even regenerate more to
get ahead this would be the same with
our physiology so if you know someone's
lifting weights they're actually
inducing micro tears in the muscle which
then induce regeneration of the muscle
where it regenerates you know with more
actual tissue fibers and more densely
bundled tissue fibers which is why
strength increases but if you don't have
adequate nutrition and adequate time
adequate circulation and support etc for
the regeneration then those micro tears
can turn into bigger tears and injury
rather than into regeneration and if you
have faster cycles of regeneration then
you can actually continue right so what
do you believe it is that that
contributes to faster
creating a faster cycle of regeneration
because maybe that's what I'm getting
out of this is that you're saying you
can actually impact the cycle in there I
guess and to regenerate more quickly
it's actually degenerate more quickly
well I think that there's a number of
things the first is to degenerate less
quickly right so if when you're a
generation is the law we're talking
about there's nothing we can do about
the fact that that we are to be
generating no matter what it's it's a
it's a universal law is that yes there's
a lot we can do about it there is it so
the second law of thermodynamics which I
think is what you're referring to is the
idea that entropy is going to increase
in any closed system yes
humans are not closed systems is a very
important topic
we're in taking new energy all the time
yeah we're actually releasing all you
know structures and one of the
definitions of life core definitions of
what life is in biology is an entropy
externalizing system or an enthalpy pump
and so like you think about the second
one says things are going to get more
and more disorderly but biology is a
process of making orderly things right
so a plant has these very complex
molecules that are organizing from very
simple molecules how does it do that
there's always been this kind of
question about how life seems to be
simply anti-entropic and it's not
violating the second law but it's
working with it in a very interesting
way where it's taking energy and
externalizing entropy and being able to
have self-organization as a result so
it's important to get there since we're
not closed systems the idea that we're
just subject to fixed entropy is not
really true now we are subject to
entropy all the time but you can
decrease the entropic load so we look at
what is it that ages us though oxidative
stress ages us toxicity of various kinds
ages as these are things that can damage
cells and then lead to you know damaged
cells or senescence right cells older
cells but all basically here means has
some damage so it doesn't function in
the same way so it produces metabolic
byproducts that end up being harmful it
doesn't do all the healthy process as
well so can we decrease oxidative stress
yes can we increase how well our body
recovers
from oxidative stress through better
antioxidant support and pathways yes can
we decrease toxic burden yeah can we
increase our detox systems pathways
totally can we decrease psychological
stress and increase our psychological
process absolutely can we make sure that
where there are deficiencies of
nutrients or other forms of stimulus
that are necessary for system
optimization that we address that so
we're not doing a deficiency yes so then
you know that there's of course still
some
entropy happening but we can navigate it
profoundly better yeah that's
fascinating I'm gonna ask you have a
funny question it's just coming up so
I'm gonna ask it anyway
is it theoretically possible that we
that humans could live or work and
what's it what's what's the is there an
outer edge to how long a human being can
live you know what you're saying is that
we can control that entropic process
this is one of the most active questions
in kind of the biomedical sciences world
right now is not just medicine focused
on disease model but the topic of
longevity and radical life extension
itself is a totally new approach to
biology and to the degree that we
address the dynamics of longevity we
also end up addressing the dynamics of
preventing the things that kill us rain
so medicine can kind of get obsolete it
much of medicine is just obsoleted in
the process of optimizing ongoing system
efficiency you know one function which
can lead to life extension give or take
genetic maximum for most people is
usually thought of in the hundred and
ten hundred and twenty kind of range
which is the oldest we see people make
it that we have documentary kurds of and
most people don't live that long and so
most people are dying earlier than
genetic maximum because of specific
issues and so they're dying of cancer or
heart disease or diabetes whatever it is
so the first step in life extension is
just preventing those causes of death
and so everybody starts to get to
genetic maximum it's very realistic that
that will become scientifically
plausible in the next not many years and
that you know premature death from
disease will become a part of history
and you know that's something that there
are a number of companies doing really
pioneering great work on and we're
working to add to research in that space
yeah beautiful leaving us beyond genetic
maximum beyond that hundred and twenty
is a totally different topic because
there's a big question right now on
is it simply accumulated stressors that
are leading to when we die and we could
just stop having those stressors or is
death actually genetically programmed as
a way to keep natural selection
happening right and so that we don't
have the older species competing with
the newer ones for the same amount of
finite resource when the newer ones have
better genetics because they've gone
through you know more breeding cycles it
there's pretty good evidence that there
are aspects of death that are
genetically programmed and but this is
one of the topics of debate between
different researchers in the field of
radical life extension and so if that's
the case it's work that's being done on
how would we actually change genetically
programmed F and given that we're in you
know Chris the post CRISPR world where
we are working on being able to identify
gene sequences and change them the idea
that we will extend longevity up to the
kind of hundred and twenty mark
regularly and maybe beyond that is very
realistic interesting I think
Buckminster Fuller was pretty on target
with a lot of his predictions and that
was one of them you know so yeah it
remains to be seen for us but yeah just
the topic of regeneration it would seem
that if you pull back far enough depth
death we can partically generally the
regenerative cycle anyway right i mean i
would definitely remove death from that
cycle any of that maybe there's no
answering your question but just like
this the cells of your body are dying
and new ones are being born and the
regeneration of your whole system is
happening that way but how life
extension technologies are working is to
actually help the old cells die faster
so that they aren't underperforming
causing metabolic problems and new cells
come in faster so if you can body has a
natural process for killing old cells
because if the old cells keep and buy
old what we mean is they are somewhat
damaged their metabolic processes are
somewhat damaged so rather than pretty
ATP cleanly and have clean genetic
transcription they end up having damage
in genetic transcription ie cancer
probability and over producing histamine
which leads to inflammation or whatever
things like that so autophagy is the
process by which the body identifies and
can kill older cells there are things
that we can do to actually increase
autophagy so that we aren't dealing with
the problems of senescence cells so
fasting actually triggers you know as
soon as the body's in caloric deficit
significant Klerk deficit for a while it
starts cutting life supports to certain
systems and it actually cuts it to old
senescent mewn cells first which is
great super helpful things so
interesting research on 72-hour mark
water fasts and we start getting purge
of senesin immune cells which caused
major inflammatory and autoimmune kinds
of issues so great there are also drugs
and herbs and things that are being
worked on to do that but if you our body
is actually producing new stem cells all
the time and those new stem cells are
then differentiating into tissues if we
could increase the rate at which we
produce themselves which means new stuff
being born and we could increase the
rate at which those differentiate into
tissues and increase the rate at which
the old cells are recycled and then also
protect healthy cells from damage well
that's a whole different system right
yes you at the level of a human body
it's also true at the level of humanity
and civilization so there's definitely
this place where one of the really
interesting philosophic questions
ethical questions in life extension is
would it be a net good thing for
civilization because if older people's
rate of learning decreases and younger
people have higher rate of learning if
you keep older people are alive longer
and then you can have less younger
people right you've got to have less
birth rate to have a steady-state
population do you have more people that
are obsolete for a longer period of time
and that are less adapted to the new
world that's changing faster but or the
other perspective would say we actually
only start to meaningfully mature around
the time we die and that we don't really
understand how to navigate universe or
even are so
very well for most of our early life and
that if we could actually be
regenerating our physiology well enough
that those older years were still
actually vital and that our learning was
optimized that people who could live to
150 etc would have basically a much
longer developmental childhood and in a
much longer period of productivity with
a much more comprehensive human
development set so without answering
which of those it is or the dynamics
between that and say that's an
interesting question it is it's a great
conversation maybe this explains even
why there's so many I'm gonna make a
joke here but so many thirty and thirty
plus year olds living still living in
their parents basements well there's no
question that we breed older than we
used to right so we went from breeding
throughout much of history pretty much
as soon as breeding was possible right
as soon as we went past puberty to
having economics and education and
social structures start changing that
we're thirty and moving towards forty
you know are are getting much more
common and while we're being exposed to
more information earlier and what
whether they're having babies later in
life and I don't know if there's any the
must be studies that attract that but
just seems like anecdotally we see
clothes that have had babies right up to
the kind of fifty which is pretty
remarkable actually it's actually one of
the really also deep ethical topics and
life extension is without extending
menopause because if it already kind of
sucks women basically are gonna have the
decision parents or not and it has to
end it forty or maybe a little somewhere
into their forties and men could make
that decision much later there is a kind
of biologic inequality in choice making
capacity where he can do other than
parenting things for much longer
preparatory she hasn't been able to do
that right so extending not just
longevity but extending reproductive
longevity is one of the very interesting
topics to yeah well well I'm gonna bring
us back to the hips of the original
point of our discussion which was
resilience I'm a big fan of recipes and
formulas I know you think formulas
- so I'm just gonna ask you it with with
just a few ingredients what would your
formula for resilience be and you've
already spoken about one which was sleep
so what are some of the other things
that you think are really key because I
believe and that's you know the results
of that studying at Harvard study they
go really telling and when I counsel
people on you know their ability to
pivot make changes in their life
whatever it is you know sometimes I
enter people in business as well and
you've just got to be able to recover
quickly I mean this constantly setbacks
the rate of disruption the rate of
change is exponentially greater all the
time then you just have to be more
resilient so you know what what is that
what would that recipe look like for you
well even though I didn't get read the
article yeah just as you shared it with
me they spoke about physical emotional
mental spiritual resilience and that
there were relationships between each of
those and that you've got kind of a
Maslow's hierarchy of those resilience
types
I think that's meaningful topic yeah
physical resilience is necessary but not
sufficient so if someone is eating well
sleeping well exercising well and doing
good preventive and integrative medicine
for optimum physiology that's gonna make
a huge difference because physiology
affects emotion and cognition emotional
I'm gonna be very affected pretty much
everyone who has felt their physiology
out of balance for any reason whether
their hormones were out of balance or
they felt in their chemistry the balance
or they had you know infection going on
knows that their emotions and their
cognition were inexorably affected right
there are certain emotional states are
just like not accessible and other ones
that were unavoidable and so almost
think of the physiology is like being
tunable like a musical instrument where
if it's out of tune and all the music is
messed up right and so before we even
talk about upgrading the instrument just
having it in tune makes a difference but
it's not sufficient right that's the
kind of hardware layers and we start
looking at the software the software
layer of how we make mean what we focus
on where our attention goes what our
frameworks for understanding and
perspective taking are and so when we
start so physical resilience suggests
for recipes let's just kind of address
that even though I think the basic
things everybody knows and then maybe
I'll add some novel things basic things
are true and they said the first one is
sleep and I would put sleep in a
category separate from nutrition and
exercise and everything else in terms of
its overall importance and I'm not under
weighting the importance of the other
ones I'm just actually weighting as
heavily
should be weighted or asleep because
given that almost all physiologic repair
and regeneration happens during sleep
the whole purpose of nutrients is to
regenerate new tissues etc means it can
happen that's gonna be major part of
what happens the exercise the
regeneration is can occur as large
you're going to be during that time so
if people are sleeping not enough or not
sleeping well I would say it should be
their first priority to address that
we're gonna do here we'll talk about how
be happy to do that at some time but I
would put it as a Tier one I don't like
to hear that because there's so much
 that we want to do that's like the
most uninteresting thing if it seems
like to use our hours but having all the
rest of our hours in tune makes a much
bigger difference than having more
shitty hours yeah this is what inspired
me earlier because before we hit the
record button folks we were having this
conversation because I asked then how
many hours do you sleep and he said you
know 8/8 the right number for me and
it's anybody that's telling you
differently it's kind of you know full
of it on some level I mean they're
they're outliers for sure but but I
don't think I don't think people can
hear it enough even though if you said
it's basic I think people need the
reminder and I'm glad you're you're
providing that reminder like and some
people really focus on when you sleep
early to sleep early to rise kind of
dynamics I think that is a good thing to
explore but I don't stress on that too
much if some I think you should find out
when you feel like you perform the best
because there is a meaningful reason to
think that most humans are diurnal
animals your daytime animals where our
circadian rhythm is in relationship to
light and and that the quality of thing
that happens in dark is better than not
bargain I think that's a general truth
it also does appear that there are a
subpopulations that are genetically
adapted for sleeping waking up earlier
and waking up later that we'll probably
had to do with rotations
nations of whose awake to keep the you
know tribe saving so whatever you find
actually works best for you go ahead and
hide right then do make sure that you're
sleeping enough sleeping enough means
you can wake up without an alarm
energized and if you wake and
sustainably because anyone when they're
just kind of on the adrenalin run of a
really exciting a busy time I do that
for a short period if you can wake up
with good energy have energy throughout
the day
that's enough sleep if it's less than
that you might wish that you needed less
sleep than that and there are things you
can do with your health they can
decrease Leaney because you have less to
repair if if someone has health issues
that lead to increased rate of oxidative
damage or increased rate of inflammation
then they'll need more sleep than they
would normally genetically need because
they're getting damaged Asti
at the same time if someone's doing very
heavy athletics they're gonna need more
sleep bodybuilders need more sleep
because it just got more than that
repaired yeah and stress I mean that
that's the thing that that article
that's it's pretty key I think is that
the stress involved in being and and the
people listen to this for the most part
and almost everybody I know is under
greater stress now than then kind of
ever before I mean there's entrepreneurs
people in business whether you're
working in somebody else's business but
there's just more plate spinning you
know with family and work and everything
else so if it feels like this more
there's more stress which would will
seemingly require a better system to
repair and recover in and regenerate and
as you said mentally emotionally
spiritually and physically so let's say
you've got stress on each of those
dimensions right physiologic stress can
come from toxins in the environment from
physical stress from injury from
exercise from poor posture from too much
computer hours from not enough exercise
leading the circulation issues from all
of those are sources of extra
physiologic stress than is just a given
and so I would say decreasing
physiologic stressors while increasing
physiologic regeneration is key but you
want to eat food less inflammatory stuff
less artificial anything less sugar
more micronutrients in general that in
general people do better with less
calories than they used to eating unless
people are really severely under eating
but caloric restriction is still the
main thing we know about life extension
we're testing co-workers to create
periodic fasting is intermittent fasting
is one way of achieving in but diets
that had about 30% less calorie than was
normally considered adequate so calorie
means macronutrient sugar fat no carbs
fats and proteins that live longer from
a number of reasons increased
ampk levels and activation of sirtuin
genes and things like that so but we
want most of micronutrients vitamins
minerals enzymes so if we're gonna have
a diet that is higher in micronutrients
and lower in total calorie they will in
general do better if you think about if
people lived in a hunter-gatherer
environment where they were eating a lot
of vegetation vegetation is going to be
very high in micronutrient raw organic
etc and relative to the total amount of
calorie in it so one thing and just in
general saying eating in a way that is
closer to the living ecosystem and less
processed is going to be a general rule
of thumb before you get into specific
dietary ideas because you will have
people who do better on different diets
and each time we go from being really
into high-fiber or high fat or ketosis
or we're just learning a little bit more
about physiology which is a very complex
system but eating in ways that are
closer to our evolutionary environment
is a good starting place so and and
avoiding stressors from food right so
that would be inflammatory foods food is
hard to digest processed toxic sugar etc
really cool I just want to start off
with something because you know talking
about food and stress in the same same
sentence I think it's unusual for people
to hear this might my dad always said
food is medicine so I've had a different
kind of meat on on it for a while but
but to hear that food actually causes
stress that you can actually eat food
that causes stress I think is something
that's worth underscoring say well think
about we think about an airplane and we
talk about this the stresses on an
airplane the tensional forces the
shearing forces we're talking about
stress in terms of mechanical physics
right mechanical stressors stress
doesn't just mean an emotional or mental
thing stress means any force on a system
that if it gets high enough will produce
an alteration of that system right the
alteration is what we call strain and
physics stress is the force that will
lead to strain if the stress gets higher
than the dynamic capacity of the system
to endure and so that's a kind of wider
way to think about what stress means and
so then we have destructive and
constructive types of stress and so when
we work out we're stressing a muscle but
if we stress it where it is within a
range that we can recover and then we do
adequate things to support recovery then
what's happening is the system's as well
I'm not adapted to be able to deal with
this kind of stimulus so I need to
change to be able to adapt to it so it
gains bigger you know develops bigger
muscles to deal with the stimulus called
heavy weight and this is why I like wim
Hof's work in cryotherapy cold therapy
is very interesting if you think about
in our evolutionary environment we for
air conditioners and heaters we were
regulating our own body temperature
means some through clothes and but
largely our own metabolism changed to
deal with external temperature much more
dynamically than it does not
and so as warm-blooded creatures how do
we get warm well we we could you know
catabolism is the force where we break
molecules and release energy and heat
from it and so if it's cold and we need
to actually generate more heat that
means we need to increase those
metabolic processes that means we need
to increase the thyroid hormones the you
know the sex hormones etc that are
involved in doing that and those
catabolic processes if it's too hot we
need to cool down we need to change
other metabolic you know and cooling
processes so it's one of those things
worked like if you don't press the
system enough it will lose capacity
because there's no evolutionary purpose
for it to keep the capacity but and so
this is what we would call adaptive or
healthy stress just saying hey this is a
kind of thing that this is a kind of
stimulus that we're going to keep being
exposed to so we need the capacity to
respond to it but if I put myself in a
cold bath or a cold chamber where I can
produce enough heat if I put myself in a
amount of cold that I don't really feel
any stress from the system can all right
its current capacity can already handle
it it doesn't need to upregulate
capacity it has to actually be at the
edge of my current capacity so the
system says hey we need to I bring it
capacity will deal with this but it has
to not be so far beyond the edge that it
causes damage ie frostbite or
hypothermia here we're lifting in a way
where you damage a tendon rather than
micro tears and muscle so healthy stress
is where you expose yourselves twist
stimulus that is beyond your current
capacity to manage easily that leads to
the system up regulating its capacity in
a way that you actually can up regulate
in relationship to damaging stress is
where you can't up regulate in
relationship to it you don't do what's
necessary or it's just too far out and
then the system actually just down
regulates
from going into strain this needs repair
at that point it needs more repair than
it can get so it's damaged
what is it irreparable in that instance
dependence is a torn tendon irreparable
nono but if you know up to a certain
point yes beyond that point right
without surgery or some other artificial
means right so two things that just come
up for me and I want
so one is this the you know the side of
unit that works in a personal
development and business tacoman arena
I'm constantly wanting to encourage
people inspire them and sometimes you
know other things to keep them on their
growth edge for the reason that you just
say and that's a that's a very
interesting line of where where
someone's growth edge is versus where
there's you know kind of gone past the
point of repair ability or if not that
is some damage that it's caused as a
result of it and that's that's a really
interesting point there and the other
thing you said earlier about recovery
because in in talking about resilience
in pivot one of the anxiety ice it's a
three-part process and the third part is
on rituals for recovery so I'm curious
do you have rituals for recovery things
that you that you're doing constant you
know continuously our regular basis
that's usually ensure that you would
cover yeah so we only mentioned a few
types of rituals
rituals so there's there's things that
are just what I'd call foundations so a
healthy diet healthy good hygiene and
movement would all just be foundational
and those are all physically their
physiological sense right your
physiologic foundations okay other
things that I would say you know kind of
doing regularly enough that they're
ritualized on top of that are things
like cryotherapy hot cold therapy and
particularly cold therapy as a method
for increasing system resilience other
kinds of therapies like PMF post
electromagnetic field therapy which has
a number of really generously healing
physiologic dynamics increases the zeta
potential the blood you know so things
like that active physiologic restoration
so you know beyond restoration that's
happening from
while sleeping on just restoration well
awake recall meditation which is both in
a psychological and physical object but
and then I do a lot of physiologic
therapies that increase the resilience
of the system so that's a lot of
nutrients and kind of bio modulators
supplements medicines as well as not
just things that are orally but IV
trained therapies things like that
because when you realize that you can
take more responsibility for how your
you know physiology inches or not
processes to start to learn and as far
as other rituals psychological stress so
you know meditation is valuable for
being able to learn how to focus the
mind being able to learn how to witness
it and have space for the kind of
neuroplasticity dynamics for the
increased body awareness proprioception
for the increased parasympathetic
process but beyond that not all there
are a lot of stresses that are just made
up right and so there's a lot of
psychological courses in particular
where it's not what's happening that's
stressing us out it's the meaning that
we give them to what's happening and we
can change the way that we can and shows
going through processes of looking at
where am i psychologically stressed
about some world dynamic or some
relationship and asking can I change the
meaning to things that either just make
me more comfortable with it or actually
increase my sense of empowerment
responsibility isn't it rituals to kind
of continuously inventory those made up
stresses and then change them are really
key
and you know what it's I'm just thinking
that that those three parts to the so
that so that resilience process
the first one is reframing so I'm just
thinking or luge asleep taking a look at
a situation and the frame that you put
it in I will determine whether you're
stressed by it or not you've made a poor
decision and you believe that you made a
poor decision because you're an idiot
where you will always make poor
decisions well that's one frame that'll
keep you stressed and entry yeah but be
a lot that flow you know that that
domino will tip over a lot of other
dominoes and then the second piece is
really how how would you apply one have
you have you learned something from the
experience that you can they're asked to
apply because I think that's a part of
the natural can regenerative process is
that we learn from the feedback that we
get that it's biofeedback right and any
feedback really we know and that's how
we that's our weave adapter that's how
the species is to memorize we just
continue been able to assimilate
information make adjustments from that
feedback and then adapt them and thrive
and continue that you actually
enumerated both of those as methods of
framing which is kind of cognitive
behavioral therapy meaning making
reframing and then also really focusing
on the lesson rather than the difficulty
and the lesson moving forward as
something that increases your adaptive
capacity when you look at life through
the lens of alright so what are all the
things that happen today they're all the
things that felt wonderful and you are
grateful for those who you're focusing
on actually giving attention to the
things that were wonderful and then
there were things that were difficult
and you say it is there anything that I
could learn that would allow me to deal
with situations like that better in the
future so that rather than just being
difficult and I try and let it go I
increase my system resilience in
response to them and then you get the
insights and then focus on the insight
rather than the differ
the day is just filled with things that
felt great and things made you more
capable exactly and those are the things
that you focus on here I'm just a
question I didn't I didn't think I'd
asked you in this interview but have you
read the presents process Michael
Vaughn's work interesting so everybody
that has not yet come and checked that
work out I recommend that it's pretty
pretty incredible and one of the things
that he writes about which has really
been then it's it's been inside of me
now for settlements like I don't want to
shake it because it's it's shaken up a
lot of a lot of things in a really great
way which is that he doesn't talk about
healing and and often especially we talk
about emotional trauma imprints for more
more young and and how it is that those
those that imprint thing from one we're
very young actually determines how we
frame the world let you say how would
give meaning or meaning making machines
so where does that all start
and so we trace it back to this this
imprisonment of person were young a lot
of people and a lot of people out there
that are talking about and not talking
about then that are engaged and helping
people heal I mean I'm in a healing
industry in the healing arts of any kind
and it's I'm not against any form of
healing but he's talking about instead
of using words feeling it's about
integrating and the stage of our therapy
as opposed to healing for as though
healing and the healing makes you think
immediately what that for something that
must be healed for something that's
wrong that's in the system that doesn't
belong in the system
it was opposed to something that might
just not see integrated into the system
which is why it's it's the you know if
it comes the cancer so you know it just
it's just one of those things I look
forward to maybe we chat about in the
future love to get your opinion there so
I'd say in the in the just the remaining
time this is a show about conscious
pivoting so it's just wonderful to be
able to speak I mean it's really
committed to what it is you know how
we're all kind of bill
we made up in before before we talk
about what your business is doing to
assist in the world because I think
you're doing something really profound
and that's what I told you brother James
I said I what you're doing makes more
than makes sense to me it is just
something I feel good about supporting
and before we get to that I'd love to
just know if there's a if there's some
pivot in your life that you've had more
recently perhaps or you know some time
ago if you wish either in your personal
life in your business life you were able
to glean some special lesson from that
you'd like to share you know the first
one that came to mind that might be
interesting for listeners here was there
was a pivot to actually decide to engage
in business at all my work previous to
that was all in either a nonprofit or
academics and specifically a lot of the
nonprofit was think-tank work most I
mean some of it was working in
environmental work and social justice
and animal rights but then quickly
realized that despite the good work
being done in for benefit businesses and
government and in nonprofits there were
key issues like ocean acidification and
biodiversity loss that were getting
worse rapidly heading towards points of
irreversibility in the face of the
collective work that was being done by
everybody and that we didn't just need
more of that kind of work we needed a
fundamentally difference that approaches
so we worked with a number of other
thing tanks and about the think tank
that was focused on comprehensive
civilization upgrade what is the future
of macroeconomics that only in sense
positive behavior that aligns the
incentive of all agents with the
well-being of other agents in the
Commons so there's no externality what
is the future of governance and
decision-making that can really inform
Omni positive decisions adequate to
those to the speed of if you need to
make decisions the complexity of the
decisions the inner number of
interrelated factors they represented
democracy can't do it retrofits of
capitalism we have to move into but no
other previously
proposed systems can either but the
technologies that are mandating us to
move into these systems also be possible
fundamentally new systems new
technological automation that's gonna
obsolete 30% of all jobs in the next 15
years is also what makes it to where we
don't need the jobs one of the core
ideas of capitalism was how do you
incent people to do the shitty justice
labor in cottony because they need done
who's gonna do them well they don't need
done by humans as soon as you automate
them which means when the jobs don't
need the humans anymore you can also
move the economic systems where the
humans don't need the jobs and start to
move into Commonwealth economics it's
one of many examples where the
technology that requires us to shift is
also changing the axioms given that you
know I having worked on economics so
deeply because we realized all right
as long as we have war then we learn how
to manage war and as long as we have
capitalism and war together then we make
military manufacturers that are for
profit right do you look at all that
together you have a for-profit
military-industrial complex sign demand
if they've developed the capacity to
supply a demand that demand has to
continue that they continue to have
supply so how do we have a world without
war and a for-profit military-industrial
complex coexisting can't right so this
is a big set of shifts how do you have a
world with robust health that prevents
disease well having a healthcare or sick
care system that only makes many people
or say you can't you have to change in
Erlang structures deeply how do you have
it where whales are worth a million
dollars dead on a fishing boat and
they're worth nothing alive in the
oceans to anyone and not all the whales
to extinction
you can't but so we have a system of
macroeconomics that in sense exactly the
opposite of collective well-being and
heaps of that are foundational to its
structure given that and that I've been
focused on the transition of economics
to post capitalist economics my whole
life wanting to build a business was the
last thing in them in my mind like
powder dota for sure
I wanted to obsolete what we think of
businesses and all the nonsense of
intellectual property where right now is
the best phone an iPhone or Google phone
or well not the best phone that could
exist can't exist because intellectual
property keeps the good being able to
synthesize and so that there's so much -
there's so much radical duplication that
occurs and then so much that goes into
marketing shitty stuff as opposed to
product development so it it had an
evolutionary relevance it's now a
profoundly inefficient but also you know
destructive set of systems but as I was
working in just you know kind of the
science and strategy and architecture
how future systems could work and then
wanting to be able to influence current
nonprofits and current for profits to be
able to do better things I saw that
their structures were just not well
enough set up to do a lot of things that
I wanted to do and that we'd actually
have to be able to and take
responsibility for prototyping the
things we wanted to prototype and so I
didn't see a way forward that didn't
involve starting things that look like
businesses even though the eventual role
is to transition the underlying
structures of what we call a business in
capitalist and so in order to do that I
had to enough went to the point of view
the idea of being an entrepreneur was
the farthest thing from my identity
grated philosopher yes scientist yes
activist yes entrepreneur all
right
that doesn't mean not entrepreneurial in
the outside of capitalism sense of
creative way but that was in vendor
right as we thought in capitalism the
idea of marketer was like the worst
thing ever right because I'm like the
marketing is with only seconds of being
a salesperson and and you know if you
think about it from the point of view of
look at how much we put into marketing
budgets rather than into product
development to have me to products just
not add more novel value to people's
lives is I've always wanted to get rid
of marketing as a whole that get rid of
the entire space synthesize all of the
product technology and then have people
have access to the best without a
marketing layer in between the missin
forms what is actually good with
emotional marketing conversion analytics
and so having to say okay so I'm going
to burn or in a marketer and whatever to
be able to actually develop the science
and technology that I want prototype
wise even though it will eventually move
into other systems that was not trivial
for me it's not for you at all that
required saying even though this is very
different than what my long-range goals
are it is the best and service to it and
I actually have to download a entirely
new element of personality right because
I can't continue to feel that conflicted
with it no you feel like a sellout
otherwise and so it was how do I
actually download the identity of
entrepreneur of marketer it sees the
beauty rather than the dysfunction and
then and then it integrates with the
other parts that doesn't do the
dysfunctional part and uses it in an
adaptive way so that was actually a very
interesting non-trivial pivot to say I
actually want to take science tech
philosophy strategy and move it into
business because it's a vehicle that in
the current landscape I can actually
advance further faster meaning
you
and the key there was so interesting cuz
that was an identity level to it right
it wasn't a strategy level pivot because
it was have to add a module to identity
you learn into the phone booth like I
you you you're like Clark Kent he walked
in as Clark Kent but you can merge this
in with a different identity same person
by the way but different identity and
there has to be a shift in that phone
booth fighters and that's interesting is
you know my value systems of what I seek
to serve or deeper to me then what I
have skillet or what I like because what
I like would have been different had I
grown up in a different culture what my
skill sets are would have been different
had they done a different college
program whatever and that's still
changeable but what I ultimately love
the most and seek to serve the most is
is deeper and less changing than those
other things are some like oh if
actually adding entrepreneur and
marketer allows me to serve the things
that I care about more in this
particular environment in this
particular time period then it is
actually in service to the deepest
aspect of self which is the values to
bring in new modules of identity
beautiful so share a little bit about
the businesses they you put a bit of
into because I think that's it's more
than a little fascinating so the the
business right now is called a neuro
hacker collective it's in the process of
going through roll up merger with some
other companies that we really love and
we're partnering with so see that in the
hopefully not too distant future but you
know where we are focused on
technologies of well-being that can
right now optimize the neurologic
function physiologic function in the
near term future also psychologic
function to increase quality of human
life human experience and human
capability our specific approach which
is different than other wellness or
medicine approaches has to do with
complex comprehensive
system science approach so when we're
looking at this involves a few things it
involves personalization it involves
addressing multiple systems
simultaneously it involves synthesis of
multiple different strategies and apply
its energy you know those kinds of
things I can speak more about that in a
minute but basically we saw that there
were major sources of human suffering
physical pain anxiety depression etc
that as well as chronic illness that we
had an approach that we believed could
do something really novel to address and
our early testing showed that was true
and that we were able to actually make
major changes and things that hadn't
believed hadn't been believed to be
modifiable or correctable things but
that beyond addressing human suffering
and increasing individual and quality of
life as we look at the major macro
issues of the world whether we're
talking about religious extremism and
female genital mutilation or violence
towards children or overfishing of the
oceans or total biodiversity loss like
all these issues our human behavior
mediated
and so changing them requires changing
patterns of human behavior and as I was
talking about earlier you know the focus
of changing economics is because
economic stress patterns of human
behavior you make a well worth a million
dollars to add and nothing alive in that
incentive system drives human behavior
so you have to change macroeconomic
incentives but you also so economics is
one thing that affects you my hair is
not the only thing right so all of the
social systems that lead to incentive
and status and you know the kind of game
theory dynamics are certain things that
we need to change environmental
psychology and the way environments
condition and pattern human behavior is
another set of interventions the thought
layer which is you know largely where
you know I imagine you focus with your
clients in terms of changing people's
definition of success the definition of
self definition of other working with
integration healing trauma you know
their strategies for how to navigate the
world all of that is key to patents few
major so it's physiology and this is one
of the things that we really started to
look at was in order to address the
problems of the world at scale we have
to have humans that are not predisposed
to continue positive those problems
that's a big deal I also have to have
humans that are predisposed to solve the
problems and to create beauty and so
this means humans that are oriented
towards more empathy more emotional
resilience more creativity more multi
perspective taking and perspective
synthesis right more complex thinking to
actually be able to solve complex
problems and
all that can be affected at the level of
thought where and must be we saw that
you know empathy is mediated over
certain neural networks mediated by
certain neural chemistry and that there
it can be down or up regulated
physiologically so could complexity of
thinking so could impulse control right
so could so many of those dynamics and
we started looking at neuro chemical and
neuro structural predisposition for
psychopathy or sociopathy on one extreme
and how to not only prevent and correct
those dynamics but also continue to
support the evolution of you know
vicarious experience empathy etc beyond
baseline intelligence ultimately you
know we talked about increasing human
sovereignty and by sovereignty we mean
the the product of people's intelligence
agency and sentience their sentient is
their ability to sense the world and
this means sense themselves have more
inner awareness because of that
vicarious sentencing of other people
empathy and more perceptive 'ti about
world around the mindfulness etc depth
of feeling this means their intelligence
to process all of what they sense to
make meaning out of it and to understand
the causation and dynamics and what
effective solutions could look like and
then their agency their ability to
actually act on and in the world with
increase adaptive capacity in power and
so this is sensory input information
processing actuator output closed-loop
cycle right and how do we increase that
whole thing which is both going to
relate to their quality of life
individually and the way that they are
an agent for the quality of life
everything to touch and so we were
interested in this this particular
company neural hackers focused on how do
we increase human sovereignty what are
all the technologies that are relevant
to that and as far as the biology goes
what can we do to support the human bio
system to predispose more sovereign
adaptive agents right increased quality
of human experience and
in capacity and and choice making and so
that's through chemistry that affects
cognitive ability and psychological
resilience etc it's through the
chemistry is just one pathway we are
very interested in every pathway so on
physiology EEG neurofeedback
transcranial stimulation closed-loop
neural feedback microbiome expand the
gut all of those were basically
technology agnostic so it's not
particular technology categories were
interested in we're interested in
technologies that work by increasing
system resilience rather than overriding
it to put you in a particular range and
so fundamentally different than the you
know traditional medical approach our
goal is not to identify a specific range
of a biomarker we want people to be in
and if they're too high give them
something that externally lowers it and
if it's too low give them something that
externally raises it but to identify
what's going on with their own
regulatory systems and increased
regulatory capacity of their system so
they are more adaptive more resilient to
talk about and so that's the gist of
what we're working on doing here is how
do we optimize human quality of life and
human capability to be a positive force
for the quality of life of everything
else because realistically if we look at
the balance sheet of nature right if we
think about the Earth's balance sheet
most humans are on the liability side of
nature's balance sheet and the humans
all have to move to the asset side which
means if they are doing more net
positive to the balance sheet of the
Commons and they are net negative and
when I do we're not even in the realm of
that and we need to be very quickly and
so we want to increase the balance sheet
of the psychological emotional balance
sheet of the human and where they live
on nature's balance sheet so you're
technology agnostic and at the moment
you develop circuit products that you're
you're using to move that
tip those Domino's get them started
right so just take a couple of minutes
we could share you know this is this is
not I know I know how you feel about
this anyway so it's not marketing or
sales but I love people who are curious
to just know a little bit about the
products that you've got and then last
thing I'll say is you know where can
people find out more information that
way they can they never want to follow
their curiosity they actually care so
you know that company started just under
three years ago we've only moved into
sharing products with people about six
months ago we you know we're in testing
with people over that entire time but in
terms of actual marketing and so we have
we didn't even shock when you said it
it's good right but an end to the of
course the essence of how we do
marketing is education and if people are
interested in lined great
so we have one product that is currently
for sale that's available to call qualia
and we had a handful more that are in
various phases of development that will
be coming available soon and then a
number of other ones that we're in just
kind of early aren't Eon and why we
started with quality a number of reasons
one is taking pills is a much more
familiar thing to people than hooking up
transcranial devices to their head so
there's much lower barrier of entry to
something that you know there's already
familiarity with it requires almost no
deep behavior modification so it's also
low barrier of injury from like a total
behavioral input point of view compared
to intermittent fasting or exercise or
something that takes you know some will
work and it can actually lead to
increased predisposition to do those
other things by it's dynamic on
motivational chemistry and specifically
you were talking about the pressure for
productivity and how we have
simultaneously an increasing pressure
for productivity while having an
increasing number of topics that we're
trying to be productive across
simultaneously well having more and more
that is distracting and you know
shortening attention span and things
relevant to productivity in a world
where we also have more physiologic
stresses from indoor outdoor pollution
shittier Dietetics that are so that's a
lot and as a result of it we've seen an
exponential increase and off-label
adderall sales of people who are trying
to deal with their productive capacity
which is totally reasonable and energy
drinks and 5-hour energy and other smart
drugs and most of these are
psychostimulant billions of dollars and
things to help people sleep it's just
truly incredible and so you know
chemistry to sleep chemistry to wake up
and be productive chemistry of them and
we're fans of chemistry but we're fans
of chemistry that have more
comprehensively positive effect
and have longer-term positive and at
minimum longer-term neutral rather than
negative effects and so that means that
it's going to have to work with the way
the body regulates its own chemistry
rather than override the way the body
does chemistry so most of the kind of
psychostimulants that people have used
for productivity enhancement and
cognitive enhancement adderal is a great
example I'm not talking here about
actual prescription adderall for
relevant things and we could argue
whether or not they're ever irrelevant
but I'm not talking about that I'm
talking about off-label use which is
huge whether it's people studying for
midterms or finals or whether it's you
know people's tech startup or whatever
when you take a dopamine agonist like
that that is going to synthetically
increase dopamine specifically and you
aren't supporting the entire dopamine
production and regulatory process then
the body becomes dependent upon an
external ratings are Janus dopamine
stimulation process so if you do that
long term then you get down regulation
of your own endogenous dopamine process
which means addiction I'm addiction
dependence also if you are doing
exhaustion a stimulation you get a more
fixed level of dopamine as opposed to a
more adaptive capacity for your body to
change its own dopamine levels based on
what it's doing because you when you
want to chill out you don't want you to
talk mean high okay and dopamine by
itself is not really going to produce
the kind of cognitive effects someone
wants it's gonna increase focus and it's
going to increase drive it's not going
to increase working memory it's not it's
gonna decrease some of the things that
really matter and so you get a very
narrow increase in some things you get a
decrease of other things that are
actually meaningful to your goal in real
time and then longer-term
down-regulation so our goal was could we
produce a much more comprehensive set of
real-time increases to the things that
matter while having our long term
effects be neutral to positive on those
same metrics and you know other metrics
which would require a fundamentally
different approach it's not going to be
you know any kind of Pharma approach
just because the way the economics were
structured where it has to be patentable
to ever be able to make enough money to
go through FDA approval so it has to be
synthetic it has to be single molecule
how could a synthetic single molecule
ever comprehensively up regulate meaning
synthetic meaning it's not part it's not
part of your normal endogenous chemistry
and your normal chemistry involves so
many simultaneous parallel and
sequential pathways how could that
comprehensively abrogate just couldn't
right it's just structurally on a
reasonable approach to that kind of
thing so medicine for Western medicine
is done a really good job with acute
illness and so if there's one cause of
the issue that I can acute infection or
an acute injury then it can deal with an
acute solution to that single molecule
can deal with that if it's a single
pathway but if we're talking about lots
of pathways then we needed a different
way of approaching it and so when you
look at when people are taking cognitive
enhancers when you look at what they
really want they want a kind of creative
productive flow state where their
cognitive capacities are engaged which
is different than the flow state
mathlete wants where their cognitive
capacities being online their linguistic
capacities aren't really relevant and in
fact you know you here the flow genome
guy is talking about flow States where
prefrontal cortexes shutting down and
people are in a very just kind of
automated response that if you're trying
to write a book if you're trying to do
science if you're trying to do a midterm
if you're trying to figure out how to do
your tech startup you need a different
kind of flow state than that right so
what does it mean to have a sense of
flow a sense of height and creativity a
sense of heightened productivity to
actually have heightened productivity
and where all of your cognitive
abilities are online well it involves
cognitive capacities like speed of
memory total working memory short-term
long-term memory digit span verbal
fluency right all those things intensity
of concentration duration of focus task
switching
these are very opposite things which is
why choosing hard to increase them
usually if I get intensity of focus I
get pissed off if someone distracts me
usually if I have task switching and
fluid intelligence I can't focus at
heart amazing we actually want the
ability to be deeply present with
something and then be able to move if we
need to be deeply pressed to come back
right so how do we do all of those
different functions simultaneously those
are cognitive abilities while also
having increased sense of purposefulness
meaningfulness Drive emotional
resilience you know etc analysis
critical thinking since the SIS creative
thinking there's a lot of different
things so that we started by kind of
modeling the space of what we're
actually seeking to affect from
cognitive science marketing and then
looking at what are all the physiologic
pathways that are known about that are
involved in mediating all of those
functions then what chemistry's can
support those pathways and then which of
those chemistry's are generally well
tolerated synergistic with each other
have really good data on them and that
was the beginning of our hypothesis
process for generating a complex
chemistry formula has lots of different
ingredients affecting lots of different
pathways different neurotransmitters for
kind of short-term effect but also
longer term effects of supporting
neurogenesis synaptogenesis for actually
affecting you know structure and brain
and then we went into of course an
iterative process where we were taking
our and there's my office he's in
testing them and then getting feedback
and iterating until we got to a place
that we're really happy with and of
course there's continued iteration
forever because that's nature of
evolution so that's qualia and obviously
it
it is not intended to treat any disease
we make no medical claims about its etc
etc but the experience people have been
reporting on it over quite a lot of
people now has been remarkable for lucky
yep I'm one to add to that so I've had a
very good experience with it and what's
the best way for people to follow their
curiosity and learn more as you said
educating and that's the best marketing
there is so neural hacker comm is our
website and imagine you post this might
be able to put a link so be easy for
people and we've got a science section
that describes our approach and the
formulation and cites research and all
that fun stuff and it's really just kind
of focused around quality right now cuz
it's the first product that's available
as the other products come online
they'll be there and the total kind of
education information on the side will
continue to there's a lot of projects
that we're engaged on that arm reference
on the site and all yet because putting
things up as they're actually available
for people to engage with we look
forward have more to share and it's
exciting
yeah Daniel what I don't know how long
we've been on I haven't even looked at
the at the clock but it's gonna blur
very quick and incredibly valuable so
thank you for your time thanks for I
know I think at this point when people
will will be listening
you know viewing etc there'll be all
times a day and night but this is your
fifth this is the fifth of these
interviews that you've done all
different today so I appreciate you
taking the time and I know your base is
just you know just getting started so I
appreciate I appreciate your time and
what you're doing in the world because
it's a different type of solution that I
think I've heard come from really a
company before and and I'm intrigued by
it you know I'm and I want to support it
I mean that's what our company is
committed to peace that's our vision is
to create peace through self
actualization so we're all about helping
people just do
things that create peace for themselves
because this very simple philosophy it's
when enough people are are selflessly
focused on just creating your own peace
will have a tipping point where there's
there's just more peace in the world in
any given moment they'll be more peace
in the world than there is anything else
I think that's a shifting event for all
of us so I really really value brother
thank you so much
likewise thank you as a blessed to be
here in you know we're not really a
company we happen to be a company right
now but and I think you would hold this
people with a mission that happens to be
the vehicle that allows the mission to
exist right now reason why even as a
company we have collected in the name
now I've reflected this to really
achieve the mission given the scale is
we need to participate with everyone
that's doing really wonderful and so if
there we only make products if there is
a major gap between the best of what's
currently available and what we know how
to make if there's something that's
already near the best of what's
scientifically possible we'd much rather
partner is it's really hard to make
stuff right it takes a lot of cycles if
anyone's done a good job with it we'd
love to partner up kind of in any space
so you know this already is the
beginning of partnership between us and
collaboration beautiful Cheers thank you
[Music]
thanks for listening everyone we hope
you now have the tools and greater
insights to navigate your own pivot help
us inspire others by sharing this
episode and leaving your comments over
at Adam Markel com forward slash
podcasts for more tips strategies and
support as you consciously pivot into a
new business and lifestyle you love join
our pivot community on Facebook at pivot
FB com
[Music]