howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to gym
rut show.com that's Jim ruts show com
today's guest is Simon de deo Simon has
assistant professor at Carnegie Mellon
University at the Department of Social
and decision science where he directs
the laboratory for social minds he's
also in the external faculty at the
Santa Fe Institute today's episode is a
new format we're calling currents where
we're going to take an event out in the
world that's relatively current and
we're gonna have an open-ended
conversation from it that will maybe
generate its own currents so I think and
we'll also get it up in a couple of days
so it'll be current as well so this is
current cubed so the the item in the in
the news or the current events world we
want to talk about is actually something
I picked out of Simon's very interesting
tweet stream it's always worth following
follow Simon on on Twitter we'll have a
link to his Twitter account on our
episode page where he had some reactions
to the recent passage by the Oxford
Student Union of a quite strong
statement kind of upping the ante with
respect to you know college student
opposition to speech they find I don't
know what's the word hateful I think
they used in their Proclamation hate
speech etc so Simon what do you think
about this and what does it all mean
thanks Jim yeah you know this is a
phenomenon that is increasingly common
it's something that I think most faculty
have noticed in their careers teaching
in the last 10 years or so which is a
bit of an inversion
the tradition we're usually pretty
familiar with which is students
protesting against police authority
students testing against university
authority and in particular
protesting against the constraints of
the university or the constraints of the
government the arts the Student Union
motion that was passed it was I think
for somebody who went to university the
1990s was you know sort of a mirror
world that that unions motion said first
of all you know this is a resolution on
hate speech
it's a demand that the university
considers censoring preventing the
assignment of philosophical texts that
are that would be deemed illegal under
British law and illegal because they
promote denigration or hatred of a
protected group so the the Student
Union's motion said hey we think the
laws at the governmental level should be
stronger that there should in fact be
stricter laws against what one is
permitted to say
in the meantime whether or not those
laws are made stricter to prevent a
wider range of speech
Oxford University should take the lead
and preemptively preventing certain
texts from being discussed one thing
that maybe might strike us particularly
is that the tax systems are talking
about or not let's say mine comp right
they're not text that we might consider
you know extraordinarily offensive in
the particular case they raised was a
philosophical article about eugenics and
in particular the question of whether
one should selectively or should select
embryos in order to avoid a child with
disabilities so there's a lot of
strangeness there I think for those of
us you know joining the culture from an
earlier an earlier stage of evolution
yeah let me let me jump in there a
little bit you know I went to college
university a full generation before you
I showed up in
Brij Massachusetts in 1971 when we the
boomers were just given the finger to
the GI Joe generation and the and the
silence and we were basically just
grabbing freedom you know we were still
very much in the shadow the famous
Berkeley Free Speech Movement it was all
about what should we be able to say on
campus anything we went goddamn well
blazed you know I get you right in
further when I talk to people who'd gone
to university just a little before me
used to be the university acted in loco
parentis scene today for instance
couldn't you bring your girlfriend's up
to your dorm room literally after 6
o'clock at night apparently was true
till about 1967 five years for I showed
up four years for I showed up um I got
there hey you were clever enough to talk
your girlfriend and cohabitating in your
dorm room no one's gonna say a word
we've had an account at a local liquor
store where we could order hooch should
have it delivered to the front desk so
it was all about you know maximizing you
know personal freedom so again that
that's you know you know again from our
my generation even more probably than
yours this kind of you know the people
want to legislate a police state that's
very odd and the other thing I wanted to
underline which I you know you mentioned
in passing but I think distinguishes
this particular act from other you know
previous acts say you know the US
universities this was not about
censoring an outside speaker you know or
dissuading reversing an invitation of an
outside speaker that people might have
thought was you know problematic in the
in that horrible passive-aggressive term
used by people on campus these days but
rather these were about assigned works
by professors in class you know and they
were specifically calling for overruling
the British law with respect to academic
freedom so this was an even stronger
reach than many of these controversies
in the states you know we are we are
different generations on this so one of
the things that I think we're really
used to is as students you know one of
our
goals is to offend whoever came before
right so I'm cusp of Gen X millennial so
you know what I say online is like okay
boomer right so like we this this this
battle that we're used to over the
course of of culture by the whole
post-war culture who knows when this
started when it became explicit that
that is you know not if it isn't just oh
the boomers did this and everyone quit I
think it's it you know if that has
changed that's a that's a much larger
shift in how the culture works right it
isn't just there was a proven tradition
that's now been superseded but there's a
sort of generational dynamic that maybe
has shifted and you know part of what I
was trying to figure out was is this
really a shift because you know to put
it another way there's no lack of
students young people yelling at the
older generation probably up the
world right so the the Oxford resolution
was a puzzle to me in a lot of ways
because you know on the one hand it's
the shift but if it really is a true
shift towards you know a kind of Pro
authoritarian stance where the students
are you know basically inviting the
government to intervene at Oxford
that's that's much larger than you know
one you know one generation having
different norms from the previous one
it's almost like a shift in a meta rule
for things one of these I wanted to do
is is maybe think a little bit more
about this dynamic that we're seeing you
know there's some standard explanation
sitting out there standard story sitting
out there you know one that's become
quite popular is it's been popularized
by Jonathan hight and bring the kana
which is the coddled mind thesis so this
says you know look why why is this
generation intervening against or
intervening in favor of an authoritarian
control in a way that we perhaps haven't
seen before at least in the general
student population Econoline thesis says
this generation is unique and
they have been isolated from challenge
in length that they have been protected
by parents helicopter parents from
experiencing any kind of difficulty
shielded family they've been taught to
see adversity and unpleasant experiences
as damaging as opposed opportunities for
growth and they've been taught that even
the very encountering of an idea that
one finds offensive is itself a
psychological harm right so it's someone
with trauma that's that's the coddled
mind thesis I don't particularly buy
that thesis you know I think it's it's
one that resonates with the peace first
game on the Atlantic it resonates with
the Atlantic Monthly readership in part
because they don't feel anything about
the readership is often indeed composed
of the parents exactly like that that
said I'm not sure that it's
representative of the student population
first of all student you know the racial
and sexual diversity of universities has
gone up under any standard account the
number of students who have actually
been exposed to traumatic things as
risen as opposed to decline the students
I went to school with by and large were
I would say in some sense more protected
than the ones today it it doesn't quite
fit that like there's there's something
missing there right it can neither
explain why it's happening I would say
in it even if it could it couldn't
explain why now as opposed to before so
there's a and there's a missing from
that from that story at least it's a
popular story so there's a second thesis
which you know different from the
Atlantic Monthly called mine pieces and
that's one who knows where it came from
one prominent person until he
disappeared to Russia was Shirin
Peterson who explains this not as a you
know psychological
story about you know early childhood you
know being forced for a bicycle helmet
that kind of thing Peterson talks about
this moment as an ideological one so
that the students behind these movements
are rather motions right so
the reason the Oxford Students Union you
know called for the banning of certain
texts in a classroom is is not
psychological but rather because they
subscribe to a certain ideology and you
know that what that ideology is I think
Peterson calls a cultural Marxism you
might call it I was reading a recent
book on this by left-wing academic who
says well maybe the right term is to
postmodern neo Marxism knows the the
ideological explanation I think is also
bit weak and one reason is that no one's
really been able to pin down exactly
what that idealogy is like you know
there is a communist ideology in as much
as there was you know the Communist
Party of the USA you know sharing
communiques from from you know Soviet HQ
it was you know this if this isn't a
theology if the speaking you'll ought to
be driven it's a really covert protein
self-contradictory one and at some point
you want to say well to what extent is a
really neat ideology if half of ideology
contradicts the other half for half of
what people are saying is there you know
is it Marxist
is it postmodern is it you know cultural
economic materialists who knows in some
sense yes they're banning things because
they have ideas and the ideas cause them
to ban things because that's usually how
ideas work but I'm just not buying the
thesis that there is a you know set of
ideas coherent written down somewhere at
least you know identifiable that all of
these motions protests have in common
so the ideological thesis I think fails
just as much as the call of mine well I
you know respond a little bit to that
the political the ideological one you
know some of my more thoughtful
conservative friends and I do pride
myself on having friends all across the
political spectrum even though that is
considered to be unfashionable these
days the lovable character the label
they would put on it you know getting
the most thoughtful of them they would
call this idea the ideology
postmodernist critical theory so they
don't use a you know seemingly built-in
contradictory layer
like neo-marxist their cultural marxism
but they basically focus specifically at
critical theory and there is an
identifiable body of work in sociology
anthropology law and the humanities
that's labeled critical theory and I
think that is perhaps got a little bit
better argument for it but let's pass on
that argument and let's go on to why I
reached out to you and wanted to get you
on the show which which Simon put forth
in his tweet storm and tweet hurricane
around the tweet storm an idea of an
alternative explanation that actually is
quite interesting called the cocktail
party model why don't you roll that out
for us well it's a gym yeah this is you
know right to get a hurricane I think
you need an inversion layer right so
what I'm going to do is take seriously
the possibility that these motions
protests and again we have the the
Oxford Student Union as the as the
example to hand it's unusual in a
certain way it's unusual for example
that you know Britain does not have the
free speech laws that we do in the
states it's not as baked in as as for us
and so you know talking about prior
restraint by the government in Britain
is not you know a non-starter as it is
in here in the US but what I wanted to
do is figure out the possibility that
these students are actually taking the
university seriously they're taking a
model of education that they've learned
and in particular if they they've
learned in in elite circles so this is
you know a story about what's happening
let's say at Oberlin or Amherst Oxford
Harvard wherever as opposed to
University of Kentucky Indiana
University refused to teach the you know
the the oxonium here are taking a model
of Education that Oxford has been
running for a hundred years who knows
maybe all the way back to the foundation
of the College of toriel system has been
taking that model and
[Music]
it was taking services so in some sense
they are actually the most conformance
of the students that we have to have and
they're in some sense revealing the
contradictions of a certain story about
what it means to to learn so that model
I call it a cocktail party model the
cocktail party model of Education if you
spend time in a place like Oxford so
that would exclude for example your
education Jim at MIT but so not like a
tech school model not an engineering
school model not the Moscow State model
but the elite Anglosphere you know IV
colored buildings model this is a story
about what you do when you go to seminar
so the primary place you learn is least
according this model not in the lecture
hall and I'm a top-down you know
communication model not in the you know
Yoda guru model this is a model of
Education where you come into your room
you sit around a table and you talk and
that's an insufficient level of
definition right the way I understood
the oxford seminar model and I keep
saying Oxford is just because we happen
to have the osc the ham is an ethic of
hospitality meaning what it means to be
in seminar is understood roughly along
the lines of what it means to goodra
cocktail party so you're learning the
rules the the boundaries the guardrails
here for what is right behavior what's
wrong behavior what it means to do well
what it means to be poorly those those
norms are imported in part from the
drawing-room I'm the lady the 18th
century 19th century driver so what does
this mean right it means for example
when you go to the seminar the professor
is the host the students are the guests
I don't know what your dinner parties
are like Jim but you know when I throw a
dinner party the host has certain
obligations right you're not a you're
not a dictator at a dinner party the
host is not telling people what to do
they create an environment in which the
guests can enjoy themselves in a
in structured way the guests themselves
have reciprocal obligations they the
host is you know some kind of partly
like a Socratic midwife they're trying
to draw the guests out the guests talk
amongst themselves the hosts
interventions are minimal the ideal
interactions are ones of enlightened
dynamic conversation having experienced
this myself in some sense this is
something you have to learn you're
taught if you go to like certain fancy
kind of high school you learn it when
you're 13 14 if you come to an elite
University from a more demonic
backgrounds you learn it sort of
on-the-job often freshmen year you'll
have a seminar that kind of teaches you
the law of seminar without explicitly
teaching you the law of seminar so
that's the cocktail party model it's a
bit you know if I were to give you a tax
on I mean a list of rules would be a bit
tricky one way I thought about it was
you know many of our educational
practices or our theories of what it
means to learn go all the way back to
Plato the part of Plato that teaches us
the cocktail party model is probably the
opening first half of Plato's symposium
which is a dinner party that in many
ways is a model for the optimal seminar
the optimal tutorial what happens people
come there pretty orderly they drink but
not too much you probably don't drink
anymore at the some in our table but
certainly you know an elite University
will have cocktail hour at some point
drinks sherry you know get roaring drunk
but there's a conviviality to it go
around the table you share your ideas
people respect each other even when they
disagree there's you know Socrates in
this case is the special guest it's
gonna show up ruined everything that's
second half of the symposium but that
first half when I read it recently
Christ like that's what I was taught to
do so if we take that cocktail party
model and say alright that's what we
were doing and let's say you know
Cambridge or Oxford in 1980 or 1994 2000
what happens when we bring when we open
the university out right the cocktail
party and by calling it the cocktail
party I draw attention to the idea that
this is a bit of a roof roof uh see
event right kind of a white a kind of a
white people thing right it's yeah it's
like remember that website stuff white
people like like stuff like yeah I know
Amherst Art History seminar like that's
awesome
right yeah yeah so right so you know
it's like you know you've had Ogoni a
jacket your your LL Bean back time
that's at least maybe you can say from
the symposium that has devolved over the
next whatever twenty five hundred years
into a sort of refined decorous way to
talk now it's not entirely decorous
people disagree but just as a good
dinner party has an argument right has
the drama to it so can the cocktail
party but at some point you know these
students are sitting there and they're
saying look I read John Stuart Mill I'm
a good enlightened liberal you know race
doesn't matter gender doesn't matter
disability doesn't matter everybody is
at the cocktail party mom and you now
encounter a really serious tension
because one of the basic rules of the
cocktail party is don't be offensive ray
you can gossip about people who aren't
there that's bit tacky but you can do it
especially elevated but you know
cocktail party model says you shouldn't
make let's say personal remarks about
the seminar leader right you can't be
like you know it's really interested in
reading you know reading Plato on on
erotic love between the young and the
old and I I'm gonna notice you know
proffer your wife is really young that's
rude moment that's like off that's off
limits right okay you might say well
 like that's just you know let's
rough and tumble let's learn man write
you some kind of wimp you can't handle
that it's all side effects right if you
do that you're no longer doing cocktail
party you might be doing something else
my guess is that you could do that at
you know whatever Amherst you're done
right you're not gonna get a good with
that clicker it's very least you're not
gonna get invited back you might think
so let's take the arson Student Union it
sample which they suggested a tax that
that might be banned is this tax I would
say it's the genesis tax I don't like it
and agree with it but we talked about
that later this this is a tax assessed
basically should we abort baby suitable
turnout should be disabled let's say in
a wheelchair you can't have that
conversation that's a really awkward
conversation to have in the cocktail
party model if somebody in the seminar
room is in a wheelchair it's just really
great I'm not saying it can't be
discussed I'm just saying it can't be
discussed in that model we need
something if you wanted to do that I
would say karma is broken
um we didn't notice this I think maybe
did but people know this this way this
is just on Twitter but you know if the
seminar resolved mail like you know
Oxford seminar on the Odyssey in 19th
century you can say all sorts of stuff
you know the men around I typically see
all sorts of stuff but if there are
women in the room they would feel
embarrassed to say right it wouldn't be
able to say it because that's just not
decorous in that environment so let's
just take that so let's just say this
right what if the speech codes the
protest these sorts of things are not
actually a secret radical Salafi other
Foucault international what if this is
actually the best students and all
they're doing is saying look we're
trying to square a story about how to
learn that you've taught us you've
taught us to idolize with another thing
you taught us to idolize which is you
know sort of really let's say the rule
and there's some classroom so that's a
different way to understand why ban this
tax not because you know the person in
the wheelchair is led a coddled and easy
life that's the Hyperion's that
point not because I have subscribed to a
really extensive theory about disability
and consciousness or whatever but simply
because this just doesn't feel like that
and the ruins of time
I call it the hospitality filter right
yeah it's not hostile in fact that it
ties back to the in some kind of almost
linguistic way to the idea of a hostile
environment it's not hospitable right I
mean the idea and so the sense what
you're saying is that these students are
taking the traditions of hospitality and
the cocktail Mar party or maybe even the
dinner party might actually be a little
closer but yes but some form of high
hospitality as a true norm and they're
saying that if you have to if you now
ensue that we're gonna include a much
broader group of people our definition
of hospitality has to change that's
great Jim I like this I mean it's it's I
mean one question is this do we want the
ethic of hospitality to be the thing
beneath an educational experience right
yeah it's interesting I mean now you
know it may be that it that it breaks
under that it may put too many
constraints you know for instance and
and I suspect we are under the influence
to a degree of some post modernist
theory here because you know you don't
imagine anyone's going to call the
police on my dinner party because I
violated some rule of hospitality right
so we you know the the idea of making
this a general will kind of you know
legally enforced doctrine is beyond
hospitality by a long shot so there is
somebody out there but maybe rather than
at one level I like the fact that you
floated this idea because it explains
actually a lot it also explains as you
mentioned in a tweet storm that this is
typically a phenomena of elite
universities and as you said not you
know Eastern Kentucky or Prince George's
County Community College or any of those
places that that we know and love
actually but it's it's of the elite but
you know we if you think about this
there are other alternatives you
mentioned at MIT where I went you don't
have this cocktail party
even those at all you know it's a battle
of the battle of the Wills and the wits
and let the fastest win
right Pierre let the chips fall where
they may I think I also mentioned I was
chatting to you once company I was on
the board of all the software engineers
like 17 of them 22 um I don't know how
many of them every one of them was a
physicist from Moscow and and I think
about 90% of them were of Jewish ethnic
background and these guys they love to
just get down to it right it was you
know they would be cursing each other's
mothers and their ancestors and in an
argument about some technical issue
right and at the end of it though they
were also having each other's backs that
going outside smoking some deadly
cigarettes and you know maybe there's a
another model that is actually better in
SFI you and I both spent a lot of time
to Santa Fe Institute there's an awful
lot of intellectual sword-fighting there
as well and probably not a whole lot of
the hospitality model maybe the
hospitality model has is no longer
functional when you have to accommodate
some vast array of people and their
potential sensitivities it's great gym I
mean you know what's they maybe this is
like too critical three clothes for you
Jim right but like you know I love SF I
I'm not sure you know when someone whips
their sword out of their pants it's
always the greatest conversation right
so I mean there is you know there we
have other models right so like if I
were if I were gonna do the same
cultural theory move on on on the Moscow
State model right you know this is this
is the military barracks model right
this is you know we we're gonna solve
problems through a model of you know
fair fight let's say you can you can
toss a bunch of insults I mean they're
always you know there's always
boundaries and rules here you know maybe
the rule in Moscow state is like don't
cry right so I'm not sure that you know
I I don't think you're saying this Jim
but you know to be clear right there's
no way outside of a culture right
there's there's no way to have the view
no we're seminar right you you there are
a set of burns that sort of guide what
you know what are the you know the
optimal or correct things to do what it
means to succeed what it means to have a
good throw down fight and you know in
the you know in the cafeteria one of my
Twitter friends we knew each other from
turing institute back in london he sees
not anyway he's josh josh you know it's
quite upfront about the fact that he you
know made it in academia without an
elite background working-class family
he's talked really eloquently about that
josh like you know and i think i'm
attributing this correctly to josh and
they've commented on it i would be
careful but the let's talk about like
the the boxing ring metaphor right the
the sparring match metaphor another one
is the college debate metaphor I never
liked college debate Jim I never made
sense to me but you know college a
metaphor there are there are rules here
to debate they're very different right
they're not rules for example of insight
I would say or you can necessarily
learning I you can learn from watching a
debate but the participants in some
sense you win in a debate if you learn
the least okay if your position changes
the least over the course of it so you
know if we think okay like maybe maybe
we you bought this gym which is great
I'm thrilled maybe you bought that okay
this is the explanation about why we are
having this other unusual moment where
students are you know protesting in
favor of greater restriction on what's
happening then we sell people with them
what's next right do we have other
models for how people can talk to each
other in an open way in a way that they
learn in a way that they develop their
let's say dialectical abilities meeting
their ability to to talk to each other
develop their ideas over the course of
time that's a great question
that's a really it's a really fun
question a an important question
right if elite universities are molding
the minds of the leaders of the future
and then we need to make sure we're
picking a metaphor and of course these
are all metaphors you know a cocktail
party a boxing ring they're all
metaphors we don't actually we're not
actually enacting these things and so
it's important
high stakes and you know when I you know
I guess when I said I bought your model
I well I think it's a fairly reasonable
explanation that fits the facts as well
or better than any alternate it is it
doesn't mean I agree with the outcome by
any means
right oh you know kids calling the
cops on their professors for including a
philosophy paper in the class that's
 nuts
right and so I can see where we got to
via your analysis but personally and
maybe it's just hey it's just okay
boomer time here it's just you know
something I think just I mean damn
pissed off and my kids we're paying
$300,000 get educated like that you know
in a different alternative equally
serious maybe more serious is University
of Chicago right you can't get any more
formal serious about the intellectual
content and yet with very very polite
forms of discourse they have their own
whole style of doing seminars and yet
rigorous open free speech maybe that's a
better alternative I mean let's do this
takes a village right I mean you know
you mentioned your your you know your
chain-smoking you know Moscow physicists
for Jewish you should conquer I mean to
me it always need to be Iraqi for the
humanities in the sense that there was
when I was there as a postdoc there for
a while and looking at how
undergraduates dealt with that the world
they were in it's very different from
let's say Harvard or Cambridge and I
wonder if that's in part you Chicago you
know had less of the let's just say it
like the kind of Episcopalian
anti-semitism that I've always kind of
associated with the Harvard model right
and the British model more generally
that you know certain ways of talking
we're like just a little too Jewish and
I reminded Jim I don't know if you
remember this the great scene in Annie
Hall where Woody Allen's character goes
to any Hall's house way and it's like
it's very you know waspy like oh you
know Jim was at the boat basin today
yeah it's great yeah I rescrub both
well and then they have the split screen
with you know Woody Allen's Hopi I guess
name the character
alvey's Brooklyn family and they're
yelling over each other and it's like
it's crass from the point view of the
Episcopalian model but it's also it's a
lot more fun it's all better right it's
all you know it's authentic cultural way
right well we're really getting down
there Jim right you know what is
authenticity I guess having to pull up
your ass and you know and your nose in
the air is authentic right if that's who
you are like I mean I mean obviously
elite universities do a couple things
right they transmit knowledge they're
their sources of innovation in the u.s.
the elite universities are a source of
innovation but you know what like a lot
of state universities are as well you
can win a Nobel Prize if you go to
Michigan State it's really hard to get a
job at Merrill Lynch right you're gonna
be in the back room for many many years
I'm not a Michigan State so you know
what is what's Oxford meant to be doing
right I mean other than what Indiana is
doing which is like let's read some
books and learn some stuff right let's
discover some new facts about the
universe and new ways to see it you know
one of the reasons people send their
kids to Harvard is so that they act like
kids who went to Harvard and so you know
hate to say it Jim one of the reasons
people pay a lot of people pay a lot of
money to go to Harvard is because it
puts you it gives you the right so it's
a college it you are you're good at
cocktail parties I think Harvard would
change pretty quickly if you know the
you know the way you got a job at
Merrill Lynch was acting like you're in
a in a in a you know working-class
Brooklyn you know dinner party I think
it would change maybe see a little bit I
haven't actually seen how seminars run
at Stanford it's pretty clear that
Stanford is the new model for elite
education you know our route is starting
to look like you know Disneyland
West for the Anglosphere like what is
what is the next thing physics is an
easy one
right cuz it's I mean I hate to say it
now I sound like her
right or wrong right like you divide it
by zero you didn't write the bridge fell
down or it didn't that's not the only
kind of knowledge right other kinds of
knowledge are more discursive they're
they're more reflective they require you
to situate yourself in that classroom as
a person with a pass that's very
different you know you go to your to
physically to class and physics it
doesn't really matter how the electron
makes you feel right but you know it
actually does matter how you know
Aristotle makes you feel not because
your feelings are really important but
because I ourselves trying to affect how
you feel right uh you know a physics
class doesn't really you know you can
learn physics without having you know
profound feelings about the nature of
the space-time manifold a rather
diversity of the feelings about time a
sacrilege right luminaries terrible
artwork but yeah so you know if you want
to teach Aristotle you have to have some
some way of dealing with the fact that
Aristotle is trying to change you as a
person that balls a different thing
changed you as a person or like Foucault
is trying to change you as a person
perhaps cutting Rita taxed or how you
see the world around you so you know we
we can't get rid of discussion at all
right no nor quit you know certainly not
in the humanities and the social
sciences it would be absurd exactly I
mean you know let's go all the way back
I mean look as a you know a
fundamentalist for the Platonic
tradition right maybe we go back and we
look what are the other models sitting
there in the dialogues for example one
of the other ways that people think
about it here's one that you can't do
right which is the Phaedrus language of
Socrates shows up works with a young guy
right
although Oxford does do that as well
friend of mine once said the benefits of
being a class is depressed or Oxford I
put a great library and a little light
pederasty so but you'll fake this out
good reasons done right thank you that
ok symposium you know it doesn't work it
kind of it's you know for these very
reasons it conflicts with a certain kind
of thing that showed up and jeonse don't
know who you want to blame for it i
don't know may well download to the
matrix right and we take on the identity
if that still doesn't work generally
because we are we are sitting here as
people right sitting as people with pass
if you don't understand Aristotle from
the point of view of a person with a
pass you don't understand them I don't
know I'm racking my brain what else we
have in the mean you know we have the
Parmenides Parmenides it's like an old
guy you know surrounded by people who
basically are asking him to demonstrate
things if the me know okay we can't do
the me know the me know involves like
enslaving someone that's out so I don't
know maybe you know Jim like I guess
what you're you know what you're saying
is the some we should really fund more
cultural theory of Education that's
that's your that's your your radical
left-wing position at the end of it is
maybe where we actually you know instead
of fighting something you should realize
that it's it's telling us that there's a
paradox sitting in there that the
students have revealed to us the they've
revealed it to us I think in part like a
place like Oxford by opening up to
working-class students by opening up to
non-white students poking up to women I
mean it took them ages but Oxford is is
that's one tensions reveal in the u.s.
enormous numbers of East Asian students
now not just coming to the u.s. to do
machine learning but also to you know
acquire a liberal education I think we
should expect to see these tensions we
should expect them to have unusual
outcomes and you know maybe the the
following from that is that we should
expect that new ideas new cultural
practices around education those are the
things we should be looking for how do
you run a seminar differently it's a
first mover problem as well so you know
if you're let's say a striving
University that's not as good as Harvard
right I just I don't think I had like
Yale you know say you wanted to say your
Yale you want to change it somewhere
where you can't because if you don't do
the Anglosphere model then you don't
you're not elite anymore and now who's
gonna pay you know five times the price
to go that so there's an imagination
problem maybe there's also the fact that
what people who go to university
cities that look like a university man
was they used to say so even if we do
have better ideas it could be very hard
to get the universities the faculty on
board and Gary say in the paying
customers the parents and the loan
offices on board as well well I think
well why don't we wrap it up there I
think this has been a very interesting
excursion you know to recap it I'll give
you a chance to respond to the recap we
we see this what seems to us old farts
me a real old fart and Simon at very
junior old fart as someone anomalous to
what we would expect from college
students but as Simon thinks about it a
little bit he comes up with this
hospitality based cocktail Mart party
marvel which actually does seem to fit
the traditions of the seminar room at
the India and the elite Anglosphere when
you cross it with radical diversity and
because it leads to conclusions at least
I would object to and I think Simon's
sort of objects to let's just say that
that's a good word I usually hate that
word use but in this case I think it
actually fits it's problematic and so
therefore that highlights your final
riff which is what this ought to be seen
as is a flag that the whole concept of
how the seminar is conducted in elite
universities needs to be rethought yeah
or you know Jim we could just go back to
all-male all the way it's all right I
mean that's boring well exactly right I
mean it's you know I I'm college I know
in love I was I've been educated there
partly myself I say John's College in
Santa Fe and I would go down there in
the summers there tutorial system is
insane that's insanely good and yet
their their attentions st. John's really
gets into your head right you read some
really intense text I mean you read
texts about rape and murder right you
read the Greek tragedy ads you know
going in at 38 that's fine you know
we're all adults around the table we
have a better sense of things you put a
17 year old guy at seven
young woman in that in the seminar room
and have a discussion about that text
something's gonna go wrong right this is
where height might have something right
in the sense that either somebody's
gonna say something really offensive and
I buy offensive I mean cocktail party
model violated right you know or they're
gonna self censor they're gonna self
censor because the emotions the the
backgrounds the students bring in one is
a man when it's a woman talking about
something they're pretty immature all
seventeen year olds are throughout time
within the dialogue so you know they're
they're they're gonna read about let's
say a rape and they're gonna talk about
this but I just don't think that that
makes sex group has the capacity to talk
about that under the cocktail party
metaphor or another cocktail party model
there's a gap there and you know how the
faculty when I was there you know one of
the things that I had a sense of was
that students would actually in
discussions after class for example its
segregated by sex these things over
so in a funny way actually they were and
a reconstituting a cocktail party where
some of these offensive ideas could be
discussed in single sex group that's
kind of how nice this is women as well
as men so you know if say johns is the
ultimate you know like you know bible
college except the Bible is the
dialogues not that you've revival you
can see them actually sort of trying to
you know go backwards in time so it's
it's a it's a really anima game it's a
really fun possible for from what for
what we do next
yeah some friends of mine would call the
liminal moment where we don't quite know
we know what there's an issue but we
don't know what the solution is and
that's kind of fun I think that's right
it's you know whenever there's a you
know I mean like Havel great thesis
antithesis synthesis there you know the
John Stuart Mill and I'm using that as a
kind of meta name for a certain kind of
egalitarian liberalism that you know we
see on Star Trek you know the the bridge
of this you know Starship Enterprise is
a fantasy an imaginary that I would say
rose and part out of a cocktail party
conversation that you know a bunch of
guys had and in a seminar room what they
didn't know perhaps was that they were
developing an idea that one day would
blow up that very room that they were
creating that idea and that is always
very exciting
maybe that's why Jim I think I'm a
little resistant to these kind of
reductive explanations that SADS a bunch
of brats or adds a bunch of you know
sleeper agents you know that maybe this
is something that's really very
interesting for us our attention your
attention my attentions drawn to it
because there seems to be something off
here self-censorship seems to be wrong
maybe what we're realizing is that
whether or not any model requires
censorship I would say secretly it does
right there are things you can't say in
Moscow State well literally there were
but even like the whatever the Brooklyn
version of muster state was there are
things you can't say they're either you
know maybe it's just this censorship
regime that requires the kaku that is
required by the cocktail party model
maybe that regime is is coming to an end
it's it's it's gotten too much I mean
you know what am I gonna cut on lots and
lots but this is I don't know I love
this this is very oh oh yeah there's a
wonderful is a wonderful conversation I
want to thank you Simon for another
excellent talk on the Jim rod show
wonderful production services and audio
editing by jarred Jane's consulting
music by Tom Muller at modern space
music.com
you