[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
it looks like being really
uncomfortable and it's forbidden to be
uncomfortable and post modernity you
have to be nice
you can't give anybody any feedback you
can't tell the truth you have to lie you
have to avoid negative feelings at all
costs those all kill any real shadow
work you have to be willing not only to
dive into the darkest darkness but be
really uncomfortable and see all the
hideous aspects of yourself that's the
simple answer we're gonna have to do
some serious shadow work as a culture to
survive
[Music]
all of these images were were designed
in a way to evoke feelings and emotions
so the dark cloud itself is just that it
came from my own feeling emotions of
observing and feeling myself and feeling
that in others and it's almost as
disrupt this purification of inner
repression of dissolving the shadow into
something that which is deformed and
doesn't work which really is crying out
to be untangled and then brought to
light so that health the vitality and
life can truly flow through and create
higher order part of spiritual
development is to recognize the satanic
tendencies that characterize you and to
fully wrestle with them and to and to
integrate them that's the thing it's not
so much to cast them away it's to
transmute them you know and you can see
the difference between people who have
done that and people who haven't at
least to some degree because people who
haven't integrated the shadow at all are
naive and because they're naive they're
often resentful as well because they get
taken advantage of and someone who's
integrated that more they're dangerous
in in the martial arts sort of way which
is they're dangerous but they don't have
to be they don't have to use it we've
been in living in the valley and we've
had a situation where the the drought
has come and we need to leave well how
we deal with that is first and foremost
we drop the parts of us that wants to
stay where we are we allow the sadness
of change to occur and we process that
we feel something bad has occurred
danger is just emerged for sure like
leaving the the old fertile valley and
migrating across the desert is fraught
with danger and some of us may not make
it but at the same time it activates in
us as well the call to consciousness the
call to gather together the call to
begin to actually become thinking in a
group
[Music]
shining light on things and integrating
them can be very uncomfortable and so
the shadow is really helps us evolve it
asks of us to constantly reorganize at a
higher level and what we do so I feel
the unconsciousness just catches up or
the shadow that's created matches the
new light and that interplay can be
really beautiful
however we are in a way wired
biologically and mentally to avoid this
comfort and avoid pain but it's only in
this honest conscious suffering if you
want to say which is very heroic of
going into shadow understanding it
integrating it do we really evolve the
spirit so to speak the psyche if you
want flees from the body and terror
because the body is the place of
mortality and suffering and so people
are disembodied and it's because what
one way of looking at is because they're
too afraid to become fully embodied and
it's no wonder they're afraid there's
reason to be afraid but the question is
well what would you be like if you had
the courage to be fully embodied and
that's fully incarnate that's another
way of thinking about that and the idea
that Christian idea is that the fully
incarnate human being is the Messiah
that's the idea that's a hell of an idea
you know but it means embracing the
horrors of the world that's what it
means
[Music]
[Music]