good morning welcome to meditating with
Chandra Vicki I'm a cognitive
psychologist in the cognitive scientists
at the University of Toronto were
academically and scientifically study
mindfulness and related phenomena like
Insight flow mystical experience
transformative experience higher states
of consciousness the cultivation of
wisdom and enlightenment have also been
practicing the posture meditation and
meta contemplation Tai Chi Chuan chi
gong and related practices over 29 years
and teaching them professor Lee for
closer to 20 years so welcome this is a
course you're welcome to stay but you
should know that every Monday is the
Dharma day in which I teach an important
lesson often give an exercise to give a
direct experience on meaning and those
lessons build on previous lessons so
this is a progressive course so what you
need to do if you want to continue on
and catch up just see the links in the
description to previous lessons in
previous six Tuesday through Friday
which includes today because it's a
Wednesday we meet together I might do
some review from the Dharma Day on
Monday but we meet together and you sit
together at the end of every day Monday
through Friday there is a Q&A session
please keep your human days to
specifically about the practice about
the course and everything I'm teaching
from one encompassing Q&A we have a live
streaming on YouTube 3 p.m. est every
third Friday of the month and I'd be
happy to take your questions there in
order to help me help as many people as
possible thank you please like this
stream so that the YouTube algorithm
will increase its visibility well that
would be a big help to me all right so I
don't think there's any other
announcements we need to address right
now please put your phones on do not
disturb please get yourself ready and we
will begin
when I say begin
you
you
slowly begin to come out of your
practice trying as best you can to
integrate which I cultivated in the
practice of your everyday consciousness
and cognition
perhaps by reciting the five promises to
yourself
okay so let's answer some questions we
might have after the core four when you
tell us to go into the pasta meditation
what specifically are we doing are we
continuing with something akin to
finding our flow or focus so after you
found the core for what I mean is you
know when you've got that state where
you've got the field awareness your body
your torso vocal awareness here and your
and your focus is the one of renewing
interest right rather than just hard
hard concentration but soft vigilance
that renewing interest right then all
you do is follow your breath following
your breath in and out following your
breath in and out that's basic the pasta
when they're distraction label it with
an ING word apply the five factors of
inquiring mindfulness come back that's
basic the pasta so that's what it means
once you've got everything the core four
set up and then you just are in the
practice of following your breath noting
your distractions and applying the five
factors of acquiring one fulness a crema
it's always good to hear from your crema
I can use the five factors of
mindfulness on my body on bro sensations
are on the emotions felt afterthought
but out on pot itself are we do use it
on the thought please give an example I
did mention that thought is the hardest
thing and for a very long time what
happened it might happen is you'll
either fall into the thought where you
tell you try to meditate on thinking
rather than thought or it'll disappear
and then your practice is what does that
feel like because I feel like in your
mind when it is empty of thinking but
that doesn't mean your mind has
disappeared so that's the practice for a
long time so when I try to meditate on
the thinking and it won't last very long
but what I do is I catch I catch the
voice and if it was my voice I'm having
a thought
somebody else's voice what was the
temperature of my mind the texture of my
mind the tempo of my mind the tension in
my mind I try to pick up all of that
around there thinking so of like that's
what I try to use that metaphor of
listening to the voice if it's a scene I
try to step back and look at like not
the meaning of the scene but the medium
that was it actually in color what was I
what was actually in my image how so I
try to know you know if it was how
colored it really was a vivacious it
really was how complete or incomplete it
really was things like that
that's what typically helps people to
pick up on the thinking rather than the
thought but like I said for a very long
time what will happen is you'll either
go into the thought it's content or
it'll disappear and then the practice is
this is a very important part of the
practice it like and you'll see this on
mine next Monday it's a light when their
mind is dis identified from its inner
speaking its inner talking to itself
it's interesting so Kara Kroger I'm
experienced anxiety is it okay just open
my eyes and just focus on the sensations
in my body yes it is so if you're
experiencing a lot of anxiety you might
want to first of all really concentrate
on centering at reading and flowing and
focusing as opposed to anything else and
for awhile just let just label the
distractions and return to your breath
if the anxiety is becoming overwhelming
you might want to first direct method
towards it try to befriend it trying to
try to give it a chance to speak to you
try to and try remain very centered and
rooted what you do now might be
overwhelming it if that's the case there
might be some something more at work
that needs to be addressed but very
often if we're an anxiety and we can be
very centered and rooted and flowing in
it and we take an attitude of the
friending it that we can it'll start to
open up and then very gently you can
apply the fire
factors of inquiring mindfulness - but
if the anxiety is getting really
powerful it's that might be also a form
of resistance trying to get you out of
the meditation so if you open your own
maybe need to open your eyes or to do
that to stabilize right trying to keep
them as close to them as possible and
try to look down don't open don't look
for out because that's very that tends
to be very distracting mark hi mark mark
cliff F I used to integrate things on
purpose external noises so what is the
recommendation for integrating knowing
distractions so another point clear up
until you mean you turn your mindfulness
to the noise and then you sort of pay
attention to how you like how its
unfolding at your experience without you
know commenting on it or judging or
theorizing or emphasizing if that's what
you need mark that's another yet other
practices tend to use that and so for
example sit Spartacus is a good
contemplative practice like that I mean
there's no reason to stop doing that if
you find that you can work it into the
practice on teaching here generally what
the the form of integration here though
is more on training skills in your
destruction that you can then integrate
into the rest of your life so instead of
how do i integrate the content of a
distraction
this practice tends to it has to it
depends to pursue a procedural
integration mainly those skills and the
realization is that I'm training as I
apply the five factors of important
mindfulness to the distraction are
actually going to be applied throughout
my life and so it's in that sense I'm
trying to pursue a much broader kind of
integration I don't see the two actually
being in competition with each other so
maybe you can sort of play with them I
can get them to speak to each other and
so that they gel together and ng Lutie
me I'm very new to this is there a guide
for newbies so the guide for the newbies
are all the lessons because the lessons
the assumption that I began within less
than one is that you you're not doing
any practice so if you go into the
description and you go to all of the
lessons you can work your waste through
all the lessons we've had eight so far
and that will help get you up to speed
I'm currently turning this into a I have
a manual that I wrote revising it that
should be available at some time towards
the end of the summer I think that's
best right now if you're if you're a
newbie just concentrate on the lessons
first if you try to do a lot of
different other learning things it's
initially confusing the opposite is the
case once you've gotten into this
practice and you feel that it's you know
starting to be as the Buddhist tradition
stuff like a self rolling wheel then
reading other things and learning more
Dharma is a very good idea Dimitar many
tips on centering my attitude is it okay
to focus on the breath a few minutes
during centering to get a better sense
of my attitude yes yes that's that's
exactly right
so the centering of the attention is the
primer headlight vehicle as you said
centering on the breath and centering on
the sensations is a way to bring into
more awareness how centered your
attitude is that's exactly right that's
exactly right
excellent question Phillip 86 MIT there
seems to be pressure of concentration in
the forehead related to the eyes how to
work with this so you'd be probably
trying too hard
I I fallen through the same thing and I
noticed that and so one of the things in
the Eightfold Path is right effort the
Buddha told a story and it might
actually be an episode from his in his
own path to enlightenment there's a so
the story goes that he was sitting close
he'd been starving himself and he and he
hears a barge going by there's a
musician on it
teaching his apprentice and the musician
keeps saying you know no no you can't
every strings too tight and you can't
have them to loose you have to get it
there just the right and
and that was part of the realization of
the middle path but that's also
specifically about right effort so again
think about per friend they think about
in a conversation if you get that right
effort if you too passive the
conversation will low if you're too
aggressive right the conversation will
will will break up and it'll get locked
or a break and you have to get that you
have to find that place or in between so
again think of the befriending metaphor
what effort would you bring to bear in
order to enter into a rich and loving
conversation with a friend in order to
cultivate and deepen the friendship
itself and that's the kind of effort you
can bring to bear try to see if that
balancing your effort is reducing the
tightness or detention in your forehead
especially around the middle area
assignment they'll take Hemington a lot
of spiritual practice mentions noticing
everything as if it's happening to
someone else is that a good way to
approach all of this
so initially follow the practice as I
taught you that ability to move what
you've actually wanted you want both
oops
so either bruceman a friend and
colleague of mine a study this is called
the Solomon effect when people can shift
to the third-person perspective on their
own problems they tend to get insight
but you also need the opposite when
people tend to think of a lot of things
that very abstract third personal terms
they tend to not get morally engaged and
that's that's what that's that's a
classic problem of morality so it's not
like again you know first person or
third person is always the right thing
this is why we practice in Metta moving
between them and when we do progeny
you'll be practicing and moving in and
out between sort of first person from
the inside of a third person from the
outside so I would say it's much more
important to think about an awareness of
those two poles of koi tena fication the
first person the third person and
especially developing a kind of
flexibility between them after we're
done the better
Asian contemplation course I'm
considering teaching you some elements
from historic practice that have a lot
more specifically do with to do with
this sort of respectable training Lynne
Slater Harlan it's great to see here
from you I'm finding that I don't know
which things to practice when when to do
meta when to do focus any idea how
frequently to do each so I recommend
initially as a sort of a strict schedule
of one day one set the past nine exit
meta and maybe that's one a day or two a
day like one of the parts the one that
about once one the past no one meta and
then maybe you should always be finding
your core for like that goes without
question and maybe all we set up a bit
of a pasta before you do better but
let's say one session dedicated to the
pasta once I should dedicated to meta
and then perhaps maybe once a week doing
the meditative questioning to really
strengthen the five factors of implying
mindfulness and just stick to that
schedule later on
two weeks from L and I teach you the
project of practice you'll get a psycho
a three way a three cycle of the past
not a meta approach that of a past meta
Praja and then perhaps on the seventh
day doing the meditative question and
then that will give you sort of a
regular schedule so everyone thank you
very much for joining thank you my dear
friend and Technology Omar I should know
that it behind the scenes of Mars often
wrestling with the dinosaur limping god
of Technology are trying to coax it into
effectiveness for us and he's always
behind the scene doing so much I also of
course want to thank my beloved son
Jason who's always there helping but
he's always troubleshooting if something
comes up as well please subscribe to the
channel to be notified on the next video
and you'll also find on that channel all
kinds of videos talking about a lot of
the topics I've mentioned here in depth
may be talking if you're interested I
just mentioned stoicism there's stuff on
stoicism in there you might want to take
a look at the awakening from eating
crisis series or the voices were with
Rififi where I gifted you know we
some really excellent discussion with
people really interested in bridging
between science and spirituality in the
face of the meeting crisis and even more
specifically in the face of the cogut
crisis please invite others to who might
benefit by showing this video as I
mentioned at the beginning when I asked
you to like the video if you can help me
without reach to get as many people I
deeply and sincerely believe that these
these mindfulness and wisdom : wisdom
cultivation practices however there's
good reason to believe this good
evidence of a deep impact on our meaning
making our meaning cultivation and this
is what we need we always need it
because human beings you know man does
not live by bread alone we are meaning
like we live and move and have our being
and meaning but even more so now even
more so now so try to help me to help as
many people get exposed to this as
possible so a reminder that we're doing
this every weekday morning at 9:30 est
Mondays dawn today Tuesday through
Friday are sick days bit of review every
day has Q&A in it please remember
continuity of practice better than just
raw quantity of practice and there is no
enemy worse than your own mind but there
is no ally greater than your own life
thank you very much everyone for your
time and attention take care and I will
see you all tomorrow bye bye