[Music]
hello hello Andrew I just wanted to tell
everybody I'm drinking wine tonight to
see how it affects my podcasting
performance brilliant and it's red wine
and one cousin named in France as on
France yes yeah so whatever we do in our
lives you and I we will definitely grow
together with tons of red wine and goose
liver pat√© no you know all the coast of
Italy in France very there you go could
not be any better what else do you need
yeah Mike alrighty all cited cases
already moved to Tuscany so there you go
uh-huh and you know the better your life
is the darker your books will become you
know when you're when you're you're sad
if you're a songwriter you write happy
songs
don't worry happier write sad songs
that's so fucking true I think is the
same thing for philosophy the funniest
quirk is philosopher met had the dark as
possible philosophy like God like Nick
land for example you know this is sort
of legendary guys in hiding in China
today and it's the acceleration is
delusion all right guy whatever they
call him he's one of the funniest guys
ever mad love to bed uh where's you know
the very serious more dark moody people
usually have a more positive attitude
towards life like analytic philosophers
coming out of the anglo-saxon tradition
light
they're very moody yeah so yeah I'm a
happy guy so there you go I'm gonna
write really fierce tough books how
about you I'm melancholic but by nature
I'm a deeply melancholic person but I
also have a kind of mischievous kind of
playful kind I like to I like to fool
around you're hiding your melancholic
pretty well Andrew really yeah you're
funny you're really sweet funny guy he
this guy for those of you are watching
this is is a great friend to go out and
get drunk with so yes the red wine I
like to go ahead and get drunks yeah I
like I like this a state of intoxication
I I think you left Canada for France and
married a Polish woman it's not like
you're avoiding alcohol right yeah
yeah except she does but anyway yeah all
right so where we at we are we are at
the Garden the City of God and the tower
the garden of God the state of God and
the tower of God these are the
theological names of the utopias were
working on at the moment for the
forthcoming Exodus project you and I are
working on them here anybody who likes
to get involved please do the credits
you richly if you contribute to this
project and I'm writing the book at the
moment you'll set it Chris it's probably
gonna take another three to four years
to finish writing the book but but this
is these these are the names of the
three utopias we are sort of sketching
going forward over say twenty to thirty
thousand years of humanity on this
planet so what I did the other day was
that had a long private soon
conversation with the eminent John for
Viking right we love this guy to bits
don't we write and do you and you're in
a way the bridge between the two of us
and ER because you're like I call you
Tibetan Buddhist I know you don't like
the Tibetan but you know very onna but
is so right no I'm a tension Buddhist
I'm not a Tibetan Buddhist I keep saying
that because cuz I'm not like Richard
Gere you know no I know but that's
that's the Tibetans own the name Tibet
now Richard Gere he's just an American
Buddhist that's different yeah but but
very key I'm going through his videos
with a fine-tooth comb and writing them
trying to digest them in about we cannot
recommend this guy too much like you got
46 or 47 episodes of eminent lectures
and John Farrar keys one of the most
learned men on the planet he's one of
the world's leading cognitive scientist
he's a professor at the University of
Toronto Canada and Toronto is now
officially the capital of brainpower in
North America we agree on that and as
you say even his with besides all of his
credentials he's a sweet guy and you can
yes since your see a person like who
doesn't have a pretentious bone in his
body I think he's a great guy he's a
great guy so he's one of our allies he
also talks open about that he's in
constant conversations with guys like
you
me so um what has happened is that he
John's sort of zoomed in or the fact
that I'm talking about file ignition all
the time but that's why I'm writing and
I'm we all said it fast and you and I
are discussing it here in our soon
conversations but what's happening
Europe is that our Lancaster's punch
it's released a book called what is sex
and she's a very funny Slovenian female
a philosopher and Alenka wrote on the
top of the book she wrote that the
probably the least sexy book you'll ever
read right which is very Slovenian the
very lock on you right then you really
need to read the book right it's a
brilliant book by the way so I recommend
a Lancaster punch of what is sex then
John Sarah Tristan I come along I write
a book called digital libido sex power
and violence in the networked society
and then Sawa Sheikh is released is new
by the way formidable new book flowers
your book is called sex and the failed
absolute where a great friend of ours
Adrian Johnston I think it is Adrian at
least the American professor the
greatest American laconian today has
written the foreword and probably have
Slava put together this book so it's
like it's like a it's like flowers she
shakes philosophy into one book six of
the failed absurd now with um these
three books it looks like the Europeans
are pretty sex-obsessed at the moment
doesn't it hmm yeah okay maybe that is
because the Americans are ignoring the
issue of sexuality all together okay the
way it works is their sexualities like
drive in itself it's fundamental Drive
and the way it works is that it's never
balanced never harmonious you never
reach what you wanted desire escapes you
all the time and the drive is that were
pleased
so sexuality reminds us that the world
is never whole it's never put together
it's always out of joint
this is where salvation can I and all
the Hegelians and Freudians agree right
so that's a European perspective maybe
but it's unavoidable and if you're sort
of an American post Christian or or some
kind of you know light Buddhist or
something to avoid sexuality altogether
you end up looking a bit like a little
boy or little girl dreaming about the
world you're not a really proper
philosopher you can't avoid the topic of
sexuality to begin with like like I said
to John the other days that these
conversations having now we don't hold
for
great when it comes to cognitive science
and computer science and therefore also
the relationship between man and machine
in the future the way we should look
after our kin Hollow what they're doing
right now is that they're pointing out a
cognitive science computer science field
where man and machine collaborations
could be really really powerful expect
North America to deliver on that one so
that's great but when talk of philosophy
like the bigger picture like the grand
narratives and all that they're gonna be
narratives by humans for humans all
they're talking about causes the world
to intelligence as I call it they're not
talking about the world to transcendence
and the world to transcendence like to
transcend it create something better
than what we have or or you know solve
our major problems in the world once and
for all if you want to put it that way
that is the world to transcend is and
that's nothing about the machines
machines don't want anything they're
just basically happy slaves to us
hopefully so we need to think about what
it just means human and what humans
communicate with you must to create a
human narrative here and that's the
content you and I are talking about also
while they're building it containing if
you being a bit nasty of a varakin Hall
I talked about the religion without
religion then I would expect the Chinese
Communist Party to call them soon
because they're actually creating a
perfect container for them as well it's
basically a perfect container for
anybody who wants to fill up a container
with some content so you got to start
talking about the contents over later
and you cannot avoid the content but if
you're going to talk about the content
you cannot avoid three things you cannot
avoid Marx and class analysis you cannot
avoid Nietzsche and power analysis that
includes for coal for example and you
can certainly normal Freud and sexuality
which also means that any system you
sort of create or fantasize about in a
plate honest way will fall apart
instantly because that's the lesson from
Hegel is that bacon is fantasies will
never hold because sexuality will make
sure they're all blown out eventually so
what you can do is temporarily create an
emergent platform of some kind from
which you can achieve greater things
okay now how do you go about doing this
this is where it gets interesting you
and I've talked a lot about the child
the dolt of the god
right ya know when you listen to the
Warka he talks about the child the
Dalton the sage mm-hmm he's creating a
religion without a religions like he
wants to avoid the God word he wouldn't
savoyard any any anything remotely close
to that probably because it has enough
bringing in fundamentalist Christianity
in North America it's a very common
traumatic experience for North American
things well he said in his recent
lecture that he did mind using the word
sacred but he didn't like using the word
like divine or he doesn't like any of
these like yeah you and I love those
personally III III want to speak I want
to use let's say romantic language to
describe things not romantic in a cheesy
sense but poetic language or sure it is
very dry analytical stuff yeah but the
point is here while for VAR can Hall
discuss a religion without religion we
look at the other way around we
basically said we've had religion
without religion for way too long right
we need proper religion what are you
afraid of what are we afraid of God why
are you afraid of religion these are
just words to begin with
what were they originally how them be
defined since then what is the impact on
these words then later and can we go
back to the original etymological
genealogical meaning and could it make
sense to us today okay so what is the
difference between child adult and sage
and child adult and God mm-hmm what is
the difference between those two chains
well sage sages is more of a humanized
notion isn't it yes it's a priest right
okay so maybe there are four maybe we
should combine the two and then you get
child adult priests God mm-hmm okay that
means the child aspires if the phallic
transition has worked at one year of age
as Freud says then the child aspires to
one day be an adult and they should stay
within that realm
that's childhood okay you don't want him
to fear with that if you throw anything
to adulting to the child's world too
early you have pornography
three-year-olds and you have computer
wargames for two-year-olds or whatever
you don't want to do that right so
children are allowed to be children okay
to aspire to become adults the adult can
then according to variety correcting
aspire to become conversation raised
because not to be compensates but to
come to become something similar or
mimic because the sage inspires the
adult to be more independent stronger
you know more responsible you'll be a
bit stronger ducks go from a young
self-obsessed adult towards somebody
caring larger and it was wisdom I would
say a sage sort of dismantles the ego
and also provides encouragement and
difference we would especially today
because we have narcissism as a massive
problem in young people so so the sage
where the priest is the third step now
the priest can aspire for the divine and
this is the interesting thing in any
culture outside of contemporary Western
culture you would be very adamant that
these four steps have to be you have to
go through them so the child cannot
aspire to be sage and the child must
certainly not aspire to be God because
that's when disaster strikes
so the problem though is that while that
is wisdom I would say daddy's historical
wisdom to actually go through those four
stages and look at them separate the
meaning there's something mistaken about
a culture where we believe you have a
direct access to God right because we
don't mm-hmm the priest did we go to the
priest the priest sucks I totally agree
go through the priests it's a gradual
step-by-step you know persons that
that's why sort of individualist
religion freaks people out because
that's what Catholicism as Saints
you know polytheism is essentially just
a recognition that there's a step
between adult and God and that step is
called the priest or the sage so you go
to the priest for the priest talks to
God you talk to the priest and with the
priest dies the priest if it's a great
priest becomes a saint
it's a go-between function right that's
important because otherwise we do not
have a chain that actually explains how
wisdom emerges and where you can find
wisdom
so if Vericut takes a cognitive
scientific
towards Westerly on top of rationality
which in turn is on top of intelligence
that we would probably say no take
intelligence separately and we can then
nurture intelligence immensely with
machines and things but we take
transcendence as the other will and
transcendence is to aspire to get higher
through the hierarchy and reach towards
the divine mm-hmm okay and what two
machines have to do with transcendence
we can lead no they don't we have to do
with the intelligence machines can be ok
ok ok let's go back and see how that
works with Aristotelian Casas so we have
the formal costs we have material cause
through the efficient cost and the final
cost and Aristotle we've all talked a
lot about the return to consolidate is
incredibly important today
now what would those four things be
today we would probably say formal calls
it's architecture of a plan right
drawing what are we gonna do right
formal cost goes into material cost
which is where's the building material
what are we gonna build this from where
where have we dug out the material or or
you know the ideas and everything that
we can build something on right it can
be a book of like a Bible it could be
building like a temple doesn't matter
same principle the third one is
sufficient cause how do you put this to
life wait we throw blood or energy or I
don't trust your water or something
through the system so it becomes a
system that has a flow that goes through
it's a change starts occurring within
the system that's efficient cost for you
now the fourth and last one is final
cost and what the Greeks share with
today's Americans is that they're very
very scared of sexualizing the cosmos so
okay maybe then final cause what pulls
us forward as if it was there already
but basically you throw the idea into
the future and that will then pull you
forward so it's not like there's
something there to pull you there that's
why God is not something that exists the
concept you throw forward and you strive
towards it and because of that you will
walk in the right direction and end up
in the promised land so so if we
sexualize the final cost god forbid we
can
we have two final causes one of them is
the magical final costs the magical
circular religion that you know Buddhism
and Christianity will enjoy that's
called the world's intelligence it's not
surprising Jordan Hall and yon for vodka
are American Buddhists it's not
surprising at all you would expect
Buddhists or sort of post Christian
Christians today to be obsessed with
magical stuff so they would think about
out of something if you just sit
together and have a conversation
something magical will merge out of that
that will solve the problem we'll always
go for solution to problems that are
increased intelligence will solve the
problem so he's become more intelligent
if the Machine stand foster the best out
of us so we become more intuitive you're
moving towards sound Adonis Magdeburg
beautifully called symbiotic
intelligence we're all for this we don't
have a problem with this project this
product is right for cognitive science
it's right for computer science it's
right for the machine learning
professors of the world today you know
anything you explore in terms of
man-machine relationship this is great
stuff that's why I expect that to come
under North America because the
groundwork is down there ready by for
Vark and all these other guys perfect
but the other one is the world -
transcendence
that's the phallic one and that's where
they sort of eerie about our talk about
the final ignition yeah good even
frivolity gets this guy's just like
alright so we'll to transcendence
well machines don't want to transcend
they have no idea what that means they
can't even crack a joke you know they
don't comprehend they're not human so we
human beings are the ones who are left
with the world to transcend and the
world to transcend it's precisely this
hierarchy where the child wants to
become an adult the dog wants to become
more like the sage and the sage
obviously aspired towards the divine
mm-hmm what we did though
what we did though in the West he sat in
the fifth century we split up church and
state and we did so but instead of going
for two religions the phallic in a
magical world like saw asters and
Buddhism you and I for Warka gory
perfect combo Briona Buddhism is even
the merger of the two so harrassed isn't
buddhism phallic religion magical
religion perfectly match each other to
different religions that
compatible they complement each other
the problem with the West was that we
could have gone possible for me
threesome which was the military
religion of the Roman Empire in
Christianity parallel but the Christians
weren't happy with that and also the
Roman Empire only had one Emperor who
was a dictatorship so they went for
Christianity what happened was that the
agnosticism built into Christianity from
st. Augustine lay it out and I meant
there was a conflict between spirit and
body throughout society that means
spirit is owned by church body re
materializes something secular in the
state the problem with that is that you
and I agree that everything should be
religion mmm-hmm static list and I wrote
a book called synthesis and crating God
in the Internet age the first chapter is
called everything is religion and it
says explicitly in a sentence everything
is religion and if it pretends not to be
religion it's either dead hopefully or
dangerous or it's a pseudo religious
ideology to to quote Georgia Virginia
well soon religious really argues are
usually innocent should be actually held
accountable for being religious I think
that's better okay so what happens is
that the West as we know it and I say
the Mediterranean West I include the
Middle East and Europe because they've
traded they be part of the same system
the Abrahamic faiths are very
intertwined to one another it became to
be dominated not by some Jewish
mysticism he came to be dominated by
Ganassi agnostic religion and agnostic
religion has two different ways
Christianity eventually developed into a
church it's separate from the state
constantly fighting with one another
over hegemony in society right whereas
Islam which was run by a were lord
Mohammed one of the best warlords ever
he's one of the best but where does what
are the best warriors ever I mean he
conquered half the world in no time at
all but but becomes the religion itself
it's basically a simplistic childish
simplified versions or Astron ism
what Islam is it was basically built by
persons who wanted to conquer and
override the Persian Empire she was
ruled by so rested mobitz and the
strawberries or asked him islam it then
she was warned by the muslims because
their religions were simple more
militaristic more aggressive and more
short-sighted so they went out and
conquered half the world took the Middle
East that became Islam we were left with
Christianity Europe
- Gnostic religious took over the West
the wars we've had ever since of the
West the conflicts that ever since of
the west are obviously related to the
lack of religion of these systems not
the abundance of it mm-hmm maybe it's
maybe it's the lack of like you say
there are the two to two forces from a
trigger America and the patriarchal
working lack of wisdom wisdom is
religion religion tells you that you
cannot do this when you're 20 and you
cannot do this even when you're 30 you
may be able to do this when you're 40
and if you live 250 then we'll
congratulate you cuz you're ready for it
yeah that is a waste I don't know if a
virginal life stages or something in
there and no no religion gives us the
journey it says that you're born here
you die there road from when you're born
until you die is your journey as a
member of a tribe the tribe is way more
important and you are you'll go through
these different phases your biology will
do this to it certain stages we will
react to that biology in certain ways
and because we've done this for tens of
thousands of years the elders know what
to do with you now
that is nobody ology the original
religion worked like that because we
were basically nomads for hundreds of
thousands of years that was all blowing
up five thousand years ago we created
permanent settlements because you're no
longer moving in the flesh so we started
moving in the ideas and an idea like
Plato's vision of the world could never
have a curtain or nomadic tribe you need
a place like Egypt and you need a boy
Pharaoh's eleven years old it has a
boy's penis and has no idea what it's
like to be fully grown up man have a
grown up man's penis so he has these
fantasies and if yes children what they
fantasize about or they're projecting
onto dolls there
fantasy but gods and goddesses right so
if you tell an 11-year old boy he's an
adult and he has no idea what it means
to be an adult you'll think he's a god
and if you call him a pharaoh he will be
encouraged to be God
you get madness mm-hmm that's why the
pharaohs built pyramids the most useless
constructions ever grown up men built
trade routes
that's use the Silk Route is a total
opposite of the pyramid the Silk Road is
the most wonderful construction humanity
ever made the most sustainable and the
biggest construction room when we need
the trade routes again today more than
ever but we do not need pyramids we
don't just empty monuments they build
they build actual sort of you know
utility into there yeah you and I've
discussed it before whenever we got the
boy who thinks he's a god we get the
Hitler's of the Stalin's and the boy
virus and all the cities of the world
but let me get idiots instead of wisdom
because if the boys told your only boy
and you're not a man yet and one day you
might be a man you might go through this
issue retool you might see something
useful in you and if you don't probably
kill you and throw you out whatever but
you know you must strive for the next
step on the transcendent of the
hierarchy of transcendence basis world
to transcendence and this is where the
father comes in because the phallus is
the symbol or what makes us want to get
higher so the phallus is the symbol
because the the female body tells the
motherly Bartos the majors in the middle
symbolize where we came from and what
supports us so it's a part of our future
it's part of the past and the present
the future is always the found us it's
like makaan would say it is the ultimate
object beti well of Drs let me just say
object but it's the ultimate object of
our desires that we strive for but never
seem to change
mm-hmm so what happens in the West is
that not only do we have the separate
state we didn't get the printing press
with the printing press arise the idea
that if you open a sacred book which are
now affordable you read it then you were
the most clever guy ever and we
encourage Johnson tell some people to
think the third divine alone and we get
individualism which is a religion
obsession says that you are divine and
and in cases Protestantism it is that
you have directx
without effort and you can ask God for
forgiveness at any given time and no
matter what you do like plunder the
earth exploit everything that's there
you can just ask God for forgiveness and
the church will give it to you in return
for some money
that's European Christianity mm-hmm no
wonder we exploited the planet and
plundered everything if you look at it
from the 5th century going forward and
they then the printing press encouraging
individualism and now with the internet
encouraging children to think they're
God's everywhere it's madness because we
get mass infantilization and mass
narcissism and no wisdom mm-hmm it's
madness and America coming out of the
Second World War 1945 and you know the
old Europe was blowing itself apart
Patrick he was lost there was a very
confused mad turkey left in your the
patterns are gone could have blown their
heads out century and and Europe was
left in some confused women and American
soldiers came along America of course
being completely steeped in the culture
of individualism and Protestantism was a
culture completely worshipping youth
yeah no wisdom so we got James Dean and
Marilyn Monroe as the new Saints and
they killed themselves because of it
right they want God's they're just kids
right we projected onto them the divine
right since then we have sexualized the
young thema body and always sexualized
the young male body and we have a
completely over sexualized society
drenched in pornography
you know literal pornography too and now
it's also social pornography and it's
getting desperate to the point of that
like when you're young when you're 20
you're at the peak of your life you must
expose yourself to everybody you're like
the king of the world the queen of the
world which is ridiculous mm-hmm you
know nothing when you're 20 mm-hmm so
this whole movement awards back to
wisdom that was seeing anglo-saxon
cultures England America the UN are
pursuing here in Europe certainly the
same thing is happening in Asia I just
came back from a tour in India they're
looking at the same thing you know the
same things going on in East Asia
this whole returned to what
system is a desperate call for getting
rid of this sort of Americanized Western
Youth worship culture and the idea that
you can instantly have access to God and
instantly have access to wisdom all you
do nothing okay I have a question for
you about that um art and aesthetics and
I wrote that down actually because I was
thinking about that how does that look
like in a in a world that that is you
know doesn't have this American youth
culture dominates anything these days
won't art be what would it would be
participatory probably more and yes
would be what would it look like
tribally produced subcultural produce
definitely we are so sick and tired of
the individual and we don't want artists
that are brands even Banksy's tired of
it right he's tried to be the anti brand
in a funny way probably that's place the
world's greatest artist today because he
just tried to avoid the narcissism that
is so prevalent today I think artists
today are no longer artists they're all
Turks they're no longer individuals or
our geniuses
just like fashion design is over as well
the fashion designer is gone
all these Napoleonic characters are gone
by the way anyway so we're over moving
into the tribal subcultural where teams
of people working with machines create
amazing things like art I would say that
a Netflix series to which produce
today's the first good example that you
first do tons of data on possible
customers out that they'll be interested
in watching and following this the
serious Ukraine and they're creating a
script out of them and you have to
challenge them yeah you have to you have
to have to flatter them it was a
challenge to make them laugh or cry
whatever as you would do with any good
narrative and you put on the performance
on that sort of theatrical States an
epic series yesterday but the Netflix
series are breaking we way more machine
intelligence involved in the old
Hollywood moves were that's why it was a
nail it much better but is there still
that's art that's art that's where we
are to move and I push you back just a
little bit here yeah isn't there still a
kind of like let's say George Marsh
what's his name Martin or something
they're some individual genius usually
behind a great work of art or is that
just an illusion
that's our
there always was an illusion we all we
only made we were told in 19th century
there were geniuses the first part of
this turn
that is a result of critique centered
listen to it you have to understand that
we've lived ingrained in a religion
called Cartesian individualism for the
past 400 years mm-hmm
it became the American religion has
there a singularity sometimes as to
certain people and I don't know
no we're sick of it everything from now
on his teams and collaborations that
return to the gang mmm the tribe the
subcultural cultural output comes from
because you know usually a leader in the
tribe who kind of is that is the the one
that shines the most or whose no okay
that holds shining the most thing is
individuals we can stop looking for the
card in everything mm-hmm give up on the
card it's dead the card is where we
don't want to go and the car today is
already in your spam box the card is
already something the algorithms are
learning to avoid because people hate
the card the last example of the card is
marketing guys who try to force you to
consume their marketing messages and you
just put ad blockers the a blocker is
the perfect metaphor for trying to block
the Cartesian individual from ever
interfering in your life ever again you
don't want them any longer we're tired
of them it was a day it's a dead
religion it's over
so if needs to kill the Protestant god
man one of my mentees Mike annex on
brilliant young Swedish Marxist he said
it just he said what do people believe
Nietzsche was an atheist yet they
haven't even read Nietzsche understood
him no because Nietzsche kills his own
father's Protestant God mm-hmm he
basically leads Christianity from on the
forward to a corrupt Catholicism which
then results in a Protestantism results
and somebody being literate being able
to read the sacred text for themselves
and thereby beginning to believe that
they as individuals have a direct
contact with God identifying with the
Christ figure and it suddenly realizes
this is dead and over this God cannot
survive this is just a god for the meat
this is not a heroic God
so Nietzsche understands to Chris
he's doomed and he was built in into the
religion because it lacked the phallic
Christianity was never a military
religion
let's test Peaks volumes he was never
looking for men it was always religion
about the child and the mother delivery
station the man is crucified I guess is
what you're saying he's not even a man
he's a young youngster do you think
Jesus even was allowed to have sex
before was crucified well if it was that
that would be against st. Augustine so
st. Paul's fantasies to begin with so
obviously these are Gnostics and
Platonists who love Jesus to die as a
virgin
on a cross that means you walk into
Christian Church you see the Virgin Mary
and the Jesus child and then you see the
youngster on the cross with his mother
next to him you see mother son the
father is absent already in Christianity
from the very beginning because the
father has become the state he's outside
of the religion hmm that is the full
Nietzschean take they don't even need
shit dare to make but that's the full
niche and take on the death of God the
death of the individual is Michel
Foucault's great contribution in the
1960's and 1970's
and even said the death of man he said
the death of man is this is just the
complementary product to the death of
God because once God is dead then the
guy who invented that board the
individual the Cartesian individual is
what for coal kills and it kills him by
exposing he as it's sort of Freudian
Jungian character driven by his own sub
consciousness of you know driven by his
own shadows about you know looking for
submission and everything everywhere you
know the way humans really are like for
coal exposes are full on humanity and
there's nothing there to idealize right
so this infantile caricature or email
that comes forward if Orko's work is
then the death of individual now what
we're doing now so dickless not least is
that we're going after the death of the
child god we're going after the idea
that anybody can have instant access to
anything you cannot have instant access
to grace immerses Christianity promise
you Christianity
cheapest fucking religion it's the
McDonald's of religion hey you can do
whatever you like about a fifth lever as
long as you ask these forgiveness you're
fine but no you're not
causes have effects right it's not that
easy come on for God's sake and at least
the muscles and the dues are not that
night but you know no you can't okay
killing the child in in the religion you
know the idea that the child can be you
know somehow um a vessel of the divine
or whatever like a guy Guttenberg
the scary thing we get to work mm-hmm
not about her like the kid didn't scare
about the projections on her is that
projections are being thrown at her or
basically as if she was an older
dominatrix whipping you souls and a
section you should be ashamed there's a
perversion there's a sad America and the
pedophilia which is unique we haven't
had pedophilia culture before anywhere
pedophilia it's a mass spread today in
the West is of course again a result
that children are innocent in an instant
access to grown-up sexuality