[Music]
anyone was intersectional kind of
thinking implanted in their brain they
view me as an absolute monster because I
opposed I fundamentally opposed a
worldview the LA Weekly flat-out told me
I turn right for them cause I was
conservative has had Beyonce sat there
and read like Camille Paglia they refuse
to admit that they control the mediums
of communication the subversiveness in
the current youth movement in
rock'n'roll is anti political be that
the leader of the free world quote quote
you know you have to sort of be able to
understand the world in the history of
the world and philosophy and like I
don't know if he has that ability in
that troubles me my only concern is I
think that when you push people to the
fringes you make them even more extreme
but I don't support revolutions I don't
support I don't I don't want a
revolution I wants to go back the
essence of what I think is cool about
Americans you could beat whoever you
want
 everybody be free live free die
hard right I viewed Sasha Gray as the
kind of feminist that I admired growing
up
she was a free strong she had moxie she
had bravado she had style she had
fashion and view women as women and men
as men and there was a beautiful sword
divided between us the battle of the
sexes was never a bad thing I thought it
was a beautiful part of the human
condition I want to be myself and I want
them to leave me alone I'm not I'm not a
journalist I'm a writer what's up
everybody it's Jack Murphy you're back
on the Jack Murphy live podcast Jack
Murphy live.com follow me on Twitter at
Jack Murphy live get my book Democrat to
the pleura Bowl on amazon.com
today's guest is art Ivana you heard his
clips there in the beginning art is a
very interesting guy with by lines in
the National Review weekly standard
viced playboy Penthouse LA Weekly he's
written all over the place about all
kinds of stuff he's a pop culture expert
music experts political commentator he's
a conservative but not a Trumper we had
a wide-ranging free-flowing conversation
that hit all kinds of stuff that you
guys are interested in I know I enjoyed
myself art is a Twitter badass he is
writing a book about Guns and Roses we
had a million things to talk about today
so you know what I'm just gonna cut this
short I'm just gonna get right to it you
ready here we go guys art Tavano Jack
Murphy live hey everybody I am here with
art Tavano all the way out there in
California and art and I've been trying
to get together for some time now and
it's been great watching and I'm Twitter
he just sort of like exploded on some
onto my Twitter scene I don't know where
you came from or how or why but all of a
sudden you just showed up in my feet and
I was like man this guy this guy's got
it going on and you're gonna go places
on Twitter you've got the right attitude
for it man you've been having fun on
there oh no not really
I hate it it's a passion I just do it
cuz it's you know I don't know I like
reading the news the same stupid I
constantly have to express myself so if
I don't have a byline or a deadline or
like if I'm not writing an article I
have to go on Twitter and basically
write my articles and very shitty
versions it's like a comedians
and a practice session or warm-up
session right well you know I mean if
you if you're a real if you're a real
writer I think I saw you say something
about this about authenticity and an
honesty on Twitter but well let that one
go for now I
you just got to express yourself I mean
if I didn't have I didn't have an
audience I'd still have a diary yeah
that's what it is Twitter is my diary
except the the scary thing is that it's
now being broadcasted to thousands of
people or whatever which i think is
horrifying because you know I don't
filter myself at all I mean I don't say
everything that's on my mind because I
kind of understand we live in a real
world it's not a jungle yeah but I mean
I do kind of just say whatever I'm
thinking at that moment I'll be in line
at Starbucks I'll be on the toilet I'll
be like getting ready to make dinner and
something will just come my head I'll
just say it yeah oftentimes I don't
really think about the consequences but
you know I I don't know I think people
take it too seriously it's a joke it's
like what Ricky Gervais I think said it
said it best for me when you said it's
like a toilet wall in like a public bath
you know that's all it is it's just a
bunch of junk and you're like you have
your giant marker and you're writing
stuff on it and that's it well it's a
it's like tapping into the inner
monologue of everybody in the world and
then throwing our our inside thoughts
all mixed up and holding them out is
like part of your Canon which is what I
don't understand it's like people are
just just going popping off you know and
having like what you feel like are sort
of private conversations with people
especially ones that aren't like the
main tweets but the reply to tweets and
then and then like a month later
someone's gonna dig that up and say it
this was your manifesto and this was
like the embodiment of your entire
ideology and your outlook on life and
this is ya be judged by I think Twitter
like Advanced Search is evil I don't
think use it you should be held
accountable I don't think anybody should
be held accountable for what they say on
Twitter except in the context of like
really extreme serious comments that
like have no sense of humor attached to
them at all and they're completely just
devote devoid of any kind of cheek or
you know satire because right I mean if
you were recorded saying having a
private conversation with your friend
and someone put that on the Internet
every single one of us in this country
every single person would be destroyed I
mean we all say things in private that
are just right Twitter for me is that
some of us are just a little
controlled so some of us Twitter's the
private conversation being broadcasted
to thousands of people yeah it is it's
almost like it's almost like not
everybody should have have the tool and
then the ones that end up being best at
Twitter are the ones that probably
shouldn't be on it at all yeah like I I
know for a fact I mean you know you and
half the people I know probably
eventually we'll all get back oh yeah no
I mean it's okay whatever I mean I'm
just gonna have fun until they they take
me down but I'm cool with Jack Jack
follows me on Twitter and I like him and
I think he's cool and I think and I mean
you jack I mean like Jack Johnson and
he's cool I think I've talked too much
I've chatted with him a few times and
formerly in it I kind of see where he's
going with what he's trying to do and I
don't I don't have the hatred for
Twitter I just personally don't like
social media I find it disgusting I find
Instagram grotesque and vile I find
Facebook to be the most just like I
don't even use Facebook anymore honestly
I have it but I don't use enjoy it and
the only reason it habits because we're
 addicted we're sheep we're
completely we can't we cannot remove the
needle from our arm it's like dangling
there and like we know it's that we know
Facebook is horrible we know it's like
propaganda we know it's like bad for us
we know it's using us to sell product
and it's controlling our minds we're
advertising and it's a horrible place
well why do we consistently use it we
can't get off it nope nope we're all
addicted it's only getting worse
although I have been able to kick the
Facebook thing cousin after a while all
I never got on there was grief from
anybody anyway and so I I just use it to
post pictures of my kids and not even
that anymore I'm like you know what if
you guys don't want to call me at
Christmas he can't see pictures of my
babies either so it
you're lucky because you have like a
family you have kids you have a wife you
have like a social life I have none of
that I just sit there and read and write
and people hate me even more because now
I have no defense I can't be like I'm a
father I'm a loving father I have a son
I've I can't even use that as like it
there's no sympathy for me because
people view me as just like just monster
behind the keyboard all day and I know
it's top I wish having a family
and I got loving home life and some
amazing kids was enough of a buffer to
protect me but it certainly it was like
it was just another avenue for which
people to come after me but like before
we just get sucked down all the rabbit
holes and dude there are so many rabbit
holes that you've got from all the
things we've written about from dave
rubin jordan peterson milo alex jones
sasha grey Guns & Roses
Donald Trump a million billion other
things this art davana is one
accomplished writer and he has been
published and all kinds of names that
you would know like playboy and LA
Weekly and among others that we'll get
to but the thing about you that I wanted
to dig into real quick first was like
your back story because I got turned on
to your Twitter feed and your writing
and your political writing and had no
idea about your backstory until just you
sort of had like a Twitter moment to a
few few weeks ago where where you laid
out sort of your background and and how
you came and the reason I want to get to
this is because you're like an advocate
for like preserving Americana and
conservative small/small see I think
conservativism and so and so I'm very
interested to understand how you came to
that perspective of talking about you
know television shows from the sixties
and the 50s and movies and like and and
masculine identities in pop culture and
I've just been having a like to the two
guests right before you we were just
talking all about masculine identities
and culture and so culture and so
juxtaposed with what I learned about you
in terms of your your back your back
story makes it even more intriguing to
me so why don't you just sort of back up
a little bit and like tell us how you
came to be in this situation I think you
think I think you know what I'm talking
about well you know the interesting
thing is I never write about I've never
done a story about my back my back story
of my history or my personal history I
never I never voided it and the reason
I've avoided is because I didn't seeing
what's happening what's happening is
people are sort of marketing it and
turning it into a brand and turning it
into sort of their identity and they're
using that to get by lines and to either
build sympathy or something or to create
this entire Mirage to defend themselves
against criticism right my identity is
this is Who I am
I'm a you know person of color or
whatever I'm gay I'm trans so in that
sense
can your value for your ear all those
things I'm not all those things right so
and I mean that's the yeah that the
complete package right the social
justice Superman no like but you know
they use it and they and it's grotesque
to me it to me and a person should be
just purely under opinions the way they
formulate their thoughts their work
whatever their work is whether you're
musician a writer a painter I don't care
what you are and that but we don't have
lived in that society anymore so I
avoided it completely I never wrote
about I was asked to write it about it
at playboy I said no I was asked to
write about it at the LA Weekly several
time to said no I never I've never
written about it at all but I'm a from
so much stories is completely wacky I
was I'm an Armenian I was born in Iran
in 1983 during the iran-iraq war it was
crazy their bombs falling in my
neighborhood as I was born from Saddam
Hussein literally we could have been
like I could have not been here just
like that the reason my mom brought me
to the United States fundamentally was
that she loved America she I mean 60s
and 70s Iran was a really westernized
country and it was almost like if you
look at photos of Iran in the 60s and
70s it's a lot like Laurel Canyon right
there's a bunch of hippies there smoking
weed there making music my mom was a
writer as well I never talked about my
mom's history because there's this weird
sort of government thing I can't get
into basically your identity can't like
ever be like I can't talk about her
publicly but she's a writer and she
couldn't be a writer in Iran because of
the government and that's one of the
reasons as well wife we came to the
United States because she wanted to be
able to be a writer and she couldn't do
that over there because she was a woman
and she was a Christian and that was not
okay in Iran that was your basically you
know your second-class citizen but mate
the main reason and was the bombs we
were being bombed by Saddam Hussein he
was literally our lives around the line
and it was like we had no idea the world
was gonna end I think it ended in end
there like a couple years later but I
mean we we fully thought this could have
been that you know the death of us and
our families so my mom left she brought
me to we went to Germany to refugee camp
in home for I think two years and I was
three years old when we made it to the
United States fully legally fully
through the entire refugee process
seeking asylum to the to the Armenian
Church and that was it
United States and that was just the
beginning of my sort of story I think
for me mam really discovering everything
in this country was through the
television set like I was in my room on
only child with a single mom watching TV
all day everyday it's all I did we
didn't have the computer yeah we didn't
have I didn't have any brothers or
sisters or any friends right just you
and your mom it was just me my mom it
was a TV set and a bunch of books Wow
and I've read I read a lot as a kid and
I you know more than I think I you know
should have there read everything and I
had no I wasn't very parented in the
sense that like my mom was so busy
working two jobs she had to pay the
bills she was a writer and she was
working two jobs so she was working two
working class jobs and writing Wow so I
had no time to like be Parenthood I had
none that privilege so for me I parented
myself so I watched I had no censorship
as a child zero I said what I wanted to
say I watched what I wanted to say I
read what I wanted to read and I
discovered everything on my own
completely by myself and that's sort of
formulated my individualistic kind of in
my obsession with sort of individual
agency and the need to protect that and
the need to protect our ability just to
say whatever we want and to be wherever
we want and I think you know and my
political kind of introduction was wacky
because it was really good help it was
TV he was family ties he was watching
Alex Nikitin literally like yeah yeah i
watch the show too I mean I remember
growing up a Thursday nights with family
ties Cosby Show cheers Night Court and
then la la man and you know my mom was
and my mom was a hippie my mom grew up a
hippie in an Iran she was literally
photos my mom you if you look at photos
my mom she looks exactly like the
hippies you see in America so I was
rebelling as well so that as a little
like I think of seven or eight years old
I was watching family ties and emulating
Alex bikini nice to wear a bow tie suit
I was like like I was saving money at
like seven or eight years old because of
that character and yeah that reduced me
to like Reaganomics and fat and sort of
the 80s sort of culture as it as it was
and also WWE I was a big pro wrestling
fan in Tomah if you grew up watching Pro
Wrestling you're a patriotic yeah like
God loved me
kokin man everybody Hulk Hogan versus I
and I
Cheikh I mean it was a it was just the
the manifestation of the Cold War like
an and all at once coming out in
caricature and it was anyways philemon I
was you know maybe indoctrinated in many
ways I don't really care that I loved it
I was all about I was like I wasn't all
about that from day one I collected GI
Joes I took him to a backyard at Baird
and I buried them of in my backyard I'd
set him on fire I you know I grew up in
that world I grew up in a really free
completely free childhood and the older
I got the more I saw like these
restrictions being put on us how you
talk how you dress what you're allowed
to believe what you're not allowed to
believe and I think for me my entire
life has been rejecting that and trying
to go back to the childhood that I saw
as being free and fun and sort of and
really the American dream not you I saw
us yes so it makes me think of a there
was a there was a show on HBO a few
years back where like the opening scene
is like this little kid just sitting on
his sitting like I was gonna say Indian
style am I allowed to say that anymore
is sitting there no what the kids called
now they call crisscross applesauce
really yeah yeah they can't say Indian
style anymore so there was a kid sitting
Joe no no no no they're sitting and he's
sitting indian-style like a little rug
and firm of black and white television
and he's just staring at it there's
nothing else lit up in the room and it's
just the light cast upon him and that
was his he there in the background has
mom and dad or just like sort of walking
back and forth and it's clear that he's
just being raved by the television and
then and then as and then the shows
about him and as an adult and I would
remember the name here but and then
every time something in his life happens
it cuts to like a scene from like
television of the 50s or the 60s or the
70s because that's how he conceptualized
this whole world so it made me want to
ask you a question you had said that
you're sort of free-range latchkey
childhood was part of what built your
independent mindset and I was wondering
if maybe it was the process or was it
that content that you are consuming at
the time because you know that the tone
and tenor of our pop culture has changed
dramatically since the late 80s and
early nineties right right I mean it was
the content it was a big part of that I
mean the 80s were really about sort of
you know the free market and free
expression and just sorta came the
America it sort of started going back to
sort of a corporate
version of the Wild West which I adored
I loved the experience as a child I
didn't know any better I didn't know the
political or economic ramifications of
things that were happening around me
it's only five or six years old but I
think for me the sort of the personality
wasn't just a tea television it was also
like my family my mom was the most
individual dimo sort of free speech she
values free speech so much that she left
her home country to come here
to sort of be able to write I mean again
the big part of the reason was the fact
that we could have died but also the
fact that she really wanted to be a
writer and she couldn't be righter there
it was completely banned right for a
woman to write and publish her work in
that country at that point not being
sort of a sort of a stooge of the
fundamentalist Islamic government was
completely banned so for me it was all
about being able to express yourself and
I had that for my entire life
until I became it ironically I had that
for my entire life until I became a
writer and then I was told to shut up
no I first experienced really my first
sort of experience for that really sure
showed me this this bizarre need for
people the status quo or the elites to
control or kind of dictate that sort of
language you can and can't use was in
high school in the ninth grade
I had my English teacher miss Keane and
I won't say to high school but Miss King
she told us we had a journal and she
would read the journal every day and she
told us to write whatever we want this
is the first time she didn't give us a
topic right this is the first time she
was like you guys just write whatever
you want I'll read it and I'll judge it
purely on your writing that was her that
was her edict or what I've heard her
decree or whatever and so we did it the
assignment we did it what okay so yeah
that was her like and we did it you know
and I did and I wrote it and I wrote it
so I wrote an honest essay about and it
was titled miss Keane as a cancer and I
wrote about how this woman was was
trying to doctorate is really her
personal point of view I wrote about how
I thought she was a horrible teacher and
should not be employed by a high school
I wrote about you know I just I was I
was what 50 out of hold her eat in ninth
grade 15 yeah 15 years old and I was
like I was holding coffee old you know
to me that's how I thought I was
literally that kid right and so I wrote
that and I got expelled
for that for that piece for that I think
loves in the conference room with the
principal the dean miss keen and my mom
and they had the journal and they're
reading the entire thing to my mom and
my mom's face when they're reading this
was just she was completely petrified
she was like it was like she saw her son
turns like a gang member or something it
was like this weird surreal moment but
yeah I was expelled they said that we
need we were gonna have to transfer him
to a different school in that Unified
School District
it wasn't the Los Angeles Unified School
District but so they were gonna transfer
me to a different high school and I
didn't know anybody in that high school
and I was I was completely on 15 years
old leaving all your friends so my mom
spent the next two weeks going there and
basically begging them to let me back in
and they did they let me back in and is
that this is the funny thing I would and
we used to have these tears right cores
in high school so you were part of a
group based on like your academic scores
in junior high right so if you're a good
student who junior high you were like
the elite group and if you're a bad
student and there was literally a I'm
gonna use the word cuz I don't really
care what there was a there was like the
retard Corps right yeah they put me in
that Corps because of this this diary
entry so I spent the next four years in
my high school like life sitting next to
kids who were literally like had
learning disabilities and I'm like and
that's that's what happened to me in
high school welcome all cuz with so I
was deep platformed and sent to like the
gulags of my high school because of an
opinion piece you know that's again I
had I had similar experiences in high
school as well I mean I wrote for my
school newspaper I always wanted to be a
journalist it was like the one thing I
ever wanted to do the only college I
ever wanted to go to was Northwestern
the only thing I ever wanted to study
was journalism and then music and drugs
and girls and got in the way of
that but I wrote for my school newspaper
and I was on the editorial staff and I
wrote a piece called like you know
condoms should be available in the
bathroom or something like that and like
because this was this was before I mean
if you said that today wouldn't even be
that really crazy of an idea but this
was like in the early 90s and like manna
freaked out we got tons of phone calls
and the principal called man to his
office we had this whole big thing but
then but then I got a column in a local
you know those like the local
neighborhood
newspapers where it's nothing but just
like fluff pieces right and local ads
for the you know the
our store and whatnot and totally each
of the kids from the different high
schools all had they put us all in like
one page like nine nine columns each
from the different high schools and
every week we'd write this total fluff
 or we'd fax it in like turn 50
words I'm like you know the cheerleading
team did really well today or whatever
but one day the principal they had
expelled a kid that I knew for having
like two hits of acid on him in school
like he was a straight-a student he was
like the drum major like led the
marching band he was like a great kid
and they expelled him and I wrote
instead of faxing in like oh hey the
cheerleading squad did great this week I
was like you know my principal's a
fascist all the way down the line about
how they are they never should have like
expelled this kid for it's like first
offense for one thing he wasn't selling
it he was a model student otherwise and
holy man I got kicked off the
school newspaper I got fired from that
job there was a huge shitstorm my
parents got called in there and I got
relegated in the same way like I was
persona non grata for like and the rest
of my classes so I just did the
industrial cooperative training where
literally with the same kids you're
talking about where they like train you
unlike how to fill out a job application
and that was like the most rigorous
thing that you did the whole year in
school and then they let you out they
let you out like after the morning just
to go work so that was like those the
end of my high school experience was
like going to school for two hours in
the day and then like getting set free
to go run amok that's amazing I just
ditched constantly I never even went to
high school I barely got out of high
school cuz after that experience I was
so angry I rebelled so bad I would
consistently get suspended I remember
this one time I was walking down I was
walking down the hallway mr. Fox our
Dean at the time people are gonna be
able to triangulate your high school if
you give one more name you know go for
it by the way I actually did a thread a
few when the whole Cavanaugh stuff was
happening I did a thread of every single
bad thing I ever did in high school
and I was completely honest I listed
every dude I listed everything I listed
I was just stuff that if someone ever
does opposition research on me they will
find that stuff yeah and I'll be like I
already said it and you know 2018
October 2018 whatever it's they're all
out there but no mr. Fox would he'd see
piece of trash on the floor he would
just be standing in front of it and even
tell me to pick it up
and to be right under like you'd be like
those horrible movie scenes right like
where the principal's I pick up that
piece of trash and I and I refused and
he's like it's not gonna pick that trash
up you're gonna be suspended and I'm
like well you dropped it it's in front
of you pick it up and then I get
suspended for three days
um because they had it out for me they
knew from the beginning this kid is not
somebody we want to succeed we want to
take him down and this is where again my
point of view about the education system
was formulated like I'm like why the why
the hell would I ever send my kid to a
public school if this is the kind of
people that are running the public
schools I'm gonna choose this my kid
goes to I'm gonna make sure the kid goes
to the school that I want him to go to
period yeah and so that was you know I
saw it was a it was literally a prison
right so right well definitely a prison
of the mind and yeah I tell you the
public school situation hasn't gotten
any better and what I do you know my
guys that I help and break to and talk
about I always tell them it's like look
man you just gotta have a daily dose
because not everybody can homeschool not
everybody can afford public sorry
private school so what they ask me like
what do you what can you do to
counteract what's going on there and I'm
like you just got to give them a daily
dose of dad like everyday dinner you got
to talk about what they talked about at
school give them the counterpoint and
what I've chosen to do is rather than
rather than fill my kids up with ideas
that they should believe or reject I've
tried to just give them like a framework
like well who's saying you know I always
ask who is saying that and why are they
saying and what are their motivations
and my son my son now he's 12 he I can
just I can like just look at him and
he'll go somebody somewheres making
money right dad that's exactly right
that's like the answer as the answer to
pretty much every question you can ask
so you know that situation hasn't gotten
any better but let me ask you did you
did you like parlay your your high
school into like did you go to
journalism school did you like go to
school for writing or anything or you
just started grinding like right
afterwards or how did you you know how
did you get to where you are right now
in terms of your journalism efforts well
I mean I was always writing so I wrote
in high school I kept writing I kept
writing my journal I kept trying to
write for the paper but I couldn't write
for the school paper because they
wouldn't let me write but so in college
I went to UCLA and at UCLA we have at
the daily Bruin which is sort of the
status quo or traditional newspaper and
there was this young guy libertarian I
won't say his name but he launched the
first ever libertarian newspaper at UC a
conservative libertarian newspaper is
called a daily standard I'm excuse me
the Bruins standard Bruins um so it's
sort of a take on the weekly standard
right Bob he relived Mikey yeah yeah he
lot all right well no I like the weekly
standard but anyway that's little debate
this later but anyway so he he launched
the paper and he said hey man were in
class together and we're talking my
Barry Bonds and steroids
and house and the whole debate was I
don't think very bond should be I think
all Barry Bonds as Records should be
wiped off the record books and Babe Ruth
cheer hold all the home run records or
Hank Aaron Cheryl you know all the home
run records right um this is your I
think he's still a great baseball player
I think he should still be in the Hall
of Fame I think he's probably won the
top ten baseball players of all time but
anyway we debated this back before
things like you should write the paper
so I start writing for the Bruins
standard and that's kind of where I
started doing journalism for the first
time like proper researching stories and
submitting it to an editor the paper was
um you know basically extinguished like
two years after I started writing for
them had nothing to do with me but it
was just he could have really maintained
it cuz it was too hard and it was too
unpopular and it was completely was
getting attacked all the time anyway but
after that I was gonna go to journal the
plan was I was a political science major
the plan was to go to law school because
I wanted to my goal was to become the
speechwriter for the president that was
the entire so that was my childhood Alex
peak heating kind of mission
I want the speechwriter for the for a
conservative president that was always
the goal except except I got an
internship at Rogers well I'll just say
the firm's name I got an internship i
rogers & Cowan while I was in at UCLA
and the internship was working for Tom
Cruise's publicist very random
but they paid they paid and then I got a
job through that and I was just like
well I'm getting paid ridiculous amounts
of money for 20 was a 25 25 year old
right I'm just writing some do what I
love I'm writing I'm getting paid a lot
of money I'll just do this for a few
years why should I go into journalism
and just be broke for the rest of my
life so I took the capitalist route
which ultimately was kind of a mistake
believe it or not but I took that route
and I was in public relations
Communications I worked on campaigns I
work for like Nintendo Netflix and
like that for like about four years and
then and but but I was also writing for
blogs during that time and what happened
was that to kind of reconcile the two
what do you want to do you want to do
you want to be a writer or do you want
to be someone who makes a lot of money
so I just went the writer route and I
just chose the non money-making sort of
passion and what I and I just that was
it I always wanted to express myself and
I couldn't express myself in PR I
remember there was this guy name is Ross
Johnson you guys can look him up he was
like the PR guy for Wesley Snipes during
the whole like advice was because you
know you were the kind of person likes
to release information not control it
and in mark we control information and
that was all I needed to hear and I went
and I started releasing information
little did I know now and the funny
thing is little did I know that we've
now been living in a world where like
journalism is all about controlling not
releasing information which is sort of
the tragedy I asked that up being you
know perfectly trained to be journalists
because really it is all just strictly
propaganda which I avoid but I could
detect it really well right I called the
opaque wall of curation that's the way
that they control they control it you
don't see it you can't see it you don't
know what they choose to run or not run
and it's really all about them just
giving you the lens that they want it
that you do have and it's a it's really
one of the things that I've discovered
the most getting into writing and just
sort of circling in the in this network
now which is that man there's the people
know the writers know the journalists
know the editors know the publisher
knows the advertisers know they all know
that the stuff is out there they just
choose not to not to distribute it and I
think that's really fascinating
comparison that you made between the
difference between PR and marketing and
advertisement and my communication
strategy and especially man
communications as a relates a government
officials holy which is control
information and rather than freeing up
information which is which is what you
which is what you're all about man I can
just see it the energy that you've got
like coming right through coming right
through the microphone right it's in my
headphones I mean it you can you can
feel it in your writing and I can
imagine your subjects can feel it too
when you're interviewing them I imagine
you're pretty passionate about it I mean
I saw I've read back
your older profiles that he did of the
the adult film star Sasha grace tell me
how yeah tell me how that came about
because that one was pretty interesting
there's a whole list of interesting
people that you've talked about let's
just start with that one cuz yes
everybody knows her name no one knows
the backstory behind why I did that so
the reason I did that interviewer that
profile was because that this was a
unique time in sort of Los Angeles where
the third wave kind of feminist movement
was taking over journalism in Los
Angeles it really was aggressively had a
stranglehold on pretty much the entire
journalistic sort of you know
environment and for me I viewed Sasha
Grey as the kind of feminist that I
admired growing up not that's not the
fact that she was engaging in
pornography or you know sexualizing
herself had nothing to do with it for me
it was about a woman who took control of
her life decided to be who she wanted to
be ruthlessly and viciously and had no
had zero concerns for what the other
women around her were telling her how
she should behave how she should dress
how she should talk and she was
rejecting third wave feminism by the
mere existence of being sasha grey and
not just that she would talk about it
except she would never talk about it
publicly because she was afraid of the
criticism and she didn't want to talk
about it I mean one of the things I'll
go ahead and say this she had no
interest in going there with me and um
yeah because it wasn't that she was
afraid she just wanted to keep it fun
she wanted to keep it very like engaging
for her fans she didn't want to do a
divisive interview I touch space I took
I talked about feminism with her but I
think that's what she was for me she was
a vehicle to communicate what I thought
was the essence of what I think is cool
about America is you could be whoever
you want everybody be free live
free die hard right and that's who she
was and how and I just reached out to
her and say you want to do a thing for
the LA Weekly and it took about like six
months brilliant to get her to commit
yeah she did want she doesn't do those
like if you look if you look up she did
something for Vice I think after she
does something for Vice you just like
I'm not doing this stuff anymore because
she was she wasn't happy with with the
results and yeah we just hung out we
basically went on a date is what
happened like we just Austin stably was
a date a five or six hour date where I
just hung out with her and asked her
questions about her little private life
and right and it was a cowards turn on
in like in the field kind of kind of
thing and it was great we just went to a
record store and we talked about
politics we talked about Trump we talked
about
feminism Russia she has a bizarre
relationship with the Russians I mean we
talk about all this stuff and it was
just one of the coolest things I've done
yeah do you think that part of the
reason that she shied away from being
overtly political with you was I
understand not wanting it to go out to
her fans like that and be divisive but
at the same time what it strikes me is
that maybe that her feminism was
authentic rather than performative right
like she wasn't acting this way in order
to like send a message she was just
being her yeah and in in doing that that
sent the message itself which to me is
like a much more appealing sort of mode
of behavior which definitely stands in
stark contrast to what I think we see
happening today which is like I don't
even think these crazy feminists the
third or fourth wave feminists even
believe half the that they say
they're just out there sort of living
out this role that they think that
they're meant that they're meant to
perform and they and they like I've seen
I've seen him in up close like in action
like at the Kavanagh hearing protests
for example on up to the Supreme Court
like I went and I was there periscoping
and I was like face-to-face like I
caught like right there and you could
just see that they all feel you they've
been like taken over by like spirits
like I'm not not even exaggerating they
they seem sort of detached from what
they're doing and they're sort of
floating through this experience that
they're having which is this
demonstration of an idea through their
behavior whereas it sounds like Sasha
Grey which makes her even a little bit
cooler my book is like you know being
herself and then letting that sort of
become the politics I guess that's a
fine line to draw but it sounds like
that was a sounds like her a little bit
yeah that's how I always viewed I don't
believe in activism or protesting or
demonstration I'm not against that
people can do it if they want I would
never do it myself and I find it to be
sort of it always leads to to me sort of
a caricature of someone who cares about
things I think it becomes this weird
emotional kind of cathartic experience
for these people and they're not really
getting anything done and I think if
every individual just took it upon
themselves to be what the change they
wanted to see in the world or to be the
feminist they want it to be or be the
whatever the conservative you want to be
and just demonstrate through your own
life and your own actions what you want
the world to
like we'd all be living in a better
place the problem is we have these
people who are obsessed with controlling
the overall sort of voice or tenor or
you know the the culture they live in
and I think Sasha gray to me had no
interest in that she was absolutely
against the third wave she was a free
strong she had moxie she had bravado she
had style she had fashion she was she
was a kind of we have philosophical
discussions that we kind of you know we
talked about fuku and stuff like that we
had differences there but I think she
was a kind of person that admired you
know Barbara Stanwyck or sort of the 30s
and 40s pre-code badass feminist the
woman that I grew up admiring the first
wave the women who were strong and
ruthless and kind of loved and admired
their sexuality and and view women as
women and men as men and there was a
beautiful sort of divide between us I
think you know women knew how to take
advantage of and men knew how to take
advantage of when we both served Josh
did the battle of sexes the battle of
the sexes was never a bad thing I
thought it was a beautiful part of the
human condition but there's this weird
need to get rid of the battle of the
sexes and make us all the same and
monoculture eyes everybody into this one
kind of this like you know it's like
turn us into like the the alloys from HG
Wells's time machine right there all
these like fragile you know no opinions
no point of view no identity people it's
disgusting you know and I'll never be
able to accept that and food for the
Morlocks too right so so you brought man
he brought up a lot of stuff that I had
on my list and I want to talk to you
about some
we can definitely circle back to this
equality of everything thing and one of
the things well talk about right the
second is the you said the battle of the
sexes them women knew and the men knew
it was just sort of the game right and
women knew their power men knew that the
women had that you know whatever
feminine power was they and and
everybody sort of knew the rules of the
game what's what's particularly
dangerous about today I think is that
there's no rules so we don't even know
what the rules of the game are so we
can't even have this like a cooperative
complementary dance where both parties
have a positive outcome instead it's
like this free-for-all sort of anarchic
relationship anarchy dating mating
anarchy
and for me it was I got into writing
about politics and culture from from
writing about relationships it was the
first thing I ever wrote about was like
dating and so like I cuz I got divorced
in 2009 and I was like 33 and I get out
in the dating world I'm like man what
the fuck's going on out here and I you
know I just like had to figure it out
cuz that's just kind of guy I am so I
figured it out and I realized that what
was upsetting the dating market was
upsetting the whole rest of the country
and whole rest of the culture and it's
only it's only systemically gotten worse
I mean in the last 10 years and I and I
feel like I've been vindicated in the
last six months even because like you
know I'm I consider myself to be like a
big strong masculine dude and I'm a
leader and I don't need anybody but
so what I'm saying oh well you know this
feminism thing is really bad for
everybody it sounds kind of whiny after
a while but then but then then they just
convinced me dude just beat the out
of me they hit me over the head with a
2x4 so many times that I finally decide
to accept it that was that's absolutely
the case and there's been a destruction
of our norms and the destruction of our
our dances and our rituals and nobody
know the is going on yeah it is it
is a strong opposition to traditional
values in a way and I think it's too
extreme so this is the thing I'm a
FEMINIST I've always been a feminist my
mom was a feminist I grew up defines
define the word is how you're using it
because I like to say that too and I get
a lotta grief from people for saying
that but define it well here's the thing
we don't need to I mean fundamentally
feminism is the idea that men and women
at least politically and legally are
equal that is to me the the foundation
of it and we need to strive towards that
and we're almost there I think in a lot
of ways I think there are still things
we need to work on this is where I
disagree with some of the extreme
anti-feminists tie people like I guess
the Milo yu-na pelisses of the world
right I do think that there are issues
we need to work through but I think that
I think the the issue that I have with
third the third wave specific and the
second wave is that they chose to define
feminism within their movement and say
that this is how it works it's a
monolithic movement we are the we are
the deciders of what it means and what
it's going to mean and if you don't
follow you know fall in line with us
you're misogynist period you are a
sexist you're women
we're it doesn't matter if you're a man
or woman the Camille Paglia is one my
favorite writers to them yeah I grew up
reader in college and I sort of like
I've always loved her work you know I
disagree with some of her hedonistic
kind of perspective on things
fundamentally I love her right and so to
me they consider her a misogynist they
consider her a problematic person and to
me if you consider Camille Paglia to be
an issue right uh and you were
completely on the other side of the
universe but I try to break bread with
all that I mean I have a lot my last
girlfriend was an extreme anti-feminist
okay
she was um and she was literally at
two-foot like in her mind I don't know
if she was actually a member or go to
protest she would dress like them to
talk about I mean she was just one of
them we'd fight every single day about
it
we fight ruthlessly and viciously and we
ultimately kind of like we can't stay
together for too long because of it but
right I myself as a feminist and no one
ever looked allowed me to view myself as
a feminist which I always found really
weird because I want for men and women
what is the problem I have a different
way of going about it
I believe you should be about
individuals making their own choices and
being strong and being ruthless and
being brave and being independent and
not asking for special privileges but um
you know we're all we're on the same we
all want the same mission we're all in
BO trying to get to the same island
let's just figure out and get there
together but the Third Way was not
willing to play ball they wanted well
you know it's a it's a tough road to hoe
trying to explain how you maybe
anti-feminist but for a woman which is
sort of where I came down and I wrote in
my book Democrats a deplorable there's a
whole section where I like I felt like I
had to virtue signal just a little bit
where I opened up with like okay I
consider myself to be a feminist and the
puggly a pink or type of a sense of the
word which is they use the phrase equity
feminist right which means yes right
everybody should have all the same
rights and then Pinker Pinker Steven
Pinker adds a little bit on the end of
it which says then and I will follow the
data wherever it goes and so like he
leaves open the opportunity to like I
don't understand that there's you know
personality differences between men and
women and men and women have different
hopes and dreams and aspirations I mean
I just had a conversation on Twitter
with somebody that I really like whose I
know definitely gonna listen to his
podcast so you know I love you honey but
she said she said well you know there's
just still not an equal member of
Congress people and I'm a men and women
I'm like you know I'm pretty
sure that like men and women on average
equally don't want to be Congress people
congressman you know in the same the
same capacity it's like I bet more men
wanna be in Congress and women
you know more men wake up in the morning
or like power I want power than women
and like accepting those differences
about a part of being pro female sort of
not the current iteration of feminism
but that's a you know that's a tough
line to draw most most people outside of
our sphere are you know inner circles
and like the people that read us
intimately are not willing to take it
they expend the intellectual capital
necessary to like understand a position
like that which to me from what I'm
sounding or hearing from you sounds like
based in a more of a libertarian
perspective of like yeah you know just
leave me the alone I'll leave you
the alone as long as you're not
hurting anybody else I don't really care
what you do which is sort of where I had
always been growing up yeah but and you
know this is where I saw this is why I
define myself as a feminist the
disagreement I have with a lot of sort
of the anti-feminist is in that sort of
context is I do believe look I don't
believe in the blank slate theory I
don't believe in any of that nonsense
that we're all just sort of like we you
know III but I do fundamentally believe
that there has been over the last you
know I don't know when it comes to sort
of political office or when it comes to
corporate America there has been an
unfortunate when women in this country
young girls in this country have been
historically persuaded to sort of go
into different kinds of more feminine
fields right they've been persuaded into
being women you know staying at home or
working in fields that are not you know
as you said not involving gaining power
or gaining sort of control of society
and the unfortunate thing is I think it
has sort of affected their psychology
and as affected their willingness to
engage in those fields now I think it's
changing I do think that in the last 20
to 30 years that has essentially gone
away I think women are now in power
completely to the point where they can
just feel confident and completely open
was being able to go into stem or
whether it's politics or whether there's
corporate America now in 70s for example
that didn't exist right Margaret
Thatcher wasn't the norm she was the
exception to the norm there weren't a
lot of women who were as strong as bold
and as confident as Margaret Thatcher to
say you to the aristocracy eyes
clawed and to go and just take it over
right there were God God willing there
should have been more women like that in
America we would have had a maybe our
Thatcher instead of our Hillary Clinton
who would have a strong you know strong
patriotic and very sore
strategic minded woman instead of this
this just lost confused terrible
campaigner who just you know everything
she says is about the polls but you know
she really dropped the ball didn't she I
mean she could have realized that
herself a part is a different kind of
politician with different thinking and
different policies and instead she said
basically we're gonna have a term three
for Obama and you should vote for me
because I have a vagina yeah that's what
it was and a sad thing about that was
people fell for it that's what blew my
look offended me the most and this is I
never got a trump supporter I didn't
vote for Trump I didn't even
I've never even the thought of voting
for Trump to me is ridiculous but that
being said that being said I would never
vote it for Hillary Clinton gun to my
head
choose Trump or Clinton I wouldn't have
voted for Hillary I just said shoot me
take me down I don't care I'm not voting
for her because even in a swing state I
mean it's easy to do it in California
not vote for you know yeah but you know
he would you it because you know
effectively the election was decided by
seventy seven thousand votes across Ohio
Wisconsin in Pennsylvania if you didn't
vote while there a no vote was as good a
vote for Hillary in some cases so here's
the thing I have this discussion with PJ
O'Rourke we had all really actually most
of it didn't get included in in the
article but we had this debate cuz he
lived in a swing state um and I don't
live in California I can do a protest
vote
I could not vote it won't make a damn
difference for him it actually made a
difference right in the state that he
lived in that vote for Hillary he voted
for Hillary he's a conservative um he
he's an absolute critic of the Clintons
he's never been a fan he's one of the
most he's like the Hitchens you know the
way Hitchens was he was an aggressive
critic of the Clinton machine but he
voted for Hillary because he thought
that he sat down into risk and basically
risk analysis and he saw that Trump we
need we couldn't predict Trump's
behavior and we could predict Hillary's
and for him the the safety net was I
know what I'm getting with Hillary
Clinton I don't know what I'm getting
with Trump I can get complete chaos with
the thought that is so disappointing
that a guy of his education background
and his understanding of the way that
our
in a structure did not have faith in our
institutions to act as a regulating
function on people acting like a madman
which is exactly what happens to every
single president every single
president says I'm going to do this that
and the other they get into office and
then they're like hum Han I really can't
do I'm in here and the president
doesn't control nearly as much as people
think that they do and the whole thing
is designed to slow people down and to
make it difficult and to and to limit
somebody from acting crazy and like
literally what has he done that's crazy
at this point I mean this foreign policy
has been on point you should get a Nobel
Peace Prize for for the Korean Peninsula
you know maybe the tariffs aren't
working out of the way some people want
to but I'll swear to God and I have a
degree in economics and I work in
finance literally nobody has
talked about the waive tariffs really
work and what the real impact is the
long-term of my economy and it's really
in frustrating to me any hope you'd be
like oh well shits more expensive well
it's way more complicated than that but
anyway I'm disappointed that PGR work
didn't see that the institution's
themselves would be a brake on somebody
acting like an insane person now what
what I couldn't get behind and I don't
want to get too bogged down in this
with Hillary is that that coalition that
Coalition has as part of its membership
people that think that I'm the devil
that actually literally want me to be
eviscerated denuded of power exiled
shamed Sean like like like and not just
covert like overt explicit you know they
want the end of white male power
whatever that is and the way that they
want to go about doing it is by actually
attacking masculinity and it's at which
root of male power and so where the oh I
guess there's no way I can participate
in a coalition like that and any any and
I obviously you didn't either but any
self-respecting man that pulled a
trigger for Hillary was like basically
pulling the trigger for like people to
come you know directly at him and I
never I never really understood yeah I
mean I don't know it's a complicated
thing the cultural aspect of voting for
Hillary versus Trump is a is a very sort
of ugly and murky terrain that I never
try to get into because I've sort of
lost I lost hope in a valid discussion
there but I think the thing for me that
was important and this is why I kind of
sympathy for PJ because you have to look
at it
spective of a conservative right he's a
conservative he well he's a libertarian
conservative but he's at his core you
know as a father and as a man you know
in the position he's and he's a small C
conservative and I think you know
avoiding chaos and avoiding the drastic
serve revolution that Trump was you know
advocating for and the kind of protests
that he was lobbying towards the federal
government and anti-establishment sort
of rhetoric and really is rhetoric I
mean it was extreme and it was
destabilizing I think a lot of the Trump
voters wanted that they wanted sort of
punk-rock president right they wanted a
guy who's gonna go ahead and shake
up and I think you know as for me I
appreciated I appreciated the fact that
he wasn't you know a professional
bullshitter he was a really bad
bullshitter which I thought was
entertaining cuz he just wouldn't that's
what people said he was so honest and he
was so he's the most mean I've said this
on Twitter I think he's the most honest
president we've ever had now that being
said I say that in the context of his
rhetoric not his actual decision-making
or his actual policymaking but I think
he's honest sense that he doesn't know
how to lie really well right back but I
want to push back on this notion that
his rhetoric was somehow out of the
ordinary I mean I have read I have read
stuff about the the turn of the 17th
1700 1800 right around then those
presidential elections and you know the
presidential candidates all had their
own newspapers first of all and then
they would publish in these newspapers
stuff like you know if Alexander
Hamilton wins will be open for negation
in the street and sodomy will become
widespread and this and that and the
other like how much more how much more
you know acerbic and the rhetoric be
then thinking that there's gonna be you
know vote for this president
everybody's gonna be gay right the
parties have changed the country's
change like conservative the Republican
Party for example is not the same
Republican Party was in 1920s right and
the Democratic Party who's done yeah I
mean so I mean everything is changed at
the bit with Goldwater come in and
Goldwater's ideas for the party and then
we had the transition to Reaganism and
and we had a transition that george w
bush's neoconservative i mean the things
the parties and the ideals and the norms
have changed but I think the last would
say 50 years in the context the last 50
to 60 years Donald Trump is certainly
his rhetoric is certainly outside the
norms it's certainly a shocking
folks and I think look to the mag abase
he's he's the president they want the
problem I have with Trump is I think
he's the president for his base I don't
think he understands yet and I don't
think he will I had to hope that he
would because I said you know what my
theory was let him let's let him prove
himself to us don't judge him
immediately give him a year what he does
in a year will you know will foreshadow
what he's gonna do for the rest of his
presidency and what he's shown to me is
an incapability to be the president for
the entire country
and what the problem with him is he
can't seem to every president when
they're asked a question or when they're
attacked or when they're sort of put in
a position where their their decency or
their authority or their common senses
question they either pivot the other
pivot around those kind of criticisms or
they answer it in a way where you know
they cover they're sort of but right
they say in a way where they sit they
get their point across but you certainly
don't create a Sur divisive and angry
and sort of wacky behave like I think
Jim Acosta is a political activist I
think Jim Acosta chibi I don't think you
should be in that in the White House
press corps I mean he should have the
right to be there but I don't think it's
qualified I think he's a he's a
surrogate for the Democratic Party but
that being said when he at when he tries
to troll Trump in those in those
conferences why is Trump completely
taking the bait he's completely
collapsing he's almost like adds his
mental fragility that doesn't allow him
to debate I have a conversation with
somebody without getting emotional and
angry and I think the president United
States to me his main job
he's a spokesperson he's a PR person for
the United States right well you know I
think I think a lot of them the a lot of
the manga base I think right now is
actually not not super thrilled you know
the absence of any meaningful progress
on the wall is one thing and I think
that the absence of any meaningful
progress on the opioid crisis you know
there's some real tangible things that
he promised that could have been
delivered upon that warrant and nobody
nobody voted Donald Trump in office
because they wanted a modest tax cut
then that wasn't anybody's anyone
anybody's agenda and I did his whole
survey like I interviewed well these
were Democrats at Horrible's not not
straight Republicans but you know I
talked to hundreds of people
I got a survey was like 1500 B
with their responses and nobody
not a single one of them in there was
like I'm I want to vote for Donald Trump
so I can get lower taxes there's none of
it you know I art I want to rap this
this part of it up but you know for me
he represented a necessary counterweight
to the forces of identity politics and
radical feminism in a way that they had
taken over our institutions and in for
me I was almost a single-issue voter on
this subject and I was very specifically
attracted to his ability for him to fix
title 9 which I see right as a major
highly leveraged feature of the Obama
administration which has just had this
huge impact on our culture that we don't
even haven't begun to understand just
yet the way that we have like twisted
relationships on campus and made
everybody fearful and afraid and
constantly looking for abuse and
harassment and bias and and and and
using emotional reasoning to justify
behaviors and then appealing to
authority to solve your problems and
it's making it's making kids actually
mentally ill and it's it's putting a
chilling effect on on all the fun six
times people out of college and how they
learn how to how to make relationships
and then those people when they graduate
and then they go into our institutions
the institutions aren't forcing those
kids to change anymore which is what
used to happen right you would show up
as a as a fresh graduate into a known
institution and you would have to change
yourself to meet the norms of the
institution but today the institutions
are falling over themselves in order to
adapt to the norms that these kids are
bringing out of college so what we're
seeing is this model this multiplier
effect that hadn't been in place before
that by a single stroke of
administrative order in 2011 the Dear
Colleague letter that changed title nine
it has it has then trickled all the way
through the economy and all the way
through our institutions and it's
impacted the way Google does their
algorithms it impacts the way Twitter
monitors the communication of the impact
everything and Trump alluded to didn't
make an outright promise for it but
alluded to making changes there and he's
got Betsy DuBose working on that and
they're going through the process the
right way and for me if that gets
taken care of it will be like one of
those unsung victories that nobody
really
that's how powerful it was it for like
ten years later but I I think that that
I think that's gonna be it for me but I
want to come back to something that you
touched on a few times no activism
versus journalism and you said right you
said a that you don't believe in
activism no I don't and then but B but B
Eve also said that you you write your
pieces to get your vision of the world
out there right so is that not sort of a
form of activism you know itself and
then yeah and then what do you think
after that and then what do you think of
the like this new and maybe it's not new
but it seems new to me this new
individual branding of like firebrand
activist journalist you know individuals
in the Twitterverse and the universe and
whatever just like stunting and doing
 so go from there
so what I've said was i I have an
obsessive need almost compulsion to
express myself that's what I do i I have
to tell people how I feel about things
I'm constantly writing on Twitter I'm
constantly talking people on the phone I
have to express my point of view on
things I can't avoid it
that's what I meant I have no filter in
that sense right I don't believe I see
there's difference between being a
person who shares their opinion like
David Foster Wallace for example or
anybody else then being someone wants to
coerce people and want someone who wants
people to change it wants people to
think like them I have no interest in
changing anybody I have no interest in
anybody thinking like me or believing in
me I don't even want followers I don't
care I don't want anybody to follow in
line with my point of view in this world
I want to be myself and I want people to
leave me alone that's what I want so I'm
not an activist I would never go hold
signs I would never go knock on people's
doors and yell at them I would never go
protest I would never March I would
never do any of that unless I felt we
had got to a point society where it was
it was either doing that or we'd be sort
of a victim of a totalitarian state
we're not we've never been at that point
in this country at least not in my
lifetime right maybe it happened it
happened in the sixties certainly I'm
not I'm not against activism and protest
when it's fundamentally necessary to you
know what I think is the advancement of
the human or the human race right yes
you're not a stenographer you're not
just reporting the box scores and
talking about
Don Mattingly went 1 for 3 you're you're
putting your your vision of the world
out there on paper and using your
subjects in order to advance the topics
that you want to talk about in that
right that's absolutely that's absolute
sure but again I don't I said this
numerous times and this is the important
distinction it's on Twitter you can look
it up with your advanced search tool I'm
not I'm not a journalist I'm a writer
and my only reason for being in
journalism it's goods I have to get paid
to be a writer and there's no other way
to do what I do without getting to get a
paycheck that's the only reason I would
not be writing for mainstream media or
even sort of you know whatever blogs or
whatever they are newspapers or
magazines if I didn't need the money I
just be doing it myself
I just be sort of you know whatever I'd
be expressing my own point of view my
own sort of platform of writing books
all day I'm writing a book right now but
the fact of the matter is our bills to
pay and if I can if I can get paid to
run wild on someone else's platform
great that's what my I don't I am NOT a
reporter I don't go on the field and you
know hold microphones in front of the
faces of politicians and ask them
questions about the you know I'm not a
reporter
I have no interest in being a reporter
it's not my job I don't but I but I do
understand the difference between a
journalist and an activist it's pretty
obvious and what I'm seeing happening
right now is we're seeing a lot of
activists we're giving we're giving the
bylines the platforms of journalists
which i think is troubling that's my
right well you know it's interesting I
think today you can if you get your
market and audience big enough you can
actually find people who will be willing
to support you to just run wild all day
you know I told her I'll do leave my
Twitter if anybody ever if I ever get to
the point my life where I'd be like I
mean I think they love the Twitter I
don't know why you hate the Twitter I as
soon as I saw your tweets for the first
time and I started reading them I was
like this guy has got it
it's got Twitter it and you're gonna
blow and you're gonna blow up and you've
gained only you've only gained thousands
of thousands of followers since I've
been since I've been paying attention
and your rate of acceleration in terms
of follower growth is like what faster
than mine and like I imagine it's gonna
keep going because you you've got a
unique voice that's a thing we're all
we're all craving this like authenticity
we're all craving honesty and I look I
know you deleted it do you mind if I say
say they say what the tweet was yeah but
yeah I mean it was like basically
you use that all great writers have a
compulsive urge to be honest and
therefore you can't really be a real
journalist and dude I read that and I
laughed I laughed and I hit like and I
even screen captured it cuz else I call
this is a good one and then you delete
it like before before you don't even hit
the response but you know I understand
it's like it's if probably felt a little
arrogant I'm a writer
you know I rewrite myself constantly I
just I found a better way to expect so I
wrote the tweet again in my own kind of
it's not filtering myself or censoring
my so it's not self censoring at all
it's more like well I thought of a
better way to say that well it's going
to more sort of you know I'm more you
know I read Oscar Wilde all day so
that's the kind of read if you read my
tweets you'll see sort of an Oscar Wilde
sort of tendency to be cheeky and that's
kind of what I'm doing there and that's
kind of where that came from
it's like when you he would do that a
lot I think I think it's awesome but I
got a whole list of the shed to talk
about we're gonna tail off the activism
thing but I wanted to ask you we had
briefly touched on this what did you
think of the Laura Loomer stunt last
week what I think about the stunts
that's such a complicated question I
think that I liked I like the the fact
that she was she got deep platform and
she was able to in this weird bizarre
almost punk-rock way yeah hack her way
back into Twitter yeah 24 hours and
becomes the most talked about topic on
Twitter I admire the sex pistol nosov
that right but I think fundamentally
this is the reality I think
conservatives and libertarians have to
wake up and deal with and this is we're
not going to win this battle Twitter
Facebook Google whatever it is the
social media platforms as of right now
are private companies they have a point
of view just like Steve just like you
know Tim Cook said today they're
curating based on their ideology right
that's just the way it is we're gonna
have to play within their framework or
reject it and leave if you don't like
the fact that you're being controlled or
you're being sort of censored get off
their platform right I get it I
get it the sort of this change right
it's not just the private company it is
the it is the only way we can
communicate to the masses at this point
but you know and so that's sort of where
I thought it would I thought the protest
was ineffective I think again I think
protest and activism in this form are
ineffective they get nothing done I have
actually I have more respect for lower
Loomer than probably anybody in my world
would like me to have or whatever sort
of forgive me for having I think she's
she's an activist okay but I do think
that she goes out there and does dig and
does do reporting that I think is
interesting and I think is brave and I
think she has a lot of guts but I don't
think in terms of the protest
ineffective pointless
I think her wearing the Jewish star on
the david star in her chest was
ridiculous if I was a Jew I'm not a Jew
and I think I thought was a Jew I
probably would have been offended by
that but I think you're sort of you know
you're sort of you're you you're using
it in a way that might have might be
served deemed as being offensive or
cheapening sort of what happened during
the Holocaust from problematic oh yeah I
don't use that word well he's a
I've known I've known Laura for a long
time I knew before I knew her well
before she blew up at all but back when
she was still working at Project Veritas
and she's always had a real hunger for
you know the story and for being an
activist and for she's always had crazy
courage and fearlessness and I and I
completely respect her for that and the
conversation that I want to have about
the protests is sort of separate from
her as a person and sort of stuck it
from her as as a journalist or an
activist or just a new media personality
like more power to her like she's really
been able to get her message out there
and leverage this new technology and
that our new triggers but at the same
time I kind of feel like the protesting
of itself
yeah it may like reflect poorly on on
the rest of the people that are sort of
around in this network and around I'm
not saying here in it I'm just saying
you know I just don't know if it was
effective in terms of changing Minds
like people want people want to quote
you know Robert C aldini and say that
you know like attention is influenced
and people want to talk about like Saul
linski tactics and stuff like that but
but I'm thinking to myself like who mind
was changed about Twitter de platforming
and censorship issues by watching more
Loomer chained herself to the door I'd I
just can't see how any leftist who
didn't already who who had a position
which was anti Lauren
position was like convinced by that and
in fact nobody I think it just made I
think it just sort of dug the hole
little deeper unfortunately yeah nobody
I know and here's a problem out with
sort of the extremist activists like
Laura and I say this to you know I
admire her as well many ways Kenneth
Owens and I know I don't agree with her
positions on a lot of issues but I think
individuals like her I don't compare to
Laura they're different but you know
people like her even Tommy Lehren which
I respect a lot of interviewed her
before and she's you know I consider her
a friend I think she's great but I do
also realize that there's preaching till
their acquired there's preaching to
their fanbase and I think the problem is
it's hard to sort of the way they
communicate their messages it's almost
impossible to get people on the left or
in the middle to even listen to you
you're not gonna get you're not gonna
get them to even their hearts and minds
are completely blocked away from you and
for me what I try to do is I grew up
reading Adam Burke and I grew up reading
sort of I study foreign policy and
diplomacy and for me it's like I don't
believe period in extremism I think
extremism is a disease it's one of the
most horrific aspects of what's
happening under the Trump era I think
Hillary Clinton would have caused it as
well as president I don't think it was
just just Donald Trump I do but I do
think that we were headed there
I don't think Trump I don't even Twitter
president was Trump's decision I think
we're headed towards that I think the
next president whether it's a liberal or
Democrat is going to be a version of
Trump which which horrifies me by the
way but anyway the point the larger
point is I don't think activism works
because activism is extreme I think
diplomacy works I think negotiating
works I think conversations you know I
think sitting down with people that you
don't agree with and having a smart calm
and prudent and conversation that works
I think real journalism works reporting
the facts and letting the letting the
readers decide for themselves where they
stand on the issues and removing the
anxiety the pressure the guilt the meat
the cruelty away from sort of the the
idea of I'm an activist is what I
believe if you don't believe me you're
part of the problem that perspective is
not working anymore you know I don't
know if I necessarily agree with this
position but I do know a lot of people
that would say that trying to use facts
and reason and persuasion and writing
intelligently and
the case and all this is what got
conservativism in the position that it's
in now which is a dwindling majority
down to minority like losing power I
know I know it feels like you know with
Trump in charge but like culturally
conservative ISM is losing there's no
question about that
yeah but Jack but Jack here's the thing
and I've had this discussion with so
many so many of the conservatives that
say the same time the same point of view
it's conservatism is always losing power
that is the sort of modus operandi of
being conservative
throughout history progress is oh I mean
you could rebut Lee and to get the sense
of it in you know any one of his books
or interviews conservatism x' purpose is
never to control or to take over culture
the holding the entire purpose of
conservative ideology for me at least is
to present sort of a barrier to progress
running amok right the idea is that
we're here we're not here to win we're
not here to you know I don't want a
conservative society
I want a society that's dead in the
center because what I want is
conservatives and people like me to
present the opposition to progress
that's absolutely lost control and is
actually running off the rails to
control it to hone it in and create a
society that we can all live in in a
normal and sort of functional and you
know I don't want tradition to be lost
I don't want culture to be lost I don't
want the American or British Way of life
to be completely flattened by
globalization and so I think that but
that to me isn't being a trump supporter
or Maggert to me that is being a
conservative in the sense that we are
you know standing like Buckley said
standing with support sort of the
progress running headlong into a wall
and that's sort of my position on it
it's not I don't want to win I don't
want conservatism to ever win I want
conservatism to prevent liberalism from
destroying society that's an interesting
perspective in that it sort of just
assumes the fact that the progress in
evolution is away from tradition I guess
that's sort of how it is by definition
right and that we're just compelled as a
species to continue a hurt continually
hurdle away from our past and our
traditions I mean is that I know I'm not
as sufficiently read a student of
history to be able to make a Blake in
statement to say like oh well you know
in no culture
has progress not been like the defining
characteristic or evolution or some sort
of careening away from the traditions
that had gotten the culture to where it
was in the first place
but I can certainly say that social
media technology the internet
connectivity etc the democratization of
communication and information etc has
got to be accelerating this sense
whatever progress use I'm using air
quotes here progress and so in some ways
it then requires a more strident
opposition and in order to sort of pull
things back so what is it like for you
to be a conservative with that
perspective in the world of Donald
Trump's Mogga conversion takeover GOP or
what is it like for you sort of living
through this I mean it's hard I've never
I've never been a supporter of Trump I
do
find I am NOT a never Trump er in the
sense that I do think he does do things
and say things that I support sometimes
I'm not completely against the guy I
don't think he's a monster I don't think
as a Nazi or fascist or white
supremacist I think he's a he's a
rhetorical buffoon I think he has
linguistic he has linguistic challenges
needs to work around I think he lacks
the sort of the temperament to be a
leader of the entire country I think
there's a lot of issues and I don't want
to like you know get into the be
negative on Trump on your show but I
don't care man I'm all I'm all about the
opposing ideas yeah if you convinced me
to change my mind that means my life got
better today so go for know I I think
diplomacy is the biggest problem he
doesn't know how to be diplomat he
doesn't know how to negotiate he doesn't
know how any negotiating the business
sense maybe he's great at it because
that's when you have to be sort of a
bull but when it comes to political
negotiations the fact that he knows he
doesn't read I mean he openly admits he
doesn't read to me if you don't read I
haven't no no it's not that I don't you
know the way I wouldn't even be friends
with you much less review respect you in
that regard so yeah I completely
understand that completely people my
family who don't read right I don't hate
the amount of this I don't have any to
contempt for them I don't disrespect
them but you know to be that the leader
of the free world quote unquote you know
you have to sort of be able to
understand the world in the history of
the world and philosophy and and like I
don't know if he has that ability in
that troubles me now that being said god
bless the people around him this is why
I never get angry at Sarah it could be
Sanders or the people that work around
me because those are the people in my
opinion who are sort of keeping the
Trump train there the small see some of
them not all of them some of them are
people that I don't really like or
respect in any way but I think that a
lot of them are keeping the Trump train
from sort of derailing they are the
Conservatives within what I see you as
the magna movement which to me is not a
conservative movement this is where I
think I where I struggle yet I don't
think it is I think it serve a
revolution in its own way but this is
why I don't support I'm not a mag a guy
in the sense that I don't support
revolutions I don't support I don't I
don't want a revolution I want us to go
back I want it I literally want to want
us to turn the clock back that is my
perspective now I don't think it's ever
gonna happen
I think progress is winning yo that's
the rut that's the revolution right now
the revolution is turning the clock back
that would be the revolution well the
problem is we're not gonna win that
battle it's an unwinnable war it's the
same word we're fighting on Twitter we
want Twitter to not let D platform
conserve as well good luck it's gonna
happen see you to happen there's gonna
be a point where anybody who's sort of
extreme on Twitter will be dumped by
Twitter and it's not gonna change and my
thing is if you can't win a battle it's
like it's like the art of war Matt if
you can't win it learn how to adapt man
and we're not gonna we're gonna stop
progress we're not gonna stop this
country from heading towards the world
that a claw Co core test wants now we
can slowly we can slow it down we can
stop it from running amok and becoming a
dangerous totalitarian communist vision
of what they act ultimately want when I
say it's a wrestling match right you got
the left and the right wrestling
continuously in this country and we get
to the middle and that to me is sort of
how this country should be and I think
that's how this country it has been for
a really long time and I think now the
problem is we have left-wing and
right-wing populism and I think to me
the left wing populism is far more
horrific yeah but that being said I mean
populism is a terrible way to run our
country and I hope we don't head towards
that I just got done I just got done
speaking at Evergreen State College in
Olympia Washington and I flew I flew out
there and you know I was expecting to
have a
a lot more pushback the only pushback
that I got actually was a the class was
all day and I was invited to speak in
the morning and then asked to stick
around for the afternoon and just to
participate and the the president of the
college when Bridges was supposed to
come and speak in the afternoon to the
same class and when he found out that I
was there he's like I'm not coming so so
that's so the professor asked me to
leave he's like you know maybe you
should just go cuz he wouldn't want the
guy to come to talk to the class so that
was the only thing I got I got asked it
I got kicked out in order to make that
president feel comfortable but there was
no protest there was no know anything
weird in fact the students were just
wonderful and you know they're all
they're all very very young and very
very lefty and progressive and but
foreverGreen I think that they were they
were really open-minded and one of the
things that we were talking about I was
trying to express to them how you can be
at once a free-market here but also not
an absolute free marketer which is why
we were talking about Twitter and like
how maybe it's time for it to be
regulated like a utility but then I was
also talking about how how we need to
foster our own domestic industry in
order to maintain our strength and
sovereignty as a nation and and they
they kept telling me that I sounded like
I was like just you know advocating for
light industrial policy like maybe we
can incentivize us to move in this one
direction or another dress right right
and and rather than like the hard our
core use of tariffs or taxes or other
things and they kept saying I sounded
like a leftist like like a was the one
they were talking a Grigore for a local
local sufficiency you know local food
sovereignty that's what it was they kept
saying that I sound like a food
sovereignty guy which is like a radical
leftist position that they were
espousing there on campus and so because
you're asking for government regulation
right that's what that's what that's
their position yeah you know that's not
where I was going with it I'm thinking
that we can incentivize our industries
in order to push us in directions that
we want to go you know I think that you
know I don't want to go too deep into
foreign trade and stuff right now but
the we seem to think that China and
Japan and Korea and the rest of the
countries around the world are
in the same framework that we are
they're not they're operating in the
accumulate capital framework right there
basically mercantilist
there they're the ones saving all the
money we're the ones going into debt and
borrowing money and that's that's my
virtue of the way that the system was
set up and so like I think that when I
when I think about populism when I think
about nationalism I think that we need
to stop being beholden to the global of
structures that that are based on the
neoliberal trade policies that came out
of the 90s but then like the other
nations aren't actually participating in
and so they're accumulating capital like
what's the point of trade if you're not
to accumulate capital if what you're
doing all the time is accumulating debt
then something is going wrong and so
they're all like they're all like
picking and heating and clawing at us
whereas we're just sort of you know
going deeper into debt now that's the
kind of populism and nationalism I'm
talking about it's like trying to
reorient our goals right so I think
we're all kind of stuck on this idea
that GDP growth uber alles is like the
only thing that we need to pay attention
to but as we've seen you know the loss
of the Midwest and loss of the
industrial belt and the Pauli's people
that are killing themselves with drugs
and stuff now it's all because we had
this focus on GDP is the only acceptable
metric and GDP per capita who the
cares you take GDP divided by the
population that doesn't tell me anything
right what's it's time for us to start
putting non economic data points as our
goal like human data points like the
life expectancy of huge chunks of our
country's going down every year for the
last couple of years that's insane we
haven't seen anything like this for
almost a century and so we need to start
thinking about us as a human as humans
rather than thinking about as GDP but so
that to me is when I say populist and
that's that's what I'm talking about
well I don't I don't entirely disagree
with you this is where might this is the
only place where I have sympathy with
with sort of Magha moving I don't I
don't the wall we can debate that if you
want I have no sympathy for the magna
movement there I have no sympathy for
and I'm not probing bordure either but I
think yeah you I do agree that you know
as I'm out of tariff or you know an
expert on economics at all
I started foreign policy when I was in
college but I mean for me and that's
what I've always studied but I mean for
me
I miss the idea that America used to
make really good product America used to
make very strong long-lasting cars
refrigerators that were passed down from
generation to generation to generation
and all of a sudden because of freight
costs and globalization and sort of
unfortunate consequences of extremists
and sort of out-of-control free trade we
have these cheap products made in China
China makes garbage and we buy it and we
force it down our throats in our
department stores in our malls and it's
all trash I miss my hate in the USA and
I agree with that I do think there's a
way to get back to that now I'm not an
expert I don't know how to do that so
that's why I don't debate a lot of the
tariff policies and economic
consequences of America first but I
don't but I do that the populism that
have a problem with is the unreal on the
unrealistic propagandistic stuff that
Trump used which is the idea that we
need to go back to coal and sort of fast
this fantasy that you know coal country
is gonna be rebuilt again we're gonna
build coal mines again and they're gonna
mean the engines are gonna be turned on
it it's gonna be back to like no I
talked to like mayor's in coal country
and they're like no it's wind turbines
it's it's over like coal is over and
these are right-wing conservative boys
and girls who grew up with coal miner
parents we're like it's over coal is
over right like a lot since we should
get rid of it completely and destroy an
entire industry immediately that's an
extreme move we should protect some of
these industries slowly and move into
wind turbines and other sort of you know
technologies to create energy but that's
that's a popular is out of a problem
with is when it's propagandistic when
you're coercing people to believe in
things they're they're basically based
in myth right that's my problem cause
your car test doesn't on the Left Trump
does it on the right and I think it's
unhealthy
yeah and it's only gonna get worse with
she'sshe's like Trump to point out man
and on the other side and I follow her
and I resist the urge to like donk on
her whenever she says something stupid
honestly I thought I find her kind of
charming kind of cute and like maybe I'm
a misogynist and an ageist but like you
know the first kind of person that comes
to mind when someone's like we need
to save the country who what do we do oh
yeah we should like send a 2027 it was a
waitress up to Congress let's do it I
don't know it just doesn't strike me as
being super super wise but
I don't know I mean she's definitely an
expert at social media and so I love
watching her from that perspective and
you know to the extent that she's like
giving the America like a peek behind
what it's like to be a freshman
congressman I think that's pretty cool
too I mean the reality is 'm we saw this
with with trump we saw was JFK man if
you're a good-looking smart smart I
think she's intelligent I don't know if
she's politically intelligent but I
think she's intelligent as a human being
and we can measure that differently but
if you're smart good-looking and
ambitious you can pretty much do
anything in this country you can be the
president that United States so that's
there's definite definite attractive
person privilege in the United States
and I tell my guys all the time I'm like
look you know you can't change your face
but you can change your hair and your
clothes and your stature and your
demeanor and the way you walk around and
I was just tweeting about this the other
day like like attractive person well put
together well dressed person privilege
is a real thing man you get better
service you get better treatment you get
more business opportunities people are
friendly to your their open more open to
you you can have more adventures you can
and you can improve your life and you
know a lot of the podcasts they do have
like a self-improvement tip to them you
know so this will be the only time we
talk about that right now it was like
how you can make yourself you can make
yourself better but let's let's move on
you've you've had the opportunity so so
we're gonna go from one extreme with
Laurel maybe this verse isn't on the
other end but Laurel umer being like the
the activist you know I'm sort of
renegade out there who's been banned and
I'm gonna put Dave Rubin sort of and
Jordan Peterson sort of on the other
side of that because I've like when I
first discovered Dave Rubin I was like
woo sweet this is awesome and I love
listen to his stuff and I love his
demeanor and I've met him a number of
times and he's we've talked about me
coming on the show but like that was
right before the whole Jordan Peterson
tour kicked off so he's been just like
crazy busy I think they said they've
been to like 200 cities in the last
seven months or something like that but
right you had a chance to go like hang
out with him pretty extensively and do a
feature at him right so why don't you
tell my guys a little bit about that
like when that was how that process was
what will your takeaways you know what
what didn't make it an article stuff
like that okay yeah I've been talking to
Dave for a while and I've been
wanting to do a story on him for Playboy
and yeah it finally came together he was
in town for a few days and I went there
to spend entire day with him he shot
four episodes that day it was intense he
every time he wasn't shooting I was
asking them questions so I was just
waiting there yeah I was hovering around
I was in the greenroom talking to random
guests they were waiting to go on the
show debating with them and having
conversations with them i sat and i sat
in sort of the Reubens what happened was
the interview most of it happened
exactly like his show we even recorded
the cameras weren't on but it was me
sitting in a chair and him sitting in
that chair the same chair you see when
you watch the Reuben report and we just
talked and debated there's a lot of
debating I think what I try not to do
with profiles and turn it into a debate
because it doesn't read well right so I
mean in an ideal world I would love to
sort of have done an interview with with
Dave where we just mean him back and
forth but you know a profile I thought
was more interesting because then I
could sort of chime in on my opinion of
Dave Rubin and sort of talk about what
he represents in the context of the
society we live in today my only problem
with the criticism that he gets is I
view what credit what criticism lately
that out let's talk about it yeah my
problem with it is I view Dave and I
think they'd sort of agrees with this I
view him as a talk show host in the in a
vein of a Leno or Fallon or Kimmel I
don't view him as a political like
activist or a voice in that world I mean
he is to some extent but I don't view
him that way I have a very solipsistic
view of Dave Rubin and to me it's like
you don't want to watch a show don't
watch a show turn change change a
channel don't engage with this content
if it bothers you if you don't like the
fact that is interviewing people who are
on the right or libertarians or you know
there's some people that I thought that
was a you know some of the some of some
of his interviews I didn't agree with I
told him I didn't like the Stephen
Molyneux interview I thought you know he
needs to push harder on Steven I think
Steven Wong use a charlatan and I think
needs to be called out for some the very
divisive and yeah yeah very divisive and
dangerous things he says nothing like
what he said quietly but I'm not gonna
let that go I mean it was in the article
I mean it's in the article it's it's all
out there I think people should read it
and sort of formulate their own can you
know what I meant but I think the idea
is that some of these ideas are
extremist liberties an extremist
libertarian yeah I he's a purist
libertarian I'm against is why I'm a
conservative libertarian because I think
curious libertarianism is fundamentally
unrealistic and dangerous I think the
idea that the foot
and his belief that he sort of feeds his
followers that the government is sort of
out to get everybody and his sort of
paranoid belief system the idea that for
example eight he believes you know that
was separate he doesn't word it exactly
as such but and I'm not gonna go into
this exact verbage but the idea we
should separate from individuals or
family members or friends who don't sort
of a spouse or political beliefs or
we're not in line with our moral sort of
belief system I think is really really
extreme and damaging I think the idea
that you should not be associated or
live with or sort of find love a
relationship with individuals that are
fundamentally against your point of view
is disgusting I think he is he's an
social justice warrior on the farthest
extreme of the sort of the right and I
think that's him he's a problem and I
think Dave Rubin is this to me Dave
Reubens a centrist to me well I don't I
don't think he is the most people but to
me cuz he should have pushed back he
should have been Steven what are you
talking about you're crazy you know Dave
and Joe Rogan did that Joe Rogan did a
fundamentally wonderful job at
dissecting and exposing Molyneux and
Malin you walked away from Joe Rogan I
think 50 50 % less potent as a speaker
because he was exposed I think it's by
the way I think Molly is really
intelligent I think he has some good
points I don't think he's a monster or
white supremacist or a fascist so I'm
just kind of I just disagree
with his political point of view but you
know Dave Dave's a centrist man Dave's a
good guy the sweet guy's a mensch
I mean you I think he's a darling and I
think he deserves a lot less kritis mean
he's he's being attacked constantly by
these people like um you know on the
sort of socialist YouTube world I'm not
gonna even say their name because I
don't think they deserve to be sort of
publicized in any way but they're
constantly cutting videos on them 24
hours a day you will see videos by
certain people who were named in the
article core just doing videos on why
Dave Reubens this or what neighborhood
was that leave who cares
like talk-show host he's interviewing
people like just well they can't they
care because he's got power and reach
and influence now right and they gotta
try to diminish it and chip away at it
and make him less effective this is the
biggest problem I have with the current
sort of left and their approach to media
as this hit campaign this hit piece sort
of approach to everything it's like if
you don't like somebody let's take him
down
if we don't think somebody is a good a
good influence for society let's DP
platform then let's let's completely
erase them from existence and they're
trying to de they're trying aggressively
to do that with Dave I think it's
disgusting it's unfortunate I wrote a
fair piece on Dave I showed both sides I
think in many ways I got see what
happened with my story I'm Milo yeah I
did story on Dave and do story on I
didn't interview Tommy Larry in every
single one of those those three pieces I
got emails and messages from people who
are like oh you're you're writing a
fluff piece and then I got the other
side of oh it's a hit piece there's a
hit piece on Milo or no you're like
kissing Milo's ass oh no you're like
you're no one can decide what I'm doing
and that's my goal with my with my
profile is I don't want you to know my
point I don't want you to know where I'm
going with this
I want you to decide I want I want to
create an environment with the profile
right I sort of show my point of view
and you decide what you think about him
and I think Dave Rubin is a nice guy I
think his talk show host I think it's a
hell of an interviewer he's a hard
worker I think do you think that I was
gonna say do you think he lets people
skate I think he it's not no I don't
think he lets people escape with like
getting away with things I think that's
his style his style is we talked I
talked about this
he listens to like free jazz he listens
he's a very smooth guy and it sounds
sort of funny but he really is like a
Leno
he's not gonna confront you he's not
that kind of guy he's not even my Larry
King you think even Larry let me Larry
King all of Larry King's entire career
all he got was criticism for not pushing
back I mean his entire profile is Larry
King never ask hard questions right and
I think that's what that's the Aruban
he's smooth he wants to create a
comforting environment where he allows
his guests to open up as much as
possible and in that environment I think
he hopes for some illumination into the
psychology of his guests that's what
he's trying to accomplish and to me
that's profound and cool and I think I
support that I don't do that I
challenged my interviewers my subjects
but and that's just me I'm more I'm a
little more I'm a little more of a sort
of pugilist today I think Dave is like
Miles Davis or something
plays if he plays the horn he's smooth
and he and actually I didn't Dave gets
more other guys like Ben Shapiro if i
sat down with deaf Ben Shapiro and I
interviewed Ben Shapiro it would be a
yelling match it would be be an ugly
sort of even we would probably never get
anywhere productive I think Dave got
more out of than Shapiro on the gay cake
issue then I think those people have got
there's an interesting sort of artistic
viewpoint on on criticism coming from
the the author or the narrator's
perspective and I think that Dave Rubin
personally I like him quite a bit I
think I'd have fun hanging out with him
and you know I I'm only sort of have mad
respect for what he's been able to
accomplish over the last few years and
he's been a really powerful and positive
force I think in our discourse but I
mean I was he has a style where he sort
of just lets the words speak for
themselves the the his interviewees and
it makes me think of when I saw wolf of
wolf of wall street martin scorsese
write about about that guy on and New
York who just scammed everybody and
there was no at the end of the movie I
was like oh I can't tell if Martin
Scorsese thinks this guy was a good guy
or a bad guy like he didn't pass any
judgment and I was like I wanted it for
some reason which is not my style
usually but like I wanted some sort of
like moralizing to come out of the come
out of the movie and and instead he just
sort of presented it and allowed you to
make your own decision and I think that
Dave Rubin does does that to some degree
and I also I also think there's maybe a
couple more questions he could ask but I
mean man it's a dance it's like
hey yo you need people to come on your
show to have a show and people aren't
gonna come out on your show if you're
gonna be an asshole it's not like it's
not like you've got 50 million people
and they need they need to be on your
show
you know he's powerful and he has
influence but he still has to like be
friendly with people and I think he is
and I think he's uncomfortable for
people because no one's ever seen what
he what he's doing he's doing a
traditional talk show aesthetically it
looks like it's something you see on
ESPN right it looks pretty it's well
shot it's it's well lit but he's
interviewing these people who are
usually not in that environment you
don't look for a liberal right for
further explain like an evergreen
student to see Milo you novelists right
sitting there being milo innopolis in
this environment is shocking no no the
Milo should be like where we are right
now right like it's like on your
laptop talking through a little
microphone like they don't want him in
that like oh my god a studio environment
well you know this is gonna be on
daytime TV now like it shocks it scares
the out of the left when they see
that and I think that he with his direct
messages yeah sort of
he gets political in his direct messages
but then he almost doesn't during the
interview and I think that juxtaposition
for meas television right I'm like whoa
it's a TV show if I don't want to watch
it I won't watch it I'm done but we need
that juxtaposition horrifies and
terrifies and sort of makes liberals
feel very uncomfortable because they see
it as they see that sort of this like
weird he's walking the fine line between
propaganda and entertainment for them I
don't think yes I don't think he's
propagandistic at all he's not trying to
converse anybody but I do think that he
is you know it's a complicated format no
one's ever seen the show before has
there ever been a show like before no
never exists I don't think so especially
especially it's such long form too I
mean holy cows sometimes they go for
hours nobody watches to the left they
don't watch these interviews they just
get the snippets that some idiot dropped
on the internet and they're like oh my
god he didn't push back on Milo when he
said something about like you know
whatever it was but he's like push back
like 80% like 60 60 70 % that Milo
interview was a really productive and
interesting conversation there are
moments where it was bad and those
moments were the only things we ever saw
right so that's that's the sad sort of
byproduct of the Internet
yeah so uh what do you think I didn't
get to the Milo piece but when was that
and what do you what do you think about
the recent happenings with him because
you know I remember 2015 Milo exploding
onto this at least to me exploded onto
my scene and I first became aware of him
and
I loved his energy I loved the I look I
like being provoked you know and I
thought it was provocative and I thought
it was interesting I went and saw him
speak you know I've met him a few times
and you know I think he sort of he's
sort of lost the plot in a big way but
you know and and then the money things
and then you know apparently he owes
people millions of dollars and I've met
people that he owes money to personally
that have done work for him and that he
didn't pay and then he goes around like
flashing these like $10,000 you know
lunch receipts and whatever and and so
my question to you is like how what what
you know do you think that's good I'm
just kidding what my questions my
question to you is is a is to what
extent has his social media de
platforming like been been a negative to
his power do you think he has any
influence how has he been able to cope
outside of the Twitter banning or what
do you see for the future there or does
he have relevance is Milo still relevant
how self question I think that Milo with
his cult following is always gonna be
relevant in that world I don't think I
think he sort of detached himself and
has been sort of forcibly removed from
any sort of pipeline to the mainstream I
think if he ever is exposed or talked
about in the mainstream now it's purely
to just remind people of you know that
he's you know a white supremacist or a
Nazi which he's not he's none of those
things I spent I spent two weeks on a
know over a month probably on and off
with Milo I was in Miami I stayed in the
mansion for five or six days I think I
spent days with him in Los Angeles and I
spend days with them in New York I spent
a lot of time with Milo and we weren't
like friends but I talked to him
consistently for about a few months all
the things people say about him are
really hard to so for me to compromise
or sort of reconcile because I know the
guy versus the the character he plays on
TV right great and I and I think that
into my piece I said that he's playing
he's playing a character the real Miley
innopolis is really hard to know it's
almost impossible to know it's like
Oscar Wilde we don't know the real Oscar
while we only know Oscar Wilde
wanted us to know he wore many masks and
I think Milo wears many masks I think
the biggest problem with that is the
world we live in now people are like you
said a craving authenticity excuse me
they're craving they're craving an
honest voice and I think Milo was so
sort of playing this bizarre heavy-metal
conservative kind of character the sex
pistol that I think he lost himself in
the character is very pro wrestling
right it's like he played the gimmick so
hard that he became the gimmick mom and
I think that he lost himself in that in
that shuffle but I think he's a really
intelligent guy I think at his core deep
down inside good guy he was a gentleman
he was gentleman to me the entire time I
was there every interaction I've ever
had with him he was nothing but a
gentleman to me so I went on one don't
have any problems the guy never treated
me bad never insulted me
never did I mean he did sort of he did
sort of I don't know there were things
that I thought were sort of weird
whatever the way you treat a journalist
or a reporter but I think that's his own
that's his own prerogative but I think
that he's a sweet guy he you know he was
a sweet guy to me I don't know what he
is in real life but my only concern is I
think that when you push people to the
fringes the way we have when you isolate
them when you get rid of their you know
Twitter you get rid of your YouTube
channel you get rid of their platforms
to communicate you make them even more
extreme you so radicalize them to even
more fundamentally dangerous level and I
think the problem is what worries me is
people like Milo the more we create
those kind of people that we push away
the more they'll kind of come together
and the Morrie's is the day when like 40
or 50 different models come together and
they mask the following and create sort
of their own little they're all a little
monster right they become a Frankenstein
that we don't want it we're creating
Frankenstein's and I think we don't know
what's gonna happen in the future and it
scares me yeah yeah the interesting you
know he the Bill Maher interview I
thought was his chance to really it was
like a test it was like if he did well
yeah if he did well on that the doors
were gonna open to him right but he
didn't I think he really that one
up I feel like he was like it looked
like he was on drugs
he didn't dress the part he didn't act
the part even though Bill Maher kind of
enjoyed him while he was on the show I
felt like it was just a missed
opportunity for Milo
- you know you just maybe maybe just
dial it from like a 12 to like a nine
point nine you know like still be able
to make make a headway into into a
broader audience with that and to garner
more influence honestly I don't know or
hear anything about Milo except for
occasionally when he does something
stupid bike post a $10,000 lunch receipt
when he owes people millions of dollars
including including people that donated
to like a white boy college fund people
that donated to I remember that bought
tickets to go to his show and Australia
and that also people that actually did
did work for him like people don't
realize that Milo Milo I don't know to
the said like the what percentages are
but he he had ghost riders and he had
people that wrote a lot of stuff for him
and wrote a lot of pieces and you know
like I don't have the super details that
I can divulge on that but you know it
just strikes me as just shooting
yourself in the foot so I just wonder I
wonder where he is gonna go and you know
Milo Milo will fate trump trump 1.0 will
fade there will be a trump 2.0 there
will be a Milo 2.0 and you and you said
it like we don't know what's happening
like the social media scene is just such
a wild wild west you have no idea people
people come out of nowhere and then they
amass power and throughout through the
independent followers and as they learn
how to monetize those those followings
and then they become independently
crowd-sourced and unrolled into anybody
and men I mean that's the model I'm
following and I read and I love it I
mean it is empowering it's beautiful
it's it's democracy it's why I
think what people dreamed of when the
internet first was story breaking out
yep but at the same time like the people
that built the and modern now and
control it now they hate what's happened
to the Internet they hate they hate the
fact that it has created individual
voices and has empowered individuals and
you know you met you brought it up but
what do you think about what do you
think about this Tim Cook statement that
it's he used religious terms he says the
CEO of Apple says it would be a sin to
not deep platform voices of hate
to those people you have no place on our
platform and we're like coming for you
basically this is an announcement he
made yesterday what do you make a - it
was a few issues I had with us first of
all he said that he said the technology
should have a point of view I completely
disagree I think technology should be a
platform or a tool for anyone to use
however there's a hammer have a
point of view yeah it's ridiculous I
think that sense he says that Apple's
gonna curate technology based on their
point of view well Apple needs to be
very what needs to happen is a police to
release a memo or a document outlining
their point of view distinctly and
clearly and say it say exactly what they
stand for and then will understand what
they are and then I will get rid of my
I'll get rid of my iPhone if that's the
case I'm a good disagree I don't care my
only issue is the idea is that they get
to decide and again it's not we all
agree you and I agree if you're being if
you're actually actually consistently
you know professing or selling hate or
political violence or extreme cruelty
yeah you should be banned off the
platforms yeah if I'm on there and I'm
saying hey everyone you know hey guys
I'm all my followers 10,000 followers I
want you guys to get weapons and I want
you guys to rush Tucker Carlson's house
and I want you to burn his
property down yeah I should be off the
internet that's a disgusting vile and
protet Volger human being so but who's
deciding would hate speech is I mean you
know if I say something long lines up
for example if I say that I don't
believe in sort of the political value
systems of the third wave feminists well
that might be hate speech - a third wave
feminist right so if they report me I
get the platform for that who who
decides what hate speech of violence
that's the problem I have and there's no
clear sort of boundaries of what they
believe is violence political violence
or hate speech or whatever so has a
libertarian conservative do you what do
you think about government regulation of
both Twitter or Facebook and Google yes
apples a whole different thing right
that's that Apple - not yeah I mean
that's yeah I don't think there's me
regulation of product like people who
create physical products right so if
they're creating I mean there should be
right to some if there always is but
right I don't know Apple's a unique
situation but Twitter I think Twitter
specifically I think Facebook and I
think Google and I think
instagrams now I think and this is where
my conservative sidekicks and that sort
of you know is an opposition to my
libertarian kind of impulse right my egg
I think there should be regulation I do
think there the government at this point
needs to step in I think that yeah like
like a utility or even or even just you
know in a sense I think there used to be
some sort of there needs to be
congressional hearings to figure out how
we're going to use these platforms and
these tools in a way where it's fair to
everybody that's all we want we want
equality we want fairness real equality
not sort of giving the platforms and
they're sort of you know the head
honchos and their major Dumbo's at the
top to be able to decide exactly what
they think is right or wrong I do think
you know like I said I've chatted with
chap Jack before it I think he's trying
to do the right thing but again he's not
the decision maker between you know he
can't decide who gets ban and who
doesn't at all times he's not the final
call I think most transparency I want to
know exactly who's making these
decisions I want to know exactly how
they're making these decisions and I
want to know exactly what their their
exact guidelines are of what is
constitutes you know problematic speech
or whatever it is they need to be more
clear and the government needs to get
involved because at this point these
companies are running amok like the only
way someone could communicate as a
journalist other than being in a website
or a magazine at this point is
Twitter yeah its Twitter like I'm sorry
like that's it like I I don't delete my
Twitter because it's the only way to
communicate at this point with sort of a
mass following other than getting
published I mean right so that's not
just a platform anymore it's a it's it's
a it's like a telephone right that's
where at that point so I think we need
government regulation here is it Adam
Smith even when he wrote wealth of
nations wasn't contemplating technology
that would be so powerful and persuasive
that it literally like reaches into
everybody's brains and connects our
synapses through our thumbs and
Technology and the internet like write
this this Twitter Twitter and Facebook
Google even Apple and apples apples you
know curation and censorship power comes
and who they let on their their App
Store right and that's math right so you
know no one was contemplating these
things no one could even conceive of
these things and it's reached a
existential is probably too big of a
word but you know somewhere on that
spectrum it's reached it's come to the
to the point where we all need to sit
down have a talk and try to figure out
what's going on and you know I
anticipate being kicked off of Twitter
at some point and part of me thinks that
some people are were supporting Laurel
Umar's antics because she takes the heat
off of them and like continues to be
sort of a wild card so that you know
they're not next on the chopping block
which I find to be a very cynical way of
doing things but yeah but uh I I'm
constantly I'm asking my guys on Twitter
enough to sign up for my email list
because that's like gonna be the will
the last bastion of of independent
thinking is me being able to email
people directly you know and I can't
stop that they can't stop that yeah I
don't know no not yet yeah well you know
I mean there's there's been websites
that have been you know D registry
registered if that's a word or like they
can't host their domain places you know
eventually I mean I don't know what you
know about me personally but dude I got
dachshund fired to start having
political beliefs like I had a really
nice job that I believed in and I was
doing good work and and and I got fired
because of specific specifically for
criticizing feminism and questioning
sanctuary cities and so I'm like really
to tune into this stuff because they've
already taken away my ability to to earn
a six-figure career and to and to do
that what I had worked for for ten years
and so when I see see this I think okay
well yeah I'll get banned from Twitter
but then you know eventually they're
gonna also you know did you know banned
me from some books on Amazon or PayPal
is not gonna let me use their payment
processing system or you know Verizon
one day is gonna be like oh we're not
allowed to have the internet either and
and then you can just be I could be
sitting here in my house in downtown
Washington DC but yet like not exist and
that's a yeah that's a power that's a
power that a private company shouldn't
have well here's the thing and I I'm not
as internet as you are right
quote-unquote Internet I'm not as sort
of I don't monetize I'm not as sort of
involved in that world but in my world
in journalism and sort of working for
magazines and publications I've been D
platform several times I've had you know
I'll just say this I've never said this
really publicly but it's not it's not
really secret the LA Weekly flat-out
told
I couldn't write for them because I was
conservative just flat-out home it
wasn't even like it wasn't even a it
wasn't even like a ghosting it was like
hey we can't write first anymore you're
conservative so that was the end so I
walked away from them I've had issues
with other magazines and platforms
who've done the same thing who've you
know deep platformed articles or killed
pieces or whatever it may be I mean I
experience it on a daily basis it's
really it's becoming almost impossible
for someone like me because and the
thing about me is the conservatives at
times sort of Magha conservatives at
least view me as being too you know
centrist or to the left maybe on some
issues and then the Liberals will never
even allow me to exist they refuse to
even allow me to have any sort of access
to their platform so I'm in this unique
situation where both sides kind of hate
me yeah I mean dude you're you right you
have such a clarity of voice and you
write with such strength and eviction
and I love it and I love I love your
style but your ie your political ideas
your your perspective like it's not
radical no it's not radical at all it's
yeah I don't view it as radical but you
know what people it's all perspective
you know when I have conversations with
third wave feminists or intersect really
extreme sort of Anita sarkeesian level
intersectional feminist high people or
really intersexual anyone was
intersectional kind of thinking oh yeah
implanted in their brain they view me as
an absolute monster because I oppose
fundamentally opposed a worldview yeah
you know I do again I will say this over
and over again men and women are
different
you could be there's a great book
mapping of the mind that I've been
reading over and over again for the last
couple of years and if you read that
book you'll fully understand PSA's in
sort of the brain of a male and a female
boy and a girl and their differences in
how hormones affect that Brandon and
we're different we're fundament like
it's like Pinker says we're different
from the waist down and the end the neck
up yeah you know and that that kind of
stuff to me is not a debate that's a
radical notion for the people that you
work for in LA and work for California
huh it's it's not only radical it'll get
you D platform you'll get kicked UPS
isn't kick up kicked off the internet
right but you know for me and my point
of view on feminism you read the article
that I that I that got killed right had
the magazine out won't name so that
article was killed because it made an
intern an intersectional trans intern
feel extremely unsafe
now to me there's nothing in that
article definitely one sentence maybe
that has something to do with gender I
don't I don't talk about gender and
she'll like that I don't care I'm not
interested in it like let trans people
have the same rights we have I don't
care let them let let them you know they
are my position on them is if they want
me to you know refer to them in certain
pronouns or whatever I will out of
kindness because I think they are
suffering from a disproportionate
suicide rate and I don't want I don't
want to be the cost for anyone else's
misery or you know potentially someone
if someone's horrific serve end and so
be kind to them but whatever but to me
it's like if you're gonna sit there and
tell me to view biology and science from
a perspective of Fanta cysts and a myth
and not gonna happen so that's never
gonna happen and I think the article
communicates that to some extent and a
trans intern and a magazine
raise their hand and complain and so we
don't I don't want our two vana to write
here if it makes me feel unsafe and that
was it my article was killed that's and
that's what's scary to me is that now
it's not about you know editors or
publishers now it's about you have
Twitter following you have an Instagram
following and your intersectional
feminist you can destroy and bring a
magazine to their knees right I think
yes so you you live firsthand what I was
talking about before which was how the
institutions are bending to meet the
needs of the newcomers that the fresh
recruits and their institutions instead
of the other way around okay around
right like we never used to let 22 year
old kids dictate what major corporation
was going to do and now the major
corporations are turning around and
bending over backwards in order to
satisfy this radical thinking that's
coming fresh out of college and for the
life of me I cannot understand
that is it profit or is it profit driven
are they making more money off of it
Alec Colin Kapernick making them much
money I have no idea I can't understand
why you know I'm a little bit I can
understand I mean like you know 50 60 70
years ago like you know if you said that
women should be able to open that
checking account and you know get a job
and go to college and do whatever she
wants you know maybe some people
disagreed with you so you know that that
was a righteous fight worth having and I
feel like it's just this momentum it
a freight train that goes rolling down a
hill but the stop was like halfway and
 it was supposed to stop there but
instead it's just picking up steam and
it's just cruising down the sill and
it's about right and it just
take everyone out at the bottom of the
at the bottom of the mountain and we
can't stop it because it started off
righteously and has now turned to
corrupt and evil like I said that's that
to me is the role of the conservative
voice it is to stand up like like like
Buckley said to Santa thwart that's sort
of running amuck train that's just
coming and trampling over society with
no controls now one thing I do want to
say is I do it this is what I do this is
what I do agree with feminists you know
I we talk about the wage gap you know we
both know the sort of science internet
or the math or data behind that and how
ridiculous it is but that being said why
aren't women why aren't more as many
women going into certain fields or
dangerous fields as men for exactly I
don't wanna well here's the thing you
got to ask you so questions why don't
they want to and if you have you read I
like reading your book about the
different minds what do you wake what do
they wake up in the morning and say that
they want to do you know I want I want
to go take risks and and and get hurt
and be dirty or I want to help my local
neighborhood thing do this thing I mean
it's like a pretty come on so here's
here's the thing this is where the
extremes just but both sides are robbed
the feminist point extreme time this
point of view is definitely wrong and he
knew extreme anti-feminist point of view
on this extreme I think we haven't
figured out yet the sort of levels of
where there's biology or sort of
societal norms and culture and
propaganda and you know marketing and
advertising and how that's affected the
fact that yeah there are women are not
going into certain fields with the same
frequency of men and men are not going
in certain fields with the same
frequency of women and these fields are
not necessarily masculine or feminine
fields right I mean I understand for
example like not not as many men will
ever go into like hair and makeup as
women that's probably not going to
happen in history it just doesn't seem
to because that is a specific feminine
you know product but I do think user
questions we got to try to answer right
and these are we're not we're not
answering them as much as we are
fighting to sort of protect our like
we're being tribal we're trying to
protect our point of view on the matter
without try
figure out well why our women are going
into why our wire is made why weren't
there in history or why are there now as
many women going into sort of you know
hard labor jobs it's a physically
daunting experience right so their
argument is that women are not as
physically capable as men to go into
those fields
that's a fair point of view but women
can still go into those fields and you
know work around the physical and sort
of you know the physical you know
handicap they might have but I don't
know I think there the I want equality
and I want people to be free to make
choices
I do think advertising and marketing and
sort of corporate America has presented
a handicap to men and women to go into
certain fields I do believe that well
you are you are a feminist I could I
could push back on that one for hours we
could talk about that in detail but I
want to move on I want to move on I know
that you're writing a book you're
writing a book about guns and roses and
do guns and roses I grew up with I mean
I will never forget the my first day of
high school I moved from Milwaukee
Wisconsin to Vienna Virginia which is
just outside of DC and it might have
well been at that time it might have all
been the deep south okay to me it was
like showing up in Virginia Virginia and
it's my very first day of school I'm
what 14 years old I'm in a new place
there's thousands of kids in this school
and the morning announcements come on
and they do the morning ops and the firt
the first song they play and they go
here you go freshmen this is for you
welcome to the jungle god I remember the
feeling I got from that like the riff
and the screaming and the whole thing
and I'm like holy I'm in this
building I don't know anything's people
there's like 18 year old kids
I'm 14 18 year old adults I mean the
women look like adults I'll never forget
that and here they are playing guns
roses and man I listen to appetite
destruction like 50 hundred million
billion times over and over again and
what was the double album that came out
after that I listened to that yep I've
listened to that a million billion times
too so to know that you're doing a story
on guns roses which I've also just
lightly followed so lightly that I did
not know that there was a female member
of Guns and Roses now until I read your
recent piece so so tell us how you came
to be
writing a book about guns and roses what
attracted you to it what's the gist what
kind of research would be have you been
doing like have you been on the road
with them like like tell me like I'm
fascinated by this yeah I grew up like I
said I grew up watching TV as a kid and
MTV was sort of my I don't know my
education into culture really AM TV was
what all I saw in the late 80s and early
90s and to me the first image really of
a rocks time it was Madonna Michael
Jackson and then Axl Rose yeah and to me
Axl Rose is the first image of a rock
star
I mean and that's what he was he
represented to me liberation to the in
the most primal masculine and he in many
ways actually androgynous because he
wasn't Rogers but also he was such a
wild rabid just a savage and I thought
was so intrigued by this guy who was
absolutely no societal controls on him
he was just wild and crazy jumping off
stage beating the out of people
fans and he was to me the last he was
truly one of the last truly free and
crazy and manic rock stars and that was
my fascination and I always wrote about
Guns N'Roses always listened to Guns
N'Roses
they're one of my favorite bands of all
time but he was an accident to be honest
with you it was an accident what
happened was I was the LA Weekly I was
writing about even believe it or not was
writing about a lot of female fronted
rock bands because what I thought the
problem I thought was happening was the
LA Weekly was entirely focusing on hip
hop and it was entirely focusing on sort
of this sort of like woke bizarre
fascination limousine liberals had with
like the ghetto and it was just no task
it was like why do I care like this gang
member who sold like thousands of pounds
of drugs amassed enough money to record
a record I don't care I want to learn
about rock and roll I want to hear about
rock and roll what's going on the rock
and roll scene in LA at that point all
the good bands were female fronted it
was just a coincidence so I wrote about
all those pants and then guns roses
started reuniting and I was like whoa
what's going on here so I started
investigating it and before a note I was
the only journalist in America who was
at the Guns N'Roses reunion show at the
Troubadour I was the only one there I
was the only one there yeah I was the
only one got invited to be there because
of you know the stories I wrote about
Guns N'Roses and yeah so I was there and
I did a few more stories on them and
before I knew it I had an agent in New
York
my agent my current agent in New York
reached out to me David Patterson and
he's like hey man you want to write a
book about Guns N'Roses
just like that and I was like absolutely
no doubt let's you know I've know yeah
let's just do it you know and then he's
like okay so write a proposal blah blah
but that was it I wrote a proposal and I
got a publisher and I've been working on
the book on and off for three years so
okay and I've never been on the road
with the band the band won't give me
access the band knows me they know my
work the axe was read my work it was
I've been told he has and all that but
no I it's a the book is a people's
history of Guns N'Roses
okay what does that mean does that mean
it's it's a book fueled by the
perspectives of the people who've
experienced been around who've seen
who've managed to worked behind the
scenes it's it's kind of like you know
I'm not a big fan of Howard Zinn's work
but it is in a way sort of like the
people's history of the United States in
the sense that it's showing the sight of
guns and roses that no one's ever really
been exposed to everything right inner
workings the culture the cultural
influences the sort of pop culture
impact they had on society the the
masculinity the violence the sex the
political consequences of Guns N'Roses
so it's really a book about that uh
interesting that you brought up the
androgynous nature of Axl Rose
immediately I thought of Mick Jagger and
David Bowie and then I may I immediately
thought of Camille Paglia
like she she has written extensively
about David Bowie and like his androgyny
and what it meant to her how what did
you observe in Nashville Rose that made
you say that terms of the androgyny was
it just like the hair was that the dress
was it amorphous sexuality like what was
it about that because I agree and it's
it's interesting how rock and roll
figures the leads of a rock and roll
band like people that chicks really love
and are you know heroes to boys and
guitar players are can be androgynous
yet and then people still are like wow
this is really cool
yeah I mean I mean the androgynous sort
of aspect of junior I didn't discover
until later when I was really young I
didn't really I'm am 8 years old 9 years
old I didn't really know the difference
I just saw this guy who had long hair
right he wore some makeup he wore
clothing that showed his like his body
parts off right um he was doing sexually
sore suggestive movements that to me was
androgynous cuz as a guy in the world
and I grew up in a very traditional sort
of environment no men didn't do those
kind of things there weren't men with
long hair there were men who were makeup
there weren't men who wore see-through
spandex clothing she didn't exist so
that to me automatically was shocking I
was like why is he dressed like a girl
but like he was it was so rebellious to
me because again I didn't know about the
Sunset Strip Harry metal scene I was too
young so to me that was just and I I
discovered Guns N'Roses like probably in
like God man the late late 80s early 90s
so I didn't know about the Sunset Strip
and poison and all that and to me it was
just wow like this guy looks different
it's shocking it's frightening
he was frightening to me yeah he scared
the out of me in a weird way and I
thought that was that's why I was drawn
to he sounds like a banshee man yeah
that's why I'm drawn to some political
people that I sort of will retweet often
that people get really mad at me about I
won't say who they are but they scare me
to some extent because they're so bold
and so extreme it's so sort of just
stand up for like their world and like
are in this bizarre sort of ruthless
kind of individualistic almost like
Barbara Stanwyck and babyface where it's
just like I'm conquering and I'm not
gonna give in to sentiment I'm not gonna
give in to any sort of decency or norms
and I think Axl Rose to me was that he's
not that anymore at all but he was that
at that point and that that was the
allure did he change did you change that
the world changed well how is he not
what he was well I I've actually become
you know believe I'm the one the only of
people who's actually become more
probably more progressive as I've gotten
older I was way more conservative when I
was young and I became extremely
conservative when I was like in college
in high school my pamphlet for Bush in
high school so I was just I mean I look
at myself then and I think wow what was
wrong with me
right my point of view
were just you know I was for going into
Iraq until I was against it when we
actually went into Iraq that was for the
invasion of Iraq before Bush became
president that's one of the reasons I
voted for Bush because I wanted him to
go into Iraq but in the aftermath of it
I was a complete against that war so I
didn't change I became even more open to
sort of those kind
I think ax roses he's gotten older has
been more insulated and more isolated
from sort of the working class and the
normal certain normal society I think
he's become a limousine liberal you know
over the years and he that's what
happily happens doesn't it yeah you gave
money and you gained influence and you
gave an empire you have to sort of you
know any pennies I guess he's
progressive I'm I didn't know that III
didn't know what his politics were in
the 80s or 90s I no one really knew at
least publicly was never acknowledged
what he breached it on the issues I know
I won't point in his life that he was
fascinated with iron Rand so I don't
know that was just a weird fascination
with rands novels or philosophy I don't
know right but yeah I think he's changed
I don't know what's going on I don't
know this whole social justice woke Axel
stuff I mean to happen it happened to
Madonna
I mean Madonna when we listen to the
whole d stationed in the car with my
kids all the time and and Madonna comes
on everyone smile and then I like one
like oh my god you guys have to listen
to this and I bust out like true blue
and I make them listen to the whole
album I I love Madonna backed up
oh yeah she was she was a force she
appeared to seemingly to me out of
nowhere she was one of the first
cassettes I ever bought I bought three
cassettes on the first time I ever
bought anything I bought it Madonna true
blue Run DMC raising hell yeah and Pink
Floyd dogs with dogs of war know what
ever saw album dogs war was on I mean
that was that was great music
back then yeah but uh but you know
Madonna she's long she's lost her
 mind and gone completely off the
left deep end and then I listened to
guys like Talib Kweli
and Kendrick Lamar who I really admired
in terms of their lyrical skills and the
hip-hop I mean man I love the beats I
love everything about their music sure
now that I've got like a glimpse into
their brains and into their politics and
stuff like it's being ruined from
I can't even yeah didn't even listen
speak a weird sort of connection between
Tilly calling and Guns N'Roses
I don't like Cleo quality I never liked
his music I never liked him as a person
I think he's an idiot I think he is for
sure no I never liked his music I
thought it was too political I thought
it was too it was attempting to it was
to sort of radical I think he's a black
nationalist I think that I think
nationalism in general I think
nationalism in general is sort of taken
to the extremes is is something I'm
uncomfortable with white or black or
whatever it is
um I think patriotism is beautiful I
think nationalism can sometimes be
dangerous I think he's he's taking it
too far in that respect um he me and him
got a Twitter fight once and then he saw
my byline and said that he saw that I
was writing about Guns N'Roses
and immediately he went in screengrab
the lyrics to one in a million and you
know that song right I do but what are
the lyrics are talking about some people
there's there's some lyrics that you
have to use the n-word and he says uses
the f-word you know the homophobic slur
he uses you say we've been same all
day yeah then he uses some weird
language about like I don't know people
from the Middle East or whatever and
whatever the song was what it was we I
don't want to get too deep into that but
till you quality immediately called me
white piece of I'm on white but he
called me a white piece of and said
that I was racist for being Guns N'Roses
fan so that's the kind of guy you're
dealing with that's the kind of guy that
is now sort of the voice of the woke
black quota go black Twitter right he's
he's a bigot he's right consumed by
contempt for people I don't understand
where it comes from yeah I think that
he's he's an unhealthy individual and I
talked to you know I like rappers like
Rask a scienter B Trask as once the LA
Weekly and I talked about to leave
quality in let me just put this way
there's a lot of people in hip-hop yeah
who are african-american and black who
kind of agree with me so there you go
like it's all I'm gonna say but I just
think that Kali is not and I think he's
wacky um speaking of Kendrick Lamar I
don't get it I don't get it man he's
music is boring I don't understand why
so I make people love him I've listened
to all his records I was forced to
listen to it as a journalist at LA
Weekly I had no choice
but I find it to be boring and his
latest stuff I really don't like the
earlier albums I real
like quite a bit he's like that is
debate with with bready I was in the
Bret Easton Ellis podcast he said why
don't you watch new movies now why don't
you go watch Avengers and I'm like
gotta watch new movies I basically
haven't watched a new movie in like
years no I don't watch them they're just
defensive of trash you're garbage so
he's like why do you watch I'm like well
why would I can go back and watch like
predicated back to the future and like
Vision Quest and go back you know I can
watch after hours I can watch The
Godfather why would i watch the garbage
that exists now and there's like there's
great a snake that I can revisit 20 mean
yummy pre-code movies I haven't seen
I've seen babyface I've seen several of
those I've seen like you know there's
thousands of these amazing movies from
the 20s and 30s I'll never be able to
watch because they're not even like
watchable right but why would I want to
like why in the world where I listen
with Kendrick Lamar record record and go
back to listen to Tupac records to box
of jeans why would I waste my
time I can sit there and dissect Tupac
lyrics all day for the rest of my life
do you think do you think Tupac and
Biggie would be woke today I know I
don't think Tupac would be woke I think
I think Tupac would be like Kanye I
don't think he'd be a trump supporter I
think he'd be a like a black radical but
I think he's a black radical in the way
where I would respect him because I
thought that he believed what he was
saying and he was actually sort of like
very gung-ho about his his philosophies
and he was a black radicalist he really
was so I think that he would have been
he'd be like a black panther in a way in
a way I kind of respect look I don't
agree with the Black Panther Party I
don't use any of their positions I think
they're violent they're pretty much
terrorist organization right I mean but
I don't I at least I respect the people
that stand up for what they but like
Malcolm X for example I don't respect
Malcolm X I don't think any I think use
an anti-semite I think he was one of the
most horrific and vulgar people in
history but you know what he stood up
for what he believed did he actually
believed what he said
I don't believe Beyonce or Kendrick
Lamar believe a goddamn where they're
saying so that's you know so what woke
is marketing exactly so when it becomes
advertising a propaganda and a business
plan you know you read my piece i when
Beyonce put feminists up at the MTV News
were yeah it was a marketing plan it was
a marketing tactic I don't believe for
one second that she is a strongly
feminist that she portrays herself
to be has has has Beyonce sat there and
read like Camille Paglia has she sat
there and read the works of sort of the
first wave and second wave feminists has
she dissected their thinking has she
really read philosophy was that working
in McKenna yeah and you think you're the
thing Jack if she had she done that we
would have known ha-joon released its
about it she would have talked about
right of course I don't even mean does
she know Gloria Steinem is maybe she
does the Shou she read like Gloria
steinem's work has she has she dug deep
into that world I don't think she has I
think she's a phony I think she's a
businesswoman and I think it's I think
to leave qualies the same thing who he
lost his relevancy in hip-hop and you
rediscovered it in activism on Twitter I
think I think you know
Kendrick Lamar was going down and like
you said in a very interesting path
talking about his all his life in the
streets of Compton and all of a sudden
he became the advocate for black lives
matter which I think is silly and boring
and I thought I thought mad mad city was
was a interesting literary glimpse into
his life growing up and there's also
some there's some really great party
tracks on that I don't like I don't like
the music at all but I do respect his
ability to vocalize his point of view
and I think that was beautiful he's a
poet
right and I don't have to like coach you
to respect your poetry right so I I've
been struggling with this and maybe
you're a little more connected to like
underground music than I am I mean I
used to be like in the 90s I was an
underground house DJ like back when it
was cool and I we used to like break
into our houses and throw raves and I
profession DJ professionally in four
years and the 90s like I love I love it
love it but and I remember listening to
hip-hop like right when oh great when it
was coming up in the mid 80s but where
today where today am I going to find
subversive rock and roll is there is
there such a thing is rock and roll
subversive was rock and roll subversive
in the first place I mean I studied
Woodstock in the 60s and yeah was
definitely subversive then yeah but what
has happened to the subversive nature of
rock and roll and where connect where
can I find subversive rock and roll
because today if you're gonna be
subversive you're not progressive
otherwise you know in the party line so
what what's up where's the cool
underground anti-establishment rock and
roll's aren't even a thing anymore not
really I mean there's this glimpses and
glimmer
like there I'll give you an example it
was a band in los angeles who got banned
from playing shows in LA they were
banned completely because the because of
their name the band was called black
 and they were banned from claim
venues yeah there and their music wasn't
that great he was whatever it was okay
but they were banned from playing venues
in Los Angeles there her name so I mean
that to me was sort of a transgressive
move but musically the problem here's a
problem it's a lot of great rock and
rollers endless amounts of great rock
bands coming out they're underground
they're not being promoted by the media
because it doesn't fit the agenda the
media because the media is trying to
push this whole intersectional diversity
quota so like they're gonna talk about
hip hop they're gonna talk about you
know you know just like NPR's list
yesterday PR listed the ten best albums
of the year right yesterday right okay
all ten were by women I mean every
single every single one of them every
single one and so to me that's okay but
do you for one second believe that every
single the top ten records are all by
women that are there no records by men
are we just saying that we want to
create this list to promote this idea
that women are it's the woman's year in
music or whatever it's been the woman's
ear music since 2012 as far as I mean
it's always been that I mean look at our
pop stars how many great male pop stars
can you name Ed Sheeran Justin Bieber
and it and it ends just a bit of Justin
Timberlake yeah but he's he's like
basically finished I know he's real like
you know he's he hasn't really done much
his last album was kind of a laughing
stock of like pop music
he's like bizarrely fading away but it's
really just all women it's like Lady
Gaga now it's all female pop stars I
mean women have a real stranglehold on
pop music and music in general right now
which i think is cool and fine but the
problem I had with that is from the
media when the media takes it upon
themselves to be you know activism and
music in music journalism to me was the
most horrific thing I saw growing up in
LA because music to me is apolitical I
mean you could be political the music
itself
the music itself to be political but the
coverage of the music to me should
always be agenda like agenda free it's
about allowing the artist to communicate
to their audience not communicating the
 message of the artist in your
own point of view as a propaganda tactic
to like convert people that's what I see
happening and that that bothered me a
lot is their great
dude I'll send you a list of great rock
man I love it I love it but what I want
to know uh-huh
we think what was his name God welcome
back to me let's keep going what uh what
I remember in middle school I studied
Woodstock I'd gave like a presentation
on it in class I watched the movie I
read everything I could about it III I
was really in the classic rock man oh
yeah I loved Led Zeppelin I love the
whoo I love listening to Pink Floyd and
you know I listened Led Zeppelin's
probably my favorite band of all time
and and I just remember I mean the
Woodstock event in and of itself was was
political the message of all the artists
was political even if even if Jimi
Hendrix wasn't like out there saying
political words his behavior was
political right and he the way that he
expressed himself was political and that
was an actual political movement
the whole the whole thing was a
political movement but does that element
of rock and roll still exist is there is
there anything counterculture about rock
and roll
is there anything counterculture about
their ideas the way that they operate
the way they not on the mainstream not
on the main it does exist in the
underground but the problem is the
underground rock and roll subversive
stuff that's happened for example I can
Boyle Heights here in LA we have a
barrio here in LA called Boyle Heights
there's a various sort of like Mexican
American little suburbs in Los Angeles
and near Zoar the epicenter who have
really cool like punks hardcore punk
scene and metal scene and they have
these underground backyard parties
they've all these bands come and play
badass subversive danger these are
dangerous bands like these bands are
gang members like I've been in these
shows it's not safe it's scary it's
subversive as the problem is
there's two problems the first problem
is they're not political people they're
just not there the subversiveness in the
current youth movement in rock'n'roll is
anti political there there there see
what happened was in the 60s being
politically subversive right now being
now the most subversive thing you could
possibly do is be apolitical right I
mean like think about it
so that's kids are doing the young
rock-and-roll kids are unplugging from
the mainframe
they're completely going to their own
little wacky world it's like they have
create their own little society and it
is not political man they're not the
female punk bands might be doing so the
feminist stuff but they're not really
even talking about look I know girls in
the LA punk scene and these are girls in
really popular bands who hate talking
about intersectional they get questions
about me too all the time they grow up
and they're grossed out by it right we
don't care like we want to play
we want to shred our guitar
right so L want to have fun what does
that what does political political
minded thinking what does that get
replaced what does it get replaced with
like a hedonism is hedonism the
counterculture is that subversive to
this like hyperbole kuiper political
perspective that people have adopted as
like mainstream thinking it's not even
hedonistic sigh think hedonism is going
away for in a lot of ways because I
think that people are afraid of I think
we're living in a in a weird sort of
police state because of the iPhone and
all these people are sort of they can't
even be free in private anymore really
so I think we're kind of moving away
from the Camille Paglia like Guns
N'Roses Madonna hedonistic world and
we're entering this weird thing of
they're just unplugging mad it's like
hackers they're just kind of like you
know in the movie hackers they're just
kind of getting away from the reality of
the current world and they're immersing
themselves in their own reality and
their own reality at least in the rock
and roll scene I'm not talking about the
digital electronic or hip hop scene but
in the rock roll scene it's a giant
you to activism to political sort of
awareness like they are so disconnected
from the music journalists won't even
cover them right these are like not
you're not produc you're not providing
productive discourse well the whole
point is that they're saying you to
discourse
 you I just and do you see my first
thought is you say you to discourse
and replace it with intercourse but I
think at the same time like like people
are having less sex and there's less of
that and there's like a major chill on
that too so like I'm trying I'm trying
to understand like what what gets
replaced in that vacuum if like overt
sexuality is it's okay anymore and like
being a political activist is and being
a
it's just replaced with what just like
I'm gonna just be me doing whatever I
want playing my video games and
skateboarding that like I don't
know yeah sad it's sad no I think you're
right I think the idea that we the thing
that we you and I probably grew up with
of rock and roll that image that world
it exists like Marilyn Manson still a
 rock star man he's still living
the rock star life and everything he
used to do nothing's really changed I
mean he's still dangerous as he
does like these monsters he takes out a
 ar-15 or whatever and horrify it
so you know it's funny I had this I'll
give you I'll give you a story of how
bad rock and roll has gone there was a
magazine I won't name the magazine a
huge classic rock magazine that wanted
me to do a story on Manson right and
this is why I didn't do the story
ultimately I have access to Manson
because I know I know some of us friends
with Manson and my idea was let's just
put Manson on the cover right holding an
ar-15 it's the American flag like on
fire behind him and like and just like
shock the world right like the
Muslims uh and I just do a cool
interview with Manson about politics
music and Second Amendment and whatever
like he's a man and sort of the occult
or whatever completely was killed he's
like that isn't that mean that image
would you know they were just like they
became soldier just these are like
classic rock guys who became social
justice Co me I'm like we don't want to
portray that kind of image we don't want
like rot that was when walking role was
dead to me dude I had the magazine
sitting it's sitting in my in my
bookshelf right there it's Axl Rose on
the cover of rip magazine from 1989 with
a shotgun right and right and
riot gear like right in the face of the
camera like that is rock and roll this
makes me so sad art now that
Rage Against the Machine is now the
machine that to post the pulse of the
80s in the 90s and the 70s are now
lawyers and politicians and businessmen
and marketing their woke nests
and I'm just afraid I'm afraid that that
look there's no question that in the 80s
and you may not like this but we were
there was a culture war on and the
culture war was sort of to fight for the
right to live your life how you want to
live whether it's like smoke weed have
sex with dudes shoot guns whatever it is
that you want to do it was sort of this
fight to like have freedom and liberty
and individuality okay so that was the
culture war that was on and then that
culture war was won right like you can
walk down the street it smells like weed
everywhere people can get people to get
married
all these things I love and support I'm
a hundred percent in favor of gay
marriage and being you know rights for
everybody but not but now the culture
war those culture warriors became the
establishment and now they're the
authoritarians and there's no one rising
up who's rising up in response to this
in art like politically speaking we've
got that part covered right that's the
moderate thing it's all happening but
like artistically is it happening in our
visual art is it happening and our music
is it happening in our in our written
word and I mean like literature you know
is there is there any pushback in
fiction world I mean or is it all just
totally part of the system and
commoditized and and brain Walton well
there is a pushback writers place by the
comics gate is a great example in the
comic book there's certainly a push back
there's a push back happening the
problem is and this is where the left
refuses to play ball and this is why
this is why I'm sort of this is where I
get frustrated right they refuse to
admit that they controlled the mediums
of communication in the arts completely
they control it and they're they're the
ones deciding what can and can't get
through the pipelines and the problem
with that is they you know they've
completely they've completely made it
abnormal right to be a libertarian or
conservative voice in the world of film
cinema music comics literature
publishing technology gaming everything
they've made it sort of like that it is
a scarlet letter that you'll have to
wear for the rest of your life if you
want to do something weird or edgy or
different from their sort of point of
view which I don't know I think that's a
unique thing we've never had that before
I think in the 80s the unique thing
about the 80s that you didn't talk on
the culture war was
the Conservatives had a semblance of
control of communication at that point
yeah you know in a good and bad way like
MTV was run by a conservative in
that at the time you know like it wasn't
that it wasn't I mean
Clear Channel right was my my concern it
wasn't that we lived in this completely
monoculture eyes liberal social justice
world for some reason in the in the late
80s and the 90s and the 2000s it all
started going completely to the left and
I think I mean the idea that we have we
had anti hippie Pro capitalistic
conservative TV shows in the 80s like
family ties wasn't completely was a
complete terroristic attack against
hippie culture right right kids were
watching that show I'm could you imagine
a show now it's a complete kind of
terrorist assault on the third wave
feminist movement dude we just we just
saw a clip for married with children the
other day I know I know yeah I asked my
girlfriend she's 20 I was like have you
ever seen that show she's like I've
watched every single one it's like
that's why I love you honey can you
imagine the during the trying to pitch
that show today I would never give no
and that that's what's sad to me that we
can't have everything like my thing with
the comics game movie was I became a
diplomat in the comics gay thing because
I was like yeah I became a diplomat and
it was I was like you know what guys
like let us have what we want
we'll let you have what we want and we
live in a beautiful society you want
feminists you want Thor to be a feminist
right okay that was interesting I was
known I was good with that that's great
you let us create um the anti-feminist
vicious sort of like skull headed
monster who's gonna go rip apart the you
know like who's gonna assassinate Lena
Dunham or something like whatever like
you let us do what we want you know
whatever I mean I don't know that's the
random example I want to get in trouble
for that blur and it was usually you but
the problem is they're not letting the
conservatives or libertarian perspective
run wild that's the problem let us run
wild we'll let you run while we live in
a beautiful society what's the problem
here
like that does I don't because they
don't believe in actual Liberty man
that's the problem yeah they don't and
they don't believe in that Hall sees
 statement that our publicist
row which is total acceptance no you
don't you don't believe in total
acceptance you only believe in accepting
the people you agree with right and
that's well I've found somebody
here and you that I can agree with on a
lot of things
and I feel like we've had a
tremendous conversation and we made it
down a lot of the things on my list and
we could have dug into a million things
even deeper but you know I just gotta
say coming coming across I think you
came to DC maybe you were hanging out
with Cassandra is that what it was
okay that's how that's how I found out
about you Cassandra texted me and she's
like hey I'm Antonio this guy arts in
town we're hanging out if you want to
come hang out with us and I could I
couldn't make it but but I that's
Cassandra Fairbanks so I looked you up
and I just started following you dude
you've been a really really fresh voice
and because I you know I'm not down with
the nevertrump errs and the Mogga guys I
do I do love them but you know there's a
certain monotony in that as well and you
know my podcast is certainly not
politically oriented by any means I mean
I've had I've had the Democrats and
libertarians and conservatives on and
we've talked about sex and porn and
masturbation and art and relationships
and all kinds of so like this
conversation to me has just been looking
awesome you know you're totally tied
into the zeitgeist and you got a really
quick mind and I love the way that you
write I love the way that you are
presenting your ideas and so man thank
you very much I mean we've done almost
two and a half hours here went by really
fast Wow and and you uh you know you've
been a lot of fun and I've appreciated
the time that we've been able to engage
online and I hope that we have a chance
to meet each other in person and to you
know continue to have these
conversations I'd love to have you back
again in a couple months and you know
sort Auk about whatever's in the news at
that time and really man I mean just uh
you thank you very much for sharing your
back story and thank you for putting
everything into perspective what a what
a fun time and a great conversation and
I think my guys and ladies that listen
are gonna love this and we'll definitely
want to have you back and continue this
talk dude okay god bless ya it's been
really fun man and I admire your workers
lowing next time I'm in DC let's hang
out and although I can't Cassandra
thinks I'm a neocon because we can
figure out how to navigate those waters
we'll talk about more of that later yeah
Cassandra's supercool and the fact that
she'll hang she'll hang out with anybody
she she surprised me one night she's
like hey we're gonna go do this thing
and she brought chelsea manning with her
so you never know you never know who's
who's gonna show up what are you hanging
out with Cassandra but I love I love her
to death and she's been a good girl a
great friend of mine and you know thanks
again art and hopefully I'll talk to you
soon dude and thank you very much
all right Jack talk to you later man bye
bye
[Music]