wellness force radio
[Music]
feelings are essential but they can't
dictate our actions to literally infect
each other with our emotions we came
here for a special purpose select the
book with unveil except knowing without
doing the same things not knowing there
are not just trackers I'm gonna wear
this and it's gonna help me do the right
thing
wellness force radio episode 96 with
co-founder of the neuro hacker
collective and cognitive enhancement
specialist Daniel SH Martin Berger how
can we optimize our mind brain body
system for increased quality of
experience the highest stages of human
development that we are used to seeing
that seems so many standard deviations
beyond normal can be the new baseline
it's clear that people have radically
increased demands on their cognitive
ability there are more things causing
distraction and competing for focus
while an increased demand for
productivity but they're looking for
creative productive slow states where
their cognitive capacities and their
creative capacities are fully online and
they have the right emotional state that
goes along with that
what could a person of normal
intelligence do with their life if they
fully dedicate themselves to developing
themselves comprehensively for the
benefit of humanity you are an emergent
property of a universe that made you
possible and you're still fundamentally
interconnected with and interdependent
with the whole thing welcome back to
another episode my friend I am your host
Josh Trent thank you for spending your
time with me here on the podcast this is
where every week I'm bringing you access
to global experts in all things wellness
behavior change and new technologies on
this podcast you'll learn from
exceptional people who are dedicating
their lives to being a positive force
for our physical and emotional wellness
my intention with the show is that
together we'll discover the connections
between our emotions and healthy habits
to live our best life and enjoy the
process this episode is brought to you
by perfect supplements a company I'm
stoked to partner with who actually
walks the talk with their values of non
GMO pesticide free real food supplements
that fuel us for the wellness journey
head on over to perfect supplements
dot-com slash wellness force enter code
wellness Force to save 10% off your
entire order what's up my friends so
excited
you are here because we're about to have
our hearts and minds expanded from our
guest on today's show Daniel SH Martin
Berger Daniel is a system designer
strategist evolutionary philosopher and
the co-founder of the neuro hacker
collective he leads a team of scientists
technologists academics and creatives
that are empowering individuals with new
tools for optimized well-being actually
discovered day's work and the neuro
hacker collective organization through
what seemed like
almost weekly conversations and hearing
testimonials from colleagues and friends
that have been using qualia which we'll
talk about on today's show it's this
advanced cognitive enhancer that was
allowing my friends to be more present
and get 10x more done in their lives so
about two months ago I decided to do a
little N equals one experiment in this
channel of mental performance and
cognition which you'll hear about now
we've had a handful of conversations
about nootropics and cognitive
enhancement from experts on wellness
force but today on the podcast what
you're gonna get is so much deeper than
just how to use new tools to succeed in
life but the understanding of the what
and the how to meet and overcome this
sometimes overwhelming distractions and
attention drains from people and things
I feel so fortunate to have been able to
visit daniel and the team at
headquarters in Encinitas because he has
been studying health and neurology for
over 25 years which led to qualia now
early in life Daniel was told there was
no cure for his diagnosed neurological
and autoimmune illness from either
allopathic or complementary medicine yet
through Advanced Studies and
applications in physiology and pathology
He healed himself this led him to become
a student of mind-body medicine and an
academic dean of a mind-body medicine
College once healed and highly educated
Daniel began working with larger teams
to solve global issues through what he
calls an omni positive and Omni
considerate system to found the critical
path Institute and the emergence project
a multi organization think-tank
dedicated to improving our global
civilization I think you're gonna love
this episode as much as I did because
we're talking about the things that
really matter and our personal wellness
and in our collective world you're gonna
want to go through this episode at least
twice head on over to wellness force.com
forward slash qualia that's qu a li a
for everything we talked about on this
episode including my N equals one
experiment where you can try that out
for yourself
which I feel so proud about and which
was a labor of love with a message I can
really stand behind you're gonna get so
much value and growth in the next 60
minutes so let's jump in to this mind
expanding and emotionally engaging
in-depth conversation with one of the
brightest and visionary minds in the
world
Daniel 'shmock Dan burger Daniel thank
you so much for coming on the show and
for inviting me to your second home it's
your work so you're here probably a lot
thanks for coming on thanks for having
today we're going to talk about things
way beyond just quality a way beyond
tropics and neuro hacking but what I'm
really digging for is something about
you that maybe people haven't heard
before you know something that shows a
little bit about your personality from
your youth I know actually there was a
space you came from in Iowa you were
homeschooled and it was from the works
of Buckminster Fuller and David Bohm
that you had learned from but how did
that shape you you know you're this
young kid you're in an environment in
Iowa there's meditation going on how did
you pull from that and what did that
mean to what you do now well I would say
one of the big unique fortunate things
about bringing for me was I was mostly
homeschooled and I happened to be in one
meditation community but was in a number
of different alternative communities
that focused on personal development
activism different forms and fields of
science permaculture right my parents
were interested in evolutionary topics
and so we got to live in proximity to
different cool thinkers and evolutionary
topics but the benefit of the
homeschooling was my parents were
wanting to do an experiment the
educational experiment which was before
unschooling was the thing the idea was
let's give them no fixed curriculum at
all and expose them to as many things as
possible see what their interests are
and facilitate that and so this was my
education growing up so I never had a
fixed amount of spelling or handwriting
or you know social studies or so my
spelling still depends on spell checker
completely my handwriting depends upon
the fact that only used computers
because I you know I never developed
those things but I did get to dive into
the sciences very deeply very early in a
way that was untraditional that is a way
that would would be the case for any kid
if they were facilitated to follow what
they were really interested in and so my
early upbringing was all of the sciences
all of the different philosophic
traditions and all areas of activism but
one of the other really neat things was
because I didn't learn them in the
contexts of subjects right this is
social science this is biology this is
physics I didn't even think of them in
isolated way so I'd be cross applying
principles from thermodynamics to
astrophysics to cell biology to looking
at what is true about how reality works
across all of these because I didn't
think of them in segmented ways and I
didn't think of them in terms of
discrete laws of a domain
what age were you when you started to be
fascinated about systems and about how
things work I mean because is there a
time we remember like I know when I was
a kid I took a part of telephone and my
curiosity I have this insatiable
curiosity and I always wondered how
things work so I wasn't satisfied unless
I took it apart and put it back together
did you feel like that in your life I
mean how has that serves you I do how
would you describe your curiosity the
same as yours I'm the same as any other
kids I maybe just had more facilitation
so it happens with kids usually is they
want to take apart the telephone they
want to make lasers they want to you
know do all kinds of interesting things
boys and particularly those ones but all
genders whatever they're interested in
is gonna be very deep but but also
things that are more esoteric like I've
never met a little kid who at 2 3 4
years old doesn't ask questions like why
is the sky blue and we give them
nonsense answers but to actually
understand how the atmosphere works and
how diffraction works and how light
works and how that intersects with the
way the rods and the cones and our eye
work and what the subjective experience
of blue compared to the actual objective
experience of light scattering it's
actually one of the deepest most
profound things to answer that well that
exposes them to everything from the hard
problem of neuroscience to atmosphere
sciences and where they're gonna learn
about climate change and stellar
formation and physics they ask why is
fire hot it's the same kind of thing
right like well we can talk about what
the photon releasing is and how photons
are exchanging energy in the hand but
then why are my subjectively
experiencing it as hot and so what
happens is we just don't know so we
don't answer their questions well and we
instead steer them to things that we do
know that are really not interesting
like how to spell something or what the
capital is something that is and we turn
them off to schooling we turn them off
to learning turn them off to their
innate fascination of existing so when
we look at the whole issue of the kind
of welfare model dynamic where we think
if people are not capitalistic aliy
motivated they'll just watch TV all the
time kids are so intrinsically motivated
to learn everything they can and to
build stuff and to create and to like
want to go to work with mom or dad and
figure out how to do stuff what happens
is when we don't facilitate their
interests and then we actively force
them to be interested in that's
just not interesting to them because
there's more to do with memorization and
getting it right than
understanding mechanics in or dynamics
and interesting ways we break their
innate intrinsic interest in life and
make them deferring to extrinsic
Authority and then they just want to get
away from that which ends up looking
like play chill out is some form of you
know escape from broken interest in life
so the future of Education has the
ability to have polymath be the new
normal you know comprehensively
developed multimodal genius as the new
normal because that's actually innate to
every child a friendly facility Wow and
the the way that I hear you explain
things this is something that I think is
endogenous to you I mean do you feel
like your intelligence has blossomed
from that environment how did you get
through these stages of learning without
going to this traditional schooling and
then maybe tell us a little bit about
how you found this cure for your auto
degenerative disease that you had what
was that like combine those two things
for us so first part one of the things
that I was struck by early is I was
studying very fortunate to come across
the work of buck mr. fuller early in
childhood and when you see as a older
man he's got 49 honorary doctorates and
everything from architecture to
mathematics to engineering to most of
fundamental sciences and did novel work
in those areas like how does someone do
novel work in mathematics when people
have done so much brilliant work
specializing in that and do novel
game-changing work in architecture and
language and it breaks our normal idea
of how specialization in human capacity
works but we see that being true in in
DaVinci and in Jefferson and all the
people that we think of as these kind of
Renaissance people that are kind of
comprehensively developed and it's easy
for us to think that they are just
somehow genetically different but one of
the things that Bucky fuller as an older
person would always stay in like the
beginning of his talks was that he was
he became aware early in childhood that
he had slightly below average
intelligence by the normal metrics of
intelligence that the other kids in
school got spelling faster than him got
math faster than him but some things
happen some specific experiences where
he became interested in figuring out
what could a person of normal
intelligence
with their life if they fully dedicated
themselves to developing themselves
comprehensively for the benefit of
humanity obviously there were some
unique things happen for him to have an
insight like that early on but you see
then all that he developed as someone
who he would say he was utterly
convinced he had no endogenous no
capacities that were beyond normal but a
development process one of the things
that's so interesting for me then was
all the people who developed themselves
to the kind of highest degrees of
comprehensive development said things
very similar and so it's clear to me
that and you know then we've no very
deeply into all of the evolutionary
biology of the topics and educational
theory that the highest stages of human
development that we're used to seeing
that seems so many standard deviations
beyond normal can be the new baseline
what was the stage where you went
through where you realized a that you
had something that was neurodegenerative
I think a lot of people deal with
illness I know I had a lot of health
issues when I was in my 20s and in my
30s and was there a point where you
realized eh I have something that I'm
not exactly sure how to fix and then
what did that road look like for you to
heal so I was in undergraduate I was 18
I was rock climbing weightlifting
healthy and then had symptoms start
kicking on very rapidly that were kind
of neuromuscular joint type things did
not have a background in by our health
at that point was studying math and
physics and other topics and so you
started studying seeing all of the
doctors and Integrative doctors and
various kind of modalities they could
and ended up figuring out a handful of
underlying phenomena from inflammatory
conditions and the underlying causes in
terms of toxicity and pathogenicity and
things were more causing it for myself
and end up reversing it fairly quickly
what was the time period where it
reversed three months Wow three months
and the initial diagnosis was rheumatic
autoimmune disorder it doesn't have a
cure
doesn't traditionally have a cure so
that was very neat and then I was you
know free of symptom pathology for for
many years until
mmm 30 something and again very rapidly
had an onset of something and it was
probably the same underlying
susceptibilities they hadn't been fully
addressed previously they got read
triggered by some new phenomena and then
it was a much more aggressive onset with
more complexity involved and that
required me doing a much deeper dive
into modeling it know that this was
important so we look at something like
MS or rheumatoid arthritis or ALS or any
any kind of complex disease or
psychiatric issues ER but say we're
looking at so we're looking at a
rheumatic condition we will see
correlation between that romantic
conditions statistically significant
correlation and things like a particular
kind of toxin exposure whether it's a
heavy metal or whether it's an
organophosphate or something like that
we don't see one for one it's not
everyone who has it has had that
exposure or everybody's had that
exposure has that disease but we see
statistically meaningful correlation
will see statistically meaningful
correlation with a bunch of different
forms of U of subclinical infections of
Lyme disease of exposure to mold
biotoxins of gastrointestinal pathogens
of you know but this ends up being very
hard the traditional medical model is
looking for one disease primarily having
one pathway that is primarily causing it
and then it's going to have one chemical
that addresses that pathway but for our
current medical approach is good for
acute cause issues so this is why it's
so great for emergency medicine because
the cause is actually pretty acute it's
pretty clear and you can address it but
where you have chronic diseases that
developed over some period of time and
often times were multifactorial they
don't have one causes they have multiple
different causes it's not even the same
multiple set for different people and
there was delayed causation in terms of
when the first thing happened and you
have some underlying pathophysiology
happening before symptomology occurs
it's actually really tricky to figure
out how that works and you don't treat a
cluster of symptoms called a disease you
actually have to see what is going on
specific pathway wise for that person
can be able to address that which is the
future of personalized medicine you feel
like you were really supporting all the
systems underneath so that they're all
happening in synergy what did you do
specifically
and then how did the different
nootropics and the other other
supplementation's that you were taking I
mean how did that work for you the
reason that I got into nootropics
obviously as someone who's interested in
learning I was interested in
intelligence and interested in
everything that could optimize that
everything from you know meditation and
technology assisted meditation like
neurofeedback to specific kinds of brain
training to better forms of learning
right epistemology for how to learn but
also biological enhancement of the
hardware that learning operates on so I
had worked with nootropics in cognitive
chemistry but not as deeply or
sophisticatedly cos there wasn't an Eden
right oftentimes in evolutionary need
ended up driving but when those
illnesses first kicked on in addition to
having like a lot of neuromuscular
symptoms II there was cognitive symptoms
all G was that massive brain fog you're
going through what was it yeah so
decreased cognitive capability how many
hours per day I had that were
cognitively viable and potency of
cognitive capability and for me for the
things I was interested in that was much
more debilitating than physical debility
because at that time you're doing
high-level thinking so you had to be
cognitively capable it wasn't an option
and all the things that I really care
about affecting require solving hard
problems right and so my focus was all
right well if I'm gonna work on figuring
out these kind of underlying disease
structures so that I can get well to get
back to my focus on the future of
macroeconomics and governance and
infrastructure and kind of large-scale
environmental and humanitarian things
I'm gonna need a lot of cognitive
bandwidth but figure these medical
issues out so first I'm gonna focus on
how to increase my cognitive bandwidth
so I can apply the limited amount that I
have to regulate it you know that was my
leverage in and so that was a very deep
dive in cognitive chemistry and that
looked like everything in the nootropic
space the brain nutrient space the both
kind of neural chemistry and neuro
structure connectomics neurobiology
smart drugs and looking at what are all
the pathways that are involved in
various aspects of cognition so short
term memory long term memory speed of
memory digit span verbal fluency focus
concentration you know all of those
modeling out
where this is being mediated by
different neurotransmitters
acetylcholine glutamate dopamine etc
with the different pathways
you literally mapped out everything that
cascades into one another and understood
how all these systems work for cognition
well I most certainly did not map out
how it actually works because I was
looking at that you know let's say I
looked at a few hundred pathways and the
interactions but I've got something like
10 to the 45 actual elements of
complexity involved what I'm doing is
still reductionistic just less
reductionistic I'm not looking at single
molecule solutions and especially not
single molecule that are just overriding
an endogenous regulatory pathway by
providing the engine chemical but
looking at what is everything we know
from the various disciplines about how
those endogenous regulatory systems work
and where breakdown in those systems can
happen and then how to be able to assess
what's going on and then support it in a
customized fashion so I started with
cognitive chemistry to have a cognitive
clarity to continue work with a deeper
neural chemistry right there's that I
knew that was not an adequate solution
but it was a necessary partial solution
which ends up being directly relevant to
why this company exists and this company
is something that's deeply impacted me I
had six weeks of trying the product
we're in talk about qualia and for
people that don't know before I tell my
story what our nootropics I mean there's
a buzz out there the wellness industry
it's like one of the top seven trends or
ten trends right now for people that
want to optimize the way they show up in
their life but if somebody hasn't heard
of nootropics I mean what is a nootropic
so the work no tropic is not precisely
defined in a way that everyone uses it
commonly but for the most part we can
define nootropic as some chemical that
enhances some aspect of cognitive
ability beyond normal baseline without
meaningful side-effects and so if we're
if we're dealing with someone's
cognitive capability having dropped
below baseline we're dealing with
pathology of some kind even if it's
subclinical pathology right Alzheimer's
is cognitive decline from pathology that
we've defined very clearly brain fog is
generally not a clearly defined
pathology but it is actually dysfunction
so if we are correcting the underlying
dysfunction to just come back to
baseline that's very meaningful we would
call that kind of medicine in the psycho
neuropharmacology
in the you know cognitive chemistry
space and it's not medicine that's well
understood or well defined but that
wouldn't be no tropics per se even
though a lot of people use no tropics
for that space
no tropics are really looking at
optimization beyond baseline how can I
take some capacity and enhance it now
then you have smart drugs so people who
use adderall not for prescription
purposes for an actual diagnosis
function but are using it for
enhancement and will enhance something
whether it's adderall that they're using
or Ritalin or modafinil what will be a
trend or just lots of Red Bull Red Bulls
a smart drug you could you could think
that way right most of the time when we
think smart drug we think
pharmaceuticals some pharmaceutical
that's usually for narcolepsy or a DD or
some other kind of actual cognitive
decline disorder like Alzheimer's or
Parkinson's people use levodopa right as
Parkinson's meant for increasing
dopamine do different things like that
so we usually think of some kind of
Pharma med first that is being used for
an off-label purpose for enhancing some
aspect of cognitive function and that
does work but usually it works at the
cost of both long-term dependency
long-term side effects and usually even
fairly narrow up regulation with some
real-time down regulation so when people
are taking dopamine for instance they're
seeking to increase dopamine production
but they're not looking at how natural
dopamine production and dopamine
regulation works and so we don't want
dopamine relatively fixed from outside
stimulus we want to open to be able to
be adaptive to external stimulus as is
appropriate and adaptive to all of the
other chemicals that have exists in
quite complex relationships with with
serotonin and with gaba with the other
catecholamines right and we also want to
look at the whole chain of how dopa
dopamine is produced to say if that
chain is damaged somewhere right the
person is not getting enough tyrosine or
phenyl alanine or they don't have enough
of the vitamins that are involved in
converting it b6 or C or etc and that
can affect other things so dopamine
might be the most obvious but if it's a
tyrosine issue it might be affecting
thyroid function a so not only do we not
want to just go straight to the insane
chemical and make them not adaptive but
we don't want to lose the opportunity to
optimize the entire chain for all of
those purposes and so smart drugs are
not no tropics though they're people who
are interested or oftentimes interested
in both what we're interested in in the
new tropic space and we specifically
have a approach to no tropics it is a
complex system informed approach to
nootropics is how do we optimize some
aspects of cognitive psychological
function sustainably where we don't have
meaningful side-effects in real time
like at all increasing focus but
creating irritability or anger
properties as well right that would be a
long term downside the short term
downside would be being anxious or
irritable while you're on it we're
having empathy go down or having digit
span go down while focus goes up so our
goal when we saw at our all doing
something like multi-billion dollar
sales off label right off label purposes
for people doing their tech startup or
midterms or finals or with all the
consequences associated we saw this
exponential curve and not just on that
but on a lot of smart drugs and on a
$15,000,000,000 energy drink market and
it's clear that people have radically
increased demands on their cognitive
ability we are slaves right now to
notifications calendar is being chocked
full I look at my brother's life I love
my brother he has three kids and he has
a full-time job and he's doing all these
things and I and I look at him at the
end of the day and he's drinking coffee
and I'm like there's got to be a better
way because he is a mirror of the
consciousness level and of the aptitude
that's out there right now about people
not really knowing what they can do to
let some steam off and to refocus their
attention so I had an experience that I
want to share and it was six weeks your
company was nice enough to give me a
great supply and it was incredible I
took a black label product which is not
on the market yet but what happened is
that I woke up in the morning I did my
meditation I went through my normal
process and then I'm at CES eight
podcast interviews in one day and going
on stage to moderate a panel and an
after-party and at the end of the day I
was still thinking like wow I could
actually connect with more people and
never in my life haven't been able to be
so focused and the same way that I'm
feeling you right now where I'm fully
present I'm looking at someone's eyes
there's no response in me where I need
to look away or check my
phone or not be here and that's
something that's unique so beyond just
the physical energy that I was feeling I
mean what is that product
tell us about qualia tell us what I was
using to be able to have that incredible
day so the first thing that we looked at
was you know as we were saying we see
this exponential rise in products that
people are taking to enhance some aspect
of productive capability or focus or
energy or clarity even if it is down
regulating other things that matter even
if it's causing dependence because the
demand is so high
alright the need is so high so as you're
mentioning with your brother and so many
people there are more things causing
distraction and competing for focus
while an increased demand for
productivity and the net result of those
together is very stressful debilitating
cetera so most people know if they take
caffeine they can have increase in
certain kinds of focus but if they take
it above a certain level they're gonna
get then downsides anxiety jitters and
they still if they actually pay
attention and say they use quantified
mind or Cambridge online cognitive
assessment or tools like that quantified
self tools they'll see that some metrics
of cognitive capability increase and
other ones actually decrease in real
time right so we've seen times where
people have a lot more energy but
they're actually task switching so fast
their follow through sport or things
like that right so the first thing we
did was we said all right so people who
are buying off-label adderall or smart
drinks or whatever it is are they
actually really looking for and what
they're looking for most of the time is
not just increased arithmetic processing
or increased verbal fluency or increased
digit span but they're looking for
creative productive flow states where
their cognitive capacities and their
creative capacities are fully online and
they have the right emotional state that
goes along with them so
cognitively there's a whole set of
functions its short-term memory and
long-term memory and speed of memory and
digit span and verbal fluency and task
switching and depth of focus and
attention span right all these classic
cognitive metrics but it's the product
of those together right none of them on
their own and we actually really want to
look at how do we lift all those
together oh
along with more internal drive and
internal agency and more emotional
resilience to disruptive external you
know phenomena creating almost of a
virtual buffer around distraction and
things that want to pull you out of that
state whether it be flow state or just
or just focused attention exactly
there's 42 compounds and they all work
together in synergy if we have time in
the other show we'll talk about how is
synergy and the emergence process work
but the synergy of 42 ingredients I've
taken four brands of nootropics actually
in the past two years and what I loved
the most about qualia is that I could go
all day long but still not feel that
crash and I think people can relate to
this if they've had too much coffee in a
day that feeling of being jittery
towards the end of the day it didn't
occur so how did you design that how do
these chemicals work together they're
not really chemicals right they're more
things that are essential for us that
our body needs there's some brain
vitamins in there tell us about those we
started by modeling what we were trying
to enhance and as you were mentioning it
was actually a lot of things that are
not necessarily obvious at first right
like increased presence isn't
necessarily what people think of when
they're going for a nootropic and they
think they want increased focus because
often times increased focus will lead to
irritability if someone tries to
distract them so how do we have this is
a common adderall thing it's like if I'm
just coding it's cool but if someone
distracts me I'm irritable and actually
have a hard time in task switching how
do we have more focus and more fluid
task switching and more presence
wherever we are well enough perspective
to then decide where we want to move our
attention back to that's a lot of
complex functions the other so we
started by doing the cognitive and
psychological modeling of what we were
actually seeking to enhance the whole
set of functions and experiences and
then how those relate to each other once
we have that modeled and that's again
that's novel right we didn't start with
here's a disease state and here's the
one thing that we're gonna try and
adjust in that disease State or even
here's an optimization goal and here's
the one thing we started with a
synergistic goal then we said let's look
at since we're not modifying it via a
meditation practice which is totally
valid or a psychotherapeutic practice
CBT or something like that we're
modifying it via modifying the
underlying what is CBT for people that
might not know cognitive behavioral
therapy particular kind of effective
psychotherapy for certain things
we're very technology agnostic by the
way we work with biochemistry
we work with neuro technology so
transcranial stimulation of various
kinds transcranial lasers magnetic deep
stem electric stim ac/dc etc
neurofeedback as well neurofeedback got
brain access work genomics and genetic
expression work as well as psychological
modalities from mindfulness meditative
modalities to underlying shifting of
meaning trauma somatic therapies we're
interested in anything that actually
works on some dynamics than being able
to know which things are in the most
meaningful for an individual person and
their goals we'll get back to that but
for this generalized purpose what we
were looking for is once we understood
what psychological and cognitive
functions were seeking to optimize we
wanted to see what physiology mediates
those and so this is looking at
everything from the cell science and the
neuro chemistry and are under chronology
biophysics what's known about all the
things that have causal relationships to
short-term memory or to emotional
resilience right so we look at all the
pathways where some studies have
happened so we started with a structured
review meta-analysis of all the
appropriate spaces to say okay
acetylcholine processing effects these
things glutamate processing effects
these things these ion channels are
involved in right so then we end up
having all these underlying physiologic
pathways and then we model how those
pathways the entire pathway and the
regulatory process of those pathways
work and how the pathways interact with
each other to create these complex
feedback mechanisms which is why we're
taking a complex systems approach to
neuroscience and second row pharmacology
once we model that out we said all right
we want to actually enhance not just the
level of some chemical right raises heal
choline we want to enhance the
regulatory capacity of this whole system
so that when someone gets off it
they don't have dependents because they
become we've just created a big
exogenous stimuli another dependent on
it but are exogenous stimuli was
actually working through their
endogenous their internal regulatory
pathway to robust the resilience of that
regulatory pathway so when they get off
it the effects can be lasting so then we
looked at how does the entire regulatory
pathway work and what can we do to be
able to increase the capacity of that
system
I'm almost hearing from you this was an
inventory of everything that works to
make our cognition fire now would you
say that nootropics decrease the time
from once in
ups to the other the message gets
through or is this more making a folding
of the safety of the axon of the neuron
what is it actually doing the nootropic
in there between that space between the
dendrite and everything what's happening
there different things so say you just
look at acetylcholine right that one
neurotransmitter for a moment you can
use something like Cooper's na which is
a very common nootropic which is what we
call an acetylcholine esterase inhibitor
which was on the 4-hour body right
didn't Tim Ferriss write about that
quite a bit probably yeah it's a common
nootropic it's a plant derived
neurotropic there are other things that
are also acetylcholine esterase
inhibitors both pharmaceutical and
plant-based and what that's doing is
there's an enzyme in the synapse oh
you're talking about between the axon
and the dendrite right in the synaptic
cleft there's an enzyme that breaks down
acetylcholine so you don't have
excessive amounts of it but it can also
break it down too fast so you then end
up having deficient amounts with that
cause brain fog if it's too fast in the
breakdown it can write but it's
important brain fog doesn't have one
cause has lots of causes it can be from
neuro inflammation it can be from
deficiency or excess of lots of
different neurotransmitters so but that
could be one of them so you can actually
inhibit that enzyme so the same amount
of acetylcholine that is coming out of
the axon can actually get across the
synapse more effectively that's one
thing you could do if you're asking
what's happening chemically so in
acetylcholine esterase inhibitor would
be one way to modulate the acetylcholine
pathway but once it gets across the
synapse it's going to be actually
getting up taken in the postsynaptic
neuron in various receptors and so we
could modulate one of those receptors so
we can use things like rasa Tam's
piracetam aniracetam etc to upregulate
say the acetylcholine uptake on the nmda
complex that's another thing that we
could do we could do those in
combination or separately we could
actually provide more choline donors or
acetyl donors for the body to make more
acetylcholine we could provide the the
catalysts like vitamin b5 and other
things that helps take calling in
acetylated so there's a lot of things
that we can do to affect the
acetylcholine pathway and that's just
one pathway then there's two stages why
taking the first stage without food and
then waiting and then food with the
second stage I had to play around with a
bit to find my
perfect dose to where I could just be
present but then not feel like I was too
much energized
tell us about that why you break it up
into two I've never done that before
okay so qualia currently has two bottles
it's a program that someone would take
just for clarity when we were initially
modeling what are all of the chemicals
that we know something meaningful about
that could modify any of those
underlying pathways we created a
database of about 500 chemicals and
looked at what the primary pathways they
affect secondary pathways etc and then
we did a whole bunch of customized
chemistry for this kind of cognitive
enhancement goal where we were working
with integrative doctors running very
deep blood chemistry on people clinical
chemistry brain scans genomics etc and
then really working to optimize in very
unique ways once we saw that we could
get the kinds of effects we wanted to
get really profound upregulation across
all the things they were interested in
without any of the kinds of down
regulation we wanted to avoid that we
could assess then we wanted to see what
portion of that could we do in a non
customized fashion so that we could
bring it at scale because obviously
doing it that kind of customization at
scale is very difficult and there's some
things that we couldn't work with
because they're so specific to one set
of genes that what would be beneficial
for someone is too harmful to other
people but we want to see which dynamics
can we work with effectively across most
of the population so then that looked
like a you know a bunch of internal
product development trials iterations
were using 23andme tests as well that
was one of the things some people were
giving us 23andme data some people are
giving us Illumina data some people were
going much deeper and also looking at
what's actually expressing but we're
also of course just doing the analysis
of all of the journal articles in
various spaces and doing you know
structured synthesis so the 42 is one
iteration it's one iteration that ended
up being the right one for us to come to
market with first but it's going to
change in the reason there was two
different things two different products
specifically some of the ingredients
absorb very well without food since
these are pills that people are
swallowing we could have things that
were injections I am or IV or intranasal
or but there's safety and regulatory
reasons would be hard to sell needles as
well
and if we don't have any moral issue
with that if it's actually safe and
effective we were just simply looking at
what the safest way for things to go to
the most number of people for the most
enhancement can happen and so since
we're having to do GI absorption then
some things really absorb much better
without food where they get to have
maximum surface area contact other
things really need food for absorption
and to avoid nausea and so in the
particular stack of chemicals we were
working with we ended up separating it
for that purpose yeah one of the things
you have on your site that's fascinating
is your quota we believe fully optimized
human beings lead to a better world
people being productive and creative and
whatever that is theirs to do but in
many ways our modern world works against
us how do you feel like neuro hacker
tell us about neuro hacker and what are
you doing to address that to address the
onslaught of these weapons of mass
distraction as gay and Katy Hendricks
call it regarding the quote that you
mentioned from our website and ye no
hacker exists is obviously we're working
on individual human optimization how can
we optimize our mind brain body system
for increased quality of experience and
increase capability and we're interested
in both increasing our quality of
experience means less subjective
suffering more subjective happiness
quality of life right that's important
because human experience is
intrinsically meaningful and increasing
human capability and positive
predisposition to solve problems and
create things of meaning ends up
affecting the experience of lots of
other people and non people sentient
things right and so if our focus is
increasing the quality of sentient
experience across everything then
optimizing humans into being key to that
whole process because most of the
problems in the world that we really
care to change whether we're talking
about economic inequality or war or
crime or species extinction those are
problems that are being caused by human
action and human action is motivated by
our worldview it's motivated by economic
systems that predispose certain actions
it's motivated by lots of things but one
of the things that ends up motivating it
is our own biology and so when we
realize that empathy runs on certain
neural networks it can be biochemically
up or downregulated
complex thinking requires certain kinds
of
hardware right and neurophysiologic
hardware interactions to occur everyone
who's had their hormones very out of
place or who's been sick or very
underslept knows that you can go into
biochemical states it makes certain
emotions or certain cognitive
capabilities almost inaccessible and
that make other ones almost unavoidable
yeah and so while addressing human
physiology is not sufficient for
optimizing human experience and
capability it is necessary it's a large
piece and and how do you feel like neuro
hacker as a company what is your ethos
with solving this on a gradual basis
because these are massive issues that
we're facing I mean it's not like
overnight things are gonna change but
what are some of the enrollment
conversations that we can have with
people that we care about that not only
can use products like quality and
nootropics but they can get behind this
mindset of having increased empathy and
compassion for people we're built to be
in a tribe jason silva talks about this
in brain games how there is circuitry in
the brain that actually wired us to care
for other people and other tribes
because that's how we would survive
let's build into our structure our a's
our seas our teas our G's well when you
talk about how do we share the value
system now you're talking about
affecting people software right actually
affecting belief structures value
structures understanding structures
which also predispose experience in
behavior so if we think about people's
worldview and their mimetics as kind of
human software and that can be affected
through education through psychotherapy
through media right through what you're
doing media is affecting human software
directly and then we think of human
Hardware as human physiology which not
just medicine addressing dysfunction but
we can think of a kind of bio
optimization addressing optimized
predisposition then we can also think
about the hardware and the software of
the collective where infrastructure
where how we meet our physical needs in
relationship with the physical planet so
transportation agriculture water energy
production materials waste are the
hardware of the collective and our
social systems economics governance law
language how we have collective
agreement fields for how we do decision
making in beyond individual decisions
it's the software the creative the
hardware and the software of the
individual and the collective represent
a
taxonomy it is necessary and sufficient
for understanding human experience in
human behavior and so not neural hacker
but our the think tank that gave rise to
neural hacker is focused on all of those
quadrants and what has to happen within
a particular time period to move us off
of the current self terminating path
that we're on you know as a species and
into a really viable path that is not
only not self terminating but that
obsoletes the unnecessary causes of
human induced suffering and optimizes
quality of life potential now an ongoing
life for all life and neuro hacker is
addressing one part of that a big part
of our emotional health comes from how
we feel in our body and how a shady we
are throughout the day I mean it's hard
to treat other people well and think
good thoughts if you're walking around
hangry one of the best ways to cure
satiety and satiation is to add in
powdered collagen to your drinks your
waters and into your foods I use perfect
supplements collagen it's sourced from
100% grass-fed cows that means there's
no hormones pesticides or synthetics
because these are healthy cows that eat
grass while the sick cows eat corn so
beyond these healing powers of collagen
for digestion and joint health
it also has 20 grams of protein and 2
scoops which helps to curb appetite and
increase that satiety one of the cool
things about this collagen is that
there's individual packets you can mix
in water and you know what it tastes
like water I mean all of a sudden like
glass has 10 grams 20 grams of protein
and all the health benefits of having
this non-gmo pasture-raised collagen in
my bloodstream so don't walk around
hangry pick up your grass-fed collagen
feel better in your emotional body and
your physical body every day it's part
of the wellness force radio bundle and
it's heavily discounted just for you
click over to perfect supplements comm
slash wellness force to save 10% off the
already discounted package and get more
wellness in the process the elevation of
consciousness through biological
optimization so if we're taking care of
ourselves I mean there's an adage out
there you can't fill up someone else's
cup if yours is empty if you're on a
plane you have to put your mask on first
how do we do both how do we become
either physically financially or just
ahead how do we get ahead in life and
take care of ourselves while also I
believe there's a term that you have
Omni considerate to other people how do
we do this and how does supplementation
and nutrition and products
qualia plug into that to be an omni
considerate think about this if I asked
you who you are you'll tell me something
but if I say we who are you without
plants and you think about it and you
think well who would you be without
oxygen and atmosphere you wouldn't exist
who would you be without the plants that
produce the oxygen atmosphere you
wouldn't exist you were actually the
emergent property of a biosphere that
made you possible it was mediated by
plants and they were mediated by insects
and microbes and a whole bunch of things
right and so you can define yourself
without thinking about the atmosphere in
plants but it's a misnomer it's a wrong
idea because you'd actually don't exist
without all of them you are
fundamentally interdependent with the
whole rest of the biosphere not just
Pasteur but the whole universe who are
you without gravity some it's a nonsense
question right who are you without
electromagnetism it's a nonsense
question so you are an emergent property
of a universe that made you possible and
you're still fundamentally
interconnected with and interdependent
with the whole thing so if you think of
earth as actually you zoom out and you
look at it from the outside
space-shuttle picture and you see that
it's this tiny tiny little bitty organic
spaceship traveling to this vast cosmos
that's very inhospitable place and you
realize that on this tiny little organic
fragile spaceship together everything in
there is interconnected profoundly and
eggs are interconnected and the idea
that there's this place called away
where we can throw our trash and these
people called others that we can bomb
and it's beneficial get their resources
whatever that engenders their enmity
back that whatever wherever the trash
goes is affecting the air the water that
Deeley everyone is engaged with we have
a level of technology that gives us
global influence and everything that we
do when we're talking here and the
headphones that we're talking on have
plastics and metals and silicates etc
that came almost every continent that
had people and supply chains around the
whole world that were involved it took
resources from the earth in ways that
were fundamentally on renewable caused
massive massive problems extinction
level problems for many species and then
turned it into trash
on the other side we're doing these
seemingly benign behaviors like buying
stuff this is actually affecting this
little spaceship that we live on in ways
that make it self terminating very
quickly we have a level of population
that we never had it's been an
exponential risin since then this
revolution and a level of impact per
capita within that population that again
is exponential that cannot continue in
this way but we also have the
technological capability to make
fundamental changes where we don't have
an exponential growth society where we
don't have an economic system that
requires year-over-year exponential
growth on a finite planet which how the
 would that make any sense to do an
exponential growth economy forever or a
linear materials economy that turns
nature into trash on a finite planet and
what's interesting is if you look at
nature everything has a lifecycle
everything comes up and everything goes
down so there's 2,500 year old
Bristlecone Pines I think that are on
the earth but at some point they'll
perish there's no such thing in nature
as continual unlimited growth it doesn't
exist so how do we address this here I'm
not saying that capitalism is wrong or
that socialism is wrong or right or any
of that what I'm trying to address is
the way we're conscious in our life and
the way that we take care of our biology
through supplementation through
nutrition and exercise how does that key
into the neuro hacker mindset do we joke
sometimes that you can take qualia as a
performance optimizing technology to go
do whatever meaningless thing you might
have been doing climbing a corporate
ladder for a company that is mostly net
harmful to life in the planet and to
your own existence and we really hope
you don't but there are so many people
who are actually wanting to create very
meaningful pieces of art and science and
humanistic connection and and are
actually at the limits of their
emotional resilience facing the
difficulties in the world or at the
limits of their ability to muster their
energy and focus to do the difficult but
meaningful things that are there so do
those are the people we most want to
affect and then the people who are
currently not engaged in what would be
most meaningful for them we want to help
empower them to switch I think there's
someone listening and they're probably
feeling oh my gosh she's so right I
doing something that I know on some
level is probably hurting other people
or it's probably not in my best interest
what does that look like for someone to
change you know what are the practices
or what are the mindsets that they can
instill to first just be aware of the
fact that what they're doing is not
aligned with who they are and then
secondly what's the first few action
steps they might take it's a deep
process and we could have a future time
if your listeners were interested
dedicated to things like what does the
future of the world look like in terms
of the future of economics beyond the
current sensation of capitalism the
future of governance beyond the current
sensation of representative democracy
the future of materials economy the
future of Medicine we could get into
that and we could also talk about what
it looks like transitionally at a macro
level for society and what it can look
like transitioning for individuals one
thing I will say just as a as a partial
offering towards this question is when
people ask intrinsic motives so they ask
questions like if all my financial needs
were already met in perpetuity what
would I do they start to move in the
right direction of what would be an
innately meaningful to them when they
asked if I could actually direct the
Gates Foundation funds what would I do
with it so they think about if I had a
lot of resources what would be most
meaningful for me to do so I'm not
looking at gaining like winning in a
competitive system I'm looking at if
I've already done that now what's
actually interesting to do this is these
are clarifying questions that are
important and they ask what problems in
the world bother them the most those are
things that are theirs to actually do
something about what touches them the
most
those are the things that are theirs to
actually help protect them proliferate I
feel like there's so many phases of
technology I just got back from CES that
are nudging people in the right
direction of conscious living of being
more aware of how they're feeling in
their body and what they're doing with
their mind and in their space and there
was a previous video we'll link in the
show notes and it was from the hive and
it was a profound talk it was an hour
and a half I think of just some of the
most intelligent Minds going over some
of the most interesting topics and one
of the things you talked about was the
Internet of Things measure the entire
natural and built world Commons in
real-time to allocate resources tell us
about what the Commons are and then how
that end of things
might actually allow us to solve some of
these big issues in the world so why do
we still burn coal for energy anywhere
as opposed to renewable energy sources
like solar and wind and etc well we have
said for quite some time that Solar is
just not quite cost-effective yet well
this one that's not true anymore in
terms of having reach grid parity but
even like why would that be true well we
could build a coal plant for less
initial dollars and get coal moving into
it and generate more watts per dollar a
little bit more watts per dollar than a
solar plant until recently but in the
process of doing so the coal was
releasing a huge amount of mercury into
the atmosphere and water so much so that
the large fish species have mercury
levels that are well beyond any previous
safe levels then again are putting
neurotoxins and you know biotoxins of
all kinds and putting zinc oxide nitrous
oxide sulfates in the atmosphere that
are doing mountaintop removal mining to
get the coal that are damaging the
ecosystem and so many ways and damaging
human health directly right well what's
the cost of that if we actually had to
fix it if we counted for it if we looked
at what is all of the harm that comes to
humans from those environmental toxins
what is the total cost of the medical
bills of that and how do you even count
the cost of lost life and cancer and
children and etc and then you said well
let's say someone can burn coal but they
can't leave the comments right which is
that which affects everybody the the
natural war Commons is a metaphor for
everyone is a common world right that
was just common to all of us are the
natural Commons is the natural world the
built built world Commons is the built
infrastructure that we all participate
in but let's particular on the natural
world Commons for a moment so with the
coal example most of the cost right the
actual negative the cost of burning coal
the company doesn't have to pay for it
its externalize to the Commons in the
form of damaging ecosystems extinct
tting species externalizing medical
bills to future generations so everybody
else pays for it right yeah now their
profit margin goes up
because they move the cost somewhere
else
that's called external ization well if
we said we can burn coal but you can't
leave the commons net worse so the same
amount of co2 has to be in the
atmosphere afterwards so whatever it
takes to scrub the co2 out of the
atmosphere scrub the mercury out mine in
a way that is regenerative to the whole
ecosystem you have to use the
technologies that do that well the cost
to do that would make coal something
like four orders of magnitude more
expensive and solar would have reached
grid parity the moment it was invented
and so it's a nonsense economic system
it is actually an extinction Airy
economic system it not only allows but
incentivizes external ization of harm to
the Commons that is what led to coal
making sense Oversoul right and so many
other things like that similar we can we
can look at that say we look at any
species extinction issue it's been a
result of destroying habitat or poaching
or whatever a whale swimming in the
ocean is worth nothing on anyone's
balance sheet economically it's part of
the natural world Commons we can think
of it that way it has its own balance
sheet right it is a part of nature's
balance sheet we just don't measure
those balance sheets and we don't care
about them and we don't care about them
in any way that we have metrics
associated with but if there is a
fishing boat that can do whaling that
whales a million dollars in will mean in
Japan or somewhere right where that's a
part of the commodities trade so that
means that there's a million dollars of
incentive to kill the whale and none to
leave it where it is which is why we
have been extinct ting species at the
radical rate that we have cutting down
all growth forests overfishing the
oceans is because everything's worth
something to us commoditized and dead
and not otherwise that the Commons the
balance sheet of the Commons we don't
measure and so we just steal from it
right we externalize cost there and we
take its assets and the more we can take
the assets of the Commons and
externalize our costs there the better
we're doing in capitalism what would it
look like for technology to measure this
inventory for the comments so that
everyone can win how do we how do we use
tech to make a win-win when we look at
the Commons and inventory all that so
the key thing that has to happen and in
the future of macroeconomics is that we
have to make sure that what we're
incentivizing people and companies and
what we're incentivizing agents to do is
Omni positive so we're not giving anyone
incentive meaning they get ahead
economically by doing something that is
fundamentally harming other agents
arming the Commons otherwise we're
continuing to cause the problems at the
deepest level by incentivizing them
based on what our counting systems right
based on our value systems and so what
we need is to incentivize things in
relationship to how Omni positive they
are which means you have to measure
everything affected not just a few of
the things but measure everything
affected internalize all of those
positives and negatives into the value
equation and then incentivize things
accordingly so to the degree that we
make an incentive of any agent more
close to perfectly aligned with the
well-being of other agents in the
Commons is the degree to which the
economic system becomes a source for
solutions to everything rather than us
or for problems everything the Internet
of Things is growing exponentially I
follow the work of Peter Diamandis and
the XPrize how do you see neuro hacker
growing into someone that can be not
just at that level of XPrize but also
like how are we gonna make the tricorder
how are we gonna solve these big
problems with that what do you feel
about the future what are you excited
about for the future of nirach so neural
hackers goals specifically are
comprehensive human optimization and so
this includes assessment includes
therapeutics effective technology and
includes the interpretive platforms that
can do customization personalization and
so the way to address brain fog or
anxiety or MS for different people is
different because they have different
underlying causal mechanisms going on
so we're look we're interested in the
assessment diagnostic system so right
now neural hackers not doing medicine
it's doing direct-to-consumer
optimization we're doing fundamental
research that is related to being able
to advance medicine whether that happens
in this company or an Associated company
but how to basically synthesize all the
diagnostics that exists where we don't
just look at individual biometrics in
relationship to a fixed reference range
but we look at the resilience of those
biometrics when stressed so we're
looking at the homeostatic resilience of
the
system not just current homeostasis and
we get to look at each of the biometrics
in relationship to each other to
understand complex inter causal patterns
and so we're looking at how we interpret
and synthesize all Diagnostics
developing new systems of Diagnostics
that provide higher fidelity more
meaningful data more affordably more
liquid ously more frequently the right
and AI interpretative platforms for
being able to make appropriate sense of
that and then the ability to vet all the
effective technologies to not just this
is effective for this disease or symptom
ology but for these pathways where then
we can look at which pathways are
involved for individual people and you
know how they're weighted to then be
able to have really personalized bio
optimization then beyond by optimization
you can also personalize people's psycho
therapeutics because the kind of
psychotherapy that's necessary for
anxiety if it came on from an acute
incident of trauma and in adulthood
versus if it was something that was
there since childhood they're different
kinds of psychotherapeutic processes
just like there's different kinds of you
know physiologic processes for similar
symptom ologies so how do we customize
everything that is meaningful optimizing
human experience and capability how do
we vet it for what's actually effective
understand what it's effective for
synthesize it personalize it and do that
progressively better at scale this is
the dream dashboard I think everyone has
been looking for where we can get all of
our wellness effects data our blood
testing data our 23andme we can get our
you biome our gut microbiota on there
we can get everything for our activity
tracking having a dashboard we can just
check in with ourselves as a mirror of
mindfulness and figure out how can I do
one percent better today I think
sometimes people get caught up in the
tracking and the tracking becomes like
what device am I gonna get or what
system like in years or what supplement
should I take and all these different
things and they get lost because the
intention behind all of it to just be
this biologically optimized human that's
the intention that people need be
following you know the people are
listening and watching like don't get
caught up in the device qualia is an
incredible tool it's not the golden
ticket that's going to heal your life
however it will support you and all
those systems you were talking about so
you can make those good decisions and
you might find your golden ticket who
knows so in leaving our show today this
has been so much fun I want to ask you
seven questions and they're really fast
so if you
get to know you okay the first question
is what fascinates you the most I mean
we already know that you have a high
level of intelligence when it comes to
biological systems but what about the
brain fascinates you the most as in
regards to neuroplasticity the way that
the brain can shift and mold and and
change what lights you up when you think
about neuroplasticity so interestingly
our team just did a structured review of
all the literature on neurogenesis so
adult neurogenesis specifically
development of new neurons and that
there's a lot that's known about
specific neurotrophins MGF b d NF g d NF
that support the development of nucleo
cells neurons etc there are are things
regarding the development of new neural
stem cells and in the differentiation of
the stem cells so we did a you know
literature review of everything known in
the space and then started looking at
what the relationship between all the
mechanisms that regulate neurogenesis
are and the evolutionary biology of why
humans have as much neurogenic capacity
as we have we're also doing structured
review of everything on that
how to remove senescent neurons so
neural autophagy what is the senescence
or mould neurons that are no longer
functioning as well they're not serving
us anymore
and neural protection and new synaptic
development neurite developments and
synaptogenesis as well as synaptic
cleaving so all of these things are
neural remodeling right brain remodeling
so how does how do we get rid of old
brain cells that are not functioning
well and causing dysfunction develop new
brain cells develop new connections
between them develop new algorithms on
them and so this is when we see the kind
of learning that can happen in early
children that is not available in adults
where adults learn a language and they
keep an accent and children can learn
multiple languages and not have an
accent because the kind of neural
restructuring neural plastic plasticity
that's available we are very interested
in being able to develop technologies to
help advance the field of what's
possible for ongoing adult neural
restructuring and this is for anti-aging
specifically in the brain side and not
just in terms of longevity and just
neural health but also
ongoing increased cognitive capacity
that is fascinating we're definitely
going to have to have another
conversation about de brain just one
hour straight about the brain now what
you look back on your journey has there
been one point where you realized wow I
learned one of the biggest lessons about
my own personal wellness and it could
have been at any stage in your life was
there one or was there many where you
thought you know what this really
affected my wellness and I know how to
take better steps next time so many
rather than speak to one because so many
things in terms of how to take better
responsibility for my relationships and
almost every time that I ever thought
there was a difficulty in a relationship
that was someone else and learned how
either it was actually me or the degree
to which it was someone else I set up
that dynamic or elicit it or didn't
create enough discernment taking
responsibility there and in physical
health and an emotional health and in
finance in it you know if you want to
look at something Metta across all those
it would be really profound empowered
self responsibility but not just
responsibility for my own well-being
integrity and quality of life but also
response rate for the way I impact what
would you say to somebody who's
experiencing anxiety I dealt with
anxiety a lot in my 20s to the point
where I would not go out for days
someone's feeling like that they're
listening what are some things they can
do in addition to to taking a smart
nootropic or having a healthy regimen of
exercise what else is something that
people can do as a first or second step
when they're going through kind of
paralyzing anxiety well the first thing
I would say is I feel you I've been
there I know how scary and crippling
that can be one of the things that is
trickiest about anxiety is we can feel
anxiety about anything it can be a
relationship ending or money or getting
on stage or whatever and then if that
anxiety ever gets to a high enough point
that gets scary to us then we start any
source of anxiety like normal stuff that
happens we become hypersensitive to our
own sensations of anxiety then we become
anxious about it and then we get in
these feedback loops and so then we
become scared of going to situations
that we'll be scared of then we notice a
little bit of fear and gosh
is that thing going to happen again
right and so panic attacks are where
that just goes to Zenith and then we can
get afraid well it's never gonna end I'm
gonna be stuck in this forever which
becomes the ultimate fear and then
depression kicks in first thing I'd say
is I've worked with a lot of people in
panic attack disorder and generalized
anxiety disorder and seen people shift
from decades of these situations through
different mechanisms and different
modalities but it is addressable that's
the first thing I would say is it is
addressable you need to find the right
solutions they are not one right best
solution for different people some
people have got disorders and you can
feel that you've got got disorders you
address the gut disorder and the gut
brain access optimising makes a
tremendous difference there are other
people where just addressing the
meditation side of it will make enough
shift that they have the energy to start
addressing other things other people
there were there were those cognitive
loops that are going on where they're
afraid of their own symptom of fear
cognitive behavioral therapy will
actually address those cognitive loops
quite quickly so there's different
modalities that can be effective try
them like big responsibility for working
at it and if some are not working then
don't make a generalized assessment that
nothing will work or nothing works for
you or your anxieties particularly
different or worse it's not just keep
working at it what if someone just wants
to increase emotional intelligence I
mean what's made a difference for you
from emotional intelligence how do we
grow that besides just making it a point
to like connect like here we are we're
connecting today and I made it a focus
that was my intention before we sat down
to connect but for somebody that's not
in the regular practice of connecting or
being present what does that look like
in the first one or two or a handful of
steps for them to be a more emotionally
present practice AllShare there are many
important ones but one simple extremely
powerful one is practice looking at the
world through other people's eyes really
deeply so if you are upset with a
partner or a friend or a family member
step out of being you completely step
out of your background your history or
perspective and really try and be them
and say with their history with the
that they value of the ways they've been
hurt with et cetera and without knowing
what your actual intentions were how you
came across to them how they could have
what what is it like white why are they
feeling what they feel why are they
asking for that are they upset are they
and you know you've got it if you grok
exactly why they are feeling the way
they are and you're like wow I would
totally be there too if you're like no
they're still lame I and my in their
position I would such-and-such
differently you haven't got it cuz
you're not being them you're being you
in their physical position without
actually getting there in our experience
a lot of the work that you do is is kind
of serious in nature I mean you're
solving some big problems here at neuro
hacker but what do you do for fun and
what's something in your life that just
cracks you up I mean with something that
makes you laugh my wife makes me laugh
consistently it is one of the great
fortunes of my life so I'm very
fortunate in that way I think everyone
should pay attention to who they
surround themselves with and have people
that uplift them in various ways and
also work to uplift everyone around you
so that you know people who are
uplifting are engendered to want to do
that so that's one thing key sure one
thing that you might do that really
cracks you up the most one of the
reasons that we are together is very
very balancing for me she's a extremely
embodied playful person and so waking me
up in the morning she's different
characters and she's just basically
talking a different accent playing and
entertaining me most of the time what
can the Wellness force community do to
support you to get in this real
conversation like they've been involved
in today with us around doing things
that matter to them on a fundamental and
on a moral level but also taking care of
their body what does that look like for
them and how can we support neuro hacker
three things that come to mind first is
go to no hacker comm check it out read
about it see if you are interested if
the product that we currently have is
interesting for you try it give us
feedback if it is positive for you share
it with people that's awesome it is a
first product we have many more products
this year that are coming out and then a
lot of things are going to take more
years and a lot of research and
development to be able to generate but
our goal is ultimately
developing everything that is most
leveraged and meaningful for my brain
optimization it's a huge task we need a
lot of support in it and actually
engaging with the current offerings as
one of the things that helps us to grow
so I would say check it out if it's
useful to you awesome if it is not a
right fit for you product wise but you
still are interested in what we're doing
and just kind of follow the information
awesome so that's one way another way is
since our goals are ultimately you know
we there's one meta imperative that we
all share which is how do we optimize
the quality of life for all life right
we all share elements of that so
upregulate how you do your part of that
and that helps synergistically with
everything that we care about and that
we're doing third thing I would say is
if you are specifically interested in
the future of human capacity human
wellness psychiatry psychology biology
and the extended future of civilization
projects that were working on and you
have resources that you'd like to add to
that whether its scientific capacities
or specific business or organizational
skills or resources of some kind contact
us my last question for you is really
profound because you have such a depth
in your life you've come from a place
where you're meditating as a kid and
you've created so much and what you're
doing neuro hacker I so connect with but
with all that set I mean what is
wellness to you how would you define
wellness in your life as we were
mentioning earlier our direct personal
experience is intrinsically valuable
independent of anything that it affects
right the universe is experiencing
itself through our experience of it and
so wellness is the depth and the choice
and the profundity and the beauty of our
experience that's part of it and what we
do that affects the experience of
everyone else everything else is also
fundamentally part of wellness of the
whole that we are inextricably
interconnected with so optimized human
wellness is both depth of experience and
depth of meaningful contribution
capacity and orientation
for meaningful contribution that was
definitely the most unique answer I've
ever heard thank you so much for coming
on the show I know that we're gonna have
a ton of questions about this the links
from today are gonna be a wellness force
slash qualia you've also given us 10%
off this incredible product so I know
people gonna go and pick this up to not
have it be the golden ticket but to have
it support all those systems that can
allow us to find whatever ticket we want
so thank you so much for coming on the
show I really appreciate it
thanks for having me this was fun and
thanks for coming in for what you do for
educating and supporting and empowering
your community you've made it to the end
of the episode and that is a great thing
because I'm gonna share with you
personally how much this interview and
qualia have impacted me so far in 2017 I
also want to give you a few key
takeaways from the show if you're
listening on your phone just tap this
show artwork and you'll be able to go
right to wellness force comm forward
slash qualia that is where we're gonna
have all the links and downloads and the
directions for your N equals one
experiment with qualia in the show notes
page if you just want to begin today you
can go directly to neuro hacker comm
that is n e U ROH AC ke R neuro hacker
comm enter code W f10 and start the
process it's no surprise that all human
problems including stress and overwhelm
and anxiety or disease are universal
whether you live in San Diego San
Antonio Delaware or even France I think
it's safe to say that our current
industrialized society does not come
without a bombardment of notifications
tasks and calendar appointments I think
you can relate when I say that in 2016
especially I found myself becoming more
of a slave to my phone than a master I
even started to notice it with my
friends where they'd be looking down at
their phone as I was speaking to them
and I know you know how that feels
because it sucks when someone's not
fully present so beyond the cognitive
effects I talked about on the show after
taking qualia now for almost three
months I can share with you that I just
feel more present in the moment and that
is something that can't always be
quantified it can only be felt so if
what we talked about on the show today
inspired you to give it a shot in your
own N equals one experiment head over to
the show notes page and give qualia a
month test drive to see how your mind
and body and emotional bandwidth will
improve when you're done shoot me an
email or even during the process message
me Josh at wellness force comm
we know how the journey is unfolding be
sure to use your discount code WF 10
that's WF 10 to save you a nice chunk of
money on the qualia as well so the top
two takeaways from today's show the
first one that hit me the most was from
Daniel where he mentioned a fully
optimized human being will lead to a
better world yes it's true if you're
walking around stressed or with brain
fog or overwhelmed it's gonna be more
difficult to treat other people as you
want them to treat you so by seeking
your own optimization and empowering
your own wellness you're actually giving
gifts to the people around you and next
was curiosity I mentioned on the show
how I've been insatiably curious for
most of my life specifically with this
podcast I think my curiosity drives all
the questions where I dig so staying
connected to that curiosity that
fundamental spark in all of us
from when you were a kid to this very
moment has been such a force of wellness
in life so do not lose that curiosity
spark the next time you're feeling
curious about something dive in this is
your sign so now there's one thing left
to do when you turn off the episode and
step into life and that is to go out and
create an amazing day for you and the
people you care about so until I see you
again real soon I'm wishing you love and
wellness