welcome to future thinkers podcast
episode number 63 this is the second
part of our interview with Jordan green
hall the co-founder of neuro hacker
where we dive deeper into the concept of
deep code we continue to talk about how
this concept works using examples like
fake news intercultural communication
and parenting we also go back to the
cycle of learning and talk about how we
can teach ourselves to use it to build
better connections with the people
around us to get all the show notes and
links from this episode go to future
thinkers org slash 62 which is also
where you can find the first part of
this conversation if you haven't heard
it yet this episode is brought to you by
qualia a premium nootropic supplement
that helps support mental performance
and brain health it's specifically
designed to promote focus support energy
mental clarity mood memory and
creativity UV and I have both used it in
the past we really like it and we
actually met the founders and
interviewed them on future thinkers you
can check out those interviews they're
one of our favorites at future thinkers
org slash Daniel and future thinkers org
slash jordan they've got a new formula
up called qualia mind it's got more
natural ingredients and you can get it
at future thinkers org slash brain hack
and you can get 10% off if you use the
code future all right let's get into the
show
welcome to future thinkers org a podcast
about the evolution of technology
society and consciousness I'm Mike
Gilliland and I'm UV Ivanova if you new
to the show and you'd like a list of our
top episodes and resources go to future
thinkers that org slash start and if you
like our podcasts leave us a rating and
a review on iTunes and elsewhere
it really helps others find the show and
we really appreciate it so practically
as our world evolves faster as we have
more information more powerful
technologies and the resources of our
planet are not increasing in response to
all of those things happening we have to
understand the deeper structures that
were functioning on so that we can
deconstruct how we're doing things and
reconstruct something new which I'm sure
you are familiar with the concept of
Soviet ed coagula from alchemy and for
those who don't know it's Latin for
deconstruct and reconstitute and the
idea is that everything is made up of
certain components and layers and that
you can go down the layers and
deconstruct or or destroy the upper
layers and then rebuild them so for me
that that comes up a lot recently and
because it seems that that's what we
have to do on many levels and in society
in how we see ourselves and how we see
ourselves in relationship to our earth
etc etc I was gonna say I see what
you're saying in terms of to quote
Daniel he keeps talking about generator
functions and it seems like this is one
of those things that's a generator
function of having a catalyst for change
in the world so people who both enjoy
and know how to self teach and and
continue learning and and to pick
domains that are of value to them into
the world and then to go deep into those
domains so it seems like and that's
something I believed and it's been very
important to me is like the love of
learning and the ability to learn at the
maximum rate that you can learn that's
been super important I like that that's
kind of what you've latched on to in
this conversation yeah there's a couple
of things that I think that I want to
bring up so one is this remember I used
the metaphor of a radio antenna going
from noise to signal the point there is
if you're trying to hear the music and
you're at I think it was eighty nine
point nine you're going to have to try
really really hard to hear a very small
amount of music but if you just tuned
the radio ever so slightly more
literally one notch up it becomes
effortless to hear all of the music now
that's a characteristic of reality
reality has this characteristic that
there are is a relationship between the
degree to which you've constructed an
instrument that is deeply attuned to the
thing that you're trying to deal with
and hear it now becomes an ethical rule
of thumb if you have a choice between
tuning your instrument or trying to use
your instrument harder tune your
instrument sharpen the soft yes
this mist of attunement is
really good heuristic that it to build
that when in doubt become more capable
of tuning your instrument in
relationship to the thing that is being
considered because that possibility of
getting a massive return signal is often
not always often available so then to
make it very concrete let's talk about a
subject that I imagine is present to the
mind of many people and that is the the
problem of fake news or the context of a
generalized breakdown of our collective
sense making systems so you find
yourself on Facebook and you'll find
yourself in a flow of information from
people and what you're noticing is that
it's very difficult to be able to make
sense of what's going on or it's
dysfunctional easy to do so what I mean
by that latter part is you can't of
course choose to have a very simple
sense making framework and then smash
all of reality into that sense making
framework it's a very binary
us-versus-them mentality and say
everything that comes from fox news is
true or everything that comes from CNN
is true and everything that comes from
the opposite is false and then sort of
what's that called externalize but grant
your sense making authority to some
other third party who's doing sense
making but in the event that you
actually want obtain your own agency and
make sense of what's going on what I
would recommend is to be to consider
these concepts of discernment for
example to become sovereign in the
domain of sense making so when you think
about discernment in this domain what
you'll notice is there a number of
different things to consider so remember
we're just like juggling you're moving
your your eyebrows at first it may not
be obvious what the complex of things is
that have to enter into a relationship
as a whole one aspect is very internal
and this is an important level of
mastery to gather in general which is
how are you responding to the
communications and the information is
coming at you to what degree are you
having a strong emotional response I
think we actually talked about this in
our first call are you triggered are you
able to realize when you're triggered
and they
4.have strategies and how to respond how
your sovereignty changes when you're
triggered do you notice that you have a
tendency to look for ways to stay right
rather than to listen to what's being
said and these are deep subtle and
oftentimes very challenging because
they're coming from inside at an
instinctual level and so building an
amount of discernment around your
internal cognitive and emotional
responsiveness is one piece of being
able to become more sovereign into the
domain of fake news in the domain of
sense making it's a very very big piece
and it's very much based upon
discernment because you're more
superficial mechanisms of making sense
of yourself can't be trusted you have to
actually go deeper you have to go deep
deep into yourself build up a higher
degree of discernment so that you can
just sort of notice that maybe the
instrument is out of tune you don't
necessarily know where yet but you know
that it's out of tune and you know as a
habitat as embodied habit that when the
instrument is out of tune first bring it
back into - I just encountered something
from somebody that first and foremost I
notice has moved me out of sovereignty
its moved me out of tune I cannot listen
fully because something has changed now
let's look at my skillfulness of
bringing myself into a tournament in
this domain of listening what does that
mean to be a coherent with listening how
do I get the fullness of my capacity to
listen to became brought to bear so now
I have clarity in the domain of
listening I can actually hear what is
being expressed and it's maybe very not
obvious somebody is expressing something
when somebody is saying something the
totality the expression is vastly more
complex than the simple semantic
interpretation of this barkhov series of
words there's a context there's a tone
there's a facial expression all these
things are part of it and then of course
there's you what are you hearing what
are you bringing into this relationship
that is already imposing itself on what
is being shared in the expression and
how much can you become clear in
yourself so it's the most fully receive
that which is endeavoring to be
expressed how well to become
struggle at listen it so then you have
the other side which is becoming
discerning in the in called the more
social context becoming discerning to
what is being expressed as opposed to
your listening also not becoming
discerning to what is the context and
the the constructs the content of what
is being expressed so now it's a
noticing and sensing that which is
trying to express itself this is the
other side of listening so one is to
become capable of listening in yourself
to have your instrument for receiving
very well tuned and the other is now
being able to become what's called not
really empathic but something which is
uses empathy as a tool and being able to
sense but also has a lot of cognitive
skills the ability to listen closely the
ability to notice where distinctions are
being made the ability to be aware of
when particular like if you guys
familiar with the concept of a rustle
conjugation know so this is a once
you've embodied capacity to notice
rustle conjugation you can now use this
in a higher level of discernment so a
Russell conjugation was coined by
Bertrand Russell it was a philosopher
and mathematician brought into public
consciousness by Eric Weinstein to
describe one of the more common
rhetorical techniques which is to
carefully select from a bunch of
ostensible synonyms the particular word
that has a connotative characteristic
that immediately biases the sense of a
particular expression so for example
come here she said come here she growled
come here she sneered in each case the
she acts the description can be
considered synonyms they're all sort of
descriptions of the fact that she
expressed something but they carry very
distinct connotations and if you're
aware the fact that that is extremely
powerful that the connotative framing
that is associated with the selection of
the particular terms that describe a
phenomenon carries call it 80% of the
actual content of what is being
expressed because as humans that's
mostly what we're doing is trying to
engage in social signaling what's our
relationship to the people not what's
the content that is being sent then what
you've embodied that you can actually
have a high degree of discernment and
say oh oh I see what's really happening
here
is I'm being told that what is being
said is bad or I'm being told that the
speaker is not part of my group for
example and what you had that level of
discernment then flipping back to your
internal you're no longer being jerked
around by the basic hominid need to know
whether or not this is an in group or an
out group expression with the doubt this
is somebody who's part of my tribe or an
enemy of my tribe whether it's
disgusting or it's sacred but now you
can be conscious of it and you can then
be conscious of how your body responds
to those signals and now you're becoming
increasingly clear you can actually be
able to perceive what's going on so then
we can flip it you can do the same thing
at the mode of expression so now I just
did the mode of perception of listening
if I also build my discernment and my
clarity and expression I can endeavor to
become capable of expressing in a
fashion that becomes possible of being
heard with higher and higher degrees of
clarity on the part of the of the
listener and now of course I have the
third order which is now creating a
relationship right now we're in a
process where we're both using our
capacities to hear and to say and we're
also building a relationship as a
collaboration that has the capacity to
do things like discern what is the most
meaningful thing to add to this
conversation which is a totally separate
thing and notice how distinct that is
from being in a relationship with fake
news that as we build skillfulness to
notice when a collaboration is forming
then you can respond you have somebody
that you're interacting with is actually
interacting in a way that is conducive
to collaboration there evidencing a
willingness and ability to listen and a
skillfulness an expression it gives rise
to the possibility of actually
collaborating well now you're in
something that's real and can be can do
things whereas if you're in relationship
with somebody who either is reckless in
their expression or not clear in their
listening and there's only so much you
can actually do and well then you know
it's kind of like if you're parenting a
child if the child is in the process of
throwing a tantrum there's a lot of
things you can't do you can't begin to
try to explain to them the reasons why
things aren't working you just have to
deal with the fact they're in a tantrum
and so that level discernment
at parenting is an example of how you
can use this capacity for internal
expressive and relational discernment in
the context of communication the context
of sense-making as a group this is such
an important thing that you're touching
on here that I'm not sure everyone's
gonna see it but when I look at the news
now and I see all this conversation on
like left versus right and offense and
social justice war and this kind of
stuff and I imagine you know we've had
jordan peterson on before and I imagine
him giving these talks all over the
world to certain mixed audiences and
having people asking themselves the
exact question that you asked is is this
person a member of my tribe or not and
just looking for those kind of key
commands that it seem like he's on one
side of the other instead of actually
listening to what he's saying like this
is such an important thing in our
culture in our generation that I think
people are overlooking to learn how to
listen properly and discern for yourself
whether something is true or false
sure yes absolutely it is in some sense
absurdly needful so let's go back to
this concept of accelerating change and
just think about the context of
listening for effectively the totality
of human history which is just say from
the beginning of humans being humans
until about fifteen thousand years ago
every single being was born and raised
among a group of other beings who were
both genetically related to them and
were also born and raised among a group
of beings who were genetically related
to them right the tribe and think about
what that means what it means to have
every single human being you literally
have ever met is of the same tribe and
they have only met people who are of the
same tribe more or less you literally
never once sit down at a dinner table
with people who did not grow up with and
who did not grow up with each other at
the level of what that means in terms of
your underlying biological expectations
of engaging in a conversation in
comparison to now and so today as fast
forward if you have history you could
just kind of did the fast-forward of a
cosmopolitanism today we're in a
situation where well first and I'll like
with it you've never actually even
physically met the pea
you're interacting with and that the
heterogeneous basis of their experiences
is well at the maximum that is even
maybe possible to be you may not even
share the same well it's quite likely
you do not share even vaguely the same
culture and so right now I'm in a
conversation with you where are you
actually from I'm from Russia originally
mic is from Canada Canada and Russia are
actually pretty good examples so as a
Russian who speaks English very well we
actually can have a nice relationship of
knowing a kind of an intuitive level
that there is going to be a cultural
divide between us although by the way I
think it's not as well understood how
distant my particular cultural lineage
is from yours that the Russian culture
is actually further away from American
culture than is I think conventionally
grasped its origins deeper and further
and then the Canadian case we actually
have the opposite problem which is
hilarious you know if I walk into China
there's a really neat category that
exists called the obvious stranger where
most of the expectations of cultural
norms are put into the category of
stranger where nobody has an expectation
that I actually know how to respond
appropriately to all the various subtle
signals that are going on it's funny you
use this example because it's exactly
our experience from the last seven years
like this is our lives now as being the
stranger in an environment like that and
we've talked about this quite a few
times like what it's like to meet
someone that you know is from the same
culture just because of their skin
colour or that you know has a set of
similar experiences just because of the
way they look and it's not racist it's
not assumptive it's not a lot of things
it's just that everyone else is Asian
here except for that one other person I
can spot out of the crowd yeah so what's
interesting is that it's actually easier
to be in relationship with somebody who
is distinctly other than it is to be in
relationship with somebody who is
superficially close you know so one of
the experiences that particularly
Americans have in going into Canada is
that there's a bit of confusion when a
Canadian is communicating with you
initially if they don't know that you're
American if they think you're Canadian
they're sending signals that are
Canadian signals des jeux d'eau have
for and so you're not responding well
they're interpreting your non-response
as some kind of actual response usually
in the direction of being an asshole now
given the fact that you're American you
might also be an asshole but we're gonna
skip over that part but once they
recognize that you're an American they
switch and say oh it's weird like you
can't run it cognitively at a physical
level you're actually able to know that
oh okay that actually explains certain
things and now you're gonna move in to
have a more formal dialogue we're gonna
say things more slowly you're gonna have
lower expectations and how fluidly
communication can happen and when you're
communicating as somebody who's quite
distinctly distant you're already in
that formal dialogue
and so they may do something which in
your culture would immediately be a sign
of nastiness but you're not going to
necessarily jump to that conclusion
because you're familiar with that gap
because we're in a situation right now
where we're trying to build an
artfulness of communication absent
embodied channels meaning absent
physical relationship I can't read your
body language my body cannot read your
body language I can kind of see your
facial expressions but even that's not
very effective so absent call it 98% of
the actual signal in human relationships
through almost the totality of human
existence across the totality of
cultural differentiation that has
occurred and so in an arbitrary moment I
might be in conversation with people
from 17 distinct cultures in social
media let's know obviously that's going
to break down why would we expect
otherwise why do we expect that we'd
have n the ability to communicate in
those circumstances and so yes to the
degree to which we want to be able to
use this medium at all in anything other
than to create conflict it is most
needful that we rather substantially
upgrade our capacity for communication
now we can return back to sort of what
the primary point the deep basis for
upgrading capacity is this cycle that I
just described and it has the
characteristic of being invariant
meaning that okay well if I want to
build my skillfulness and communicating
with somebody from Vietnam I could just
go do a deep immersion in Vietnam and
kind of build a the spoke one time
channel that is able to take into
consideration what Vietnamese people are
like well okay that works that can
happen but if I want to do it where I'm
actually adaptive response
to an arbitrarily large number of
interlocutors over an arbitrary large
number of potential conversations who
made themselves be changing rapidly
because they're actually changing in
relationship to who they're engaging
with that process doesn't work at all I
have to actually go deeper I have to
build the sensibility of very subtle
discernment and then what happens is
everything snaps to a meta level have
you heard the phrase find the others
mm-hmm
the meta level is when you begin to
recognize individuals who've actually
developed a level of discernment of this
kind where you're now actually
signalling is oh we can actually engage
in a conversation at the level of
collaboration it's almost like a the way
that a modem an old-fashioned modem
protocol works
remember the Bongbong tuning in the
beginning what happens is you're
actually sending signals that are
ultimately really just about
establishing what level of communication
and collaboration is actually available
in this relationship and when you find
that it's a consequence those signals
that you can actually enter into a truly
collaborative relationship between
collaborative conversation that's of a
completely different kind
it's its own attractor that sits over
here it's not the same as what happens
when you're engaging in sort of trying
to navigate the bloomin buzzing
confusion of social media it's actually
now a completely different space that
can happen because the underlying
capacities have been built among all the
different participants you can actually
enter into a new space which we could
just call the space of collaboration
which can be invariant to all possible
media of communication because everybody
has taken responsibility for listening
and responsibility for expressing we
call this rule Omega by the way for
thinking for considering for noticing
and for noticing things for example like
your own sovereignty does it sound like
this is because it makes sense to me I'm
out of my element and I'm getting a
little bit confused or I'm physically
tired and I can't actually hold was
being presented here or that particular
concept or phrase doesn't make sense to
me can we slow down these kinds of
things and so you could say that the
s'alright so now I'm gonna have to see
if I can put something together which is
really nice okay so let's go back to the
practical applications of this way of
thinking what does it mean for the
future and how
we become better at communicating and
building relationships all the way back
in the beginning we were talking to our
hypothetical truck driver about the fact
that we had a game and they came at a
certain way of being played and that
game was coming to an end that it
doesn't work anymore and the world that
we live in and in point of fact if you
look at it closely it kind of had to
come to an end because of the kind of
game that it was the good news is
there's a new kind of game it's still a
game and the sense that we're all
choosing to play it but it's a very
different kind of game and there's a way
for you to be able to notice when you're
playing this new game and when you found
people who are themselves trying to play
this new game and are building
skillfulness and playing this new game
of course these two become the people
that you can actually begin to play with
and collectively and collaboratively
ginn to build more skillfulness and play
in this new game one of the aspects
shows up as the difference between
communication journalism social media in
the old game which is in the process of
breaking down doesn't work and it can't
work there's nothing about that way of
being that can be resolved do we cannot
try to retool that we can't patch it we
can't you know temporarily put a spare
tire on and get to the next stop it's
breaking down it is done and then in
this new game there's a way of
communicating a way of being in
relationship that is completely able to
resolve all the problems of the old game
it doesn't have the same kinds of
problems
it doesn't involve things like how to
deal with people who are using language
to confuse and we've actually filtered
out that entire set of challenges and
once you've done that you now have this
well it actually looks like a graph or a
mesh of people who are committed to a
skillfulness of communication that has
both the ability to benefit from all of
their unique experiences and perceptions
of what is going on in the world and
it's the ability to form the basis of
real relationships between among them so
they can act
we make choices together there's almost
something there
well actually it's an awful lot like
what happened with the difference
between personal computers in the
internet you can say that we were
beginning to figure out how to extend
this concept of the Internet what
happens when you take things that like
computers and you connect them so they
can communicate and then you make it so
that they have protocols for
communication so that they can all
communicate with each other and share
information in a way that has a certain
fidelity to it well this has to do what
I'm talking about here this process of
building a certain skillfulness in
communication listening and expressing
and informing relationships of
collaboration it's kind of like the
internet for human communication and
it's the necessary corollary to the
Internet the physical Internet that the
physical substrate for communication the
medium of decentralized communication
has it's different than the medium of
person-to-person embodied communication
that we grew up in tribally and it's
different than broadcast communication
that has been the primary mode of
communication for the past millennium
and so it requires a different kind of
skills completely different just
flat-out different you can't Cluj the
old approach you have to build a new one
and you build a new one like the way you
build anything new by starting at this
loop from discernment to embodiment and
you build those raw capacities to listen
and to express and then to enter into a
space of collaboration and then once
you've done that well a whole lot of
very powerful and important things
follow are there methods for teaching
this to people effectively I'm sure
there are but let's say somebody hears
this show and says okay I really should
at understanding what is being
communicated to me or I'm really sure
communicating what I'm trying to say
where can I learn how to get better at
this well in point of fact building that
is one of the things that deep code is
working on because it is one of the
things that is most needful and there's
kind of two parts to it when I sorry
there's three one is what we're calling
the uplift Academy and I'm using
just as an example there are many many
possible variations of this that many
other people are doing but sukham kind
of generalized the uplift Academy is a
self-directed self orientation that has
the ability to access a curated list of
practices that are good there's a lot of
practices that are good and most of them
have lots of problems as well so let's
take for example what's it called
landmark so landmark forum is a nice
good central example there are aspects
of landmark that are very effective in
helping an individual become more
conscious of the way their own mind
constrains the way they can think so one
of the things that you might do is go to
landmark
however landmark as a process grew up in
the context of this old game and there's
a lot of multi-level marketing / jerking
people around into spending more money
that has also become part of landmark so
if you were to engage with that and be
mindful of the parts that are good and
be mindful the parts that aren't that
said there's actually a large number of
different kinds of schools and practices
meditation is whether you mentioned so
if you kind of double click on
meditation you now get this large
portfolio do you go on to the passing of
retreat do you simply you know download
an app and begin indifferent to do it
yourself and these are all differential
practices the other side is doing this
in relationship with other people in
embodied space there's a lot of stuff
here that just can't be done until
you're actually doing it with other
people who are trying to do it too you
know it's hard to practice relationship
on your room that's also my needful so
finding people that you can actually do
this with in physical space like around
you people who are conscious of the
project people who have endeavored to
build certain skillfulness in listening
and expressing and entering into a space
of collaboration and exploring it and
what's interesting about it is just like
learning how to juggle the whole point
is you don't have to be good at it the
whole point is that you're in good faith
entering into an exploration of it and
so this last comes to the last
peace which is used meditation as the
example and this a good one in some deep
sense you know the entire history of
Buddhism speaks to the the oblique nough
status necessary in trying to convey
something which is entirely internal you
know the Cohen is not teaching you how
to meditate the Cohen is trying to
disrupt that which gets in the way same
thing here
right so what I can say is the concepts
that were conveyed discernment hmm can
you become discerning around discernment
can you put yourself in a variety of
different kinds of experiences it
doesn't matter what they are anything
something new is good learn how to cook
learn how to surf we're gonna run a bike
or hit a program but while you're doing
it try to see if you can be aware of how
you are yourself learning something new
how does the sermon show up and you it's
going to be something that is
categorically impossible for me to
actually share your version is your
version that's the whole point and then
try to be conscious of the process
whereby you go about using discernment
to actually begin to gather together the
sense of coherence like can you notice
when you've actually gotten better at
something when you're skillfulness is
increased can you generalize that can
you get a sense of the difference
between getting better at dancing and
getting better at speaking French can
you feel those things can you go beyond
the specific domain to the general then
all the way around the loop so it's an
interesting invitation it's an
invitation to learning new things but
principally for the purpose of becoming
skillful in building in yourself a
conscious awareness of what are the
capacities that you use to be able to
learn new things and then you could take
this and run it backwards so if I take
that third part which shows up anywhere
and I embed it in the first part I
embedded in practices that are
themselves specifically focused on
building these kinds of capacities now
what can happen is I can go into
landmark and I can use my discernment
to try to separate out that which is
helpful and that which is not I can go
into collaboration with people who are
themselves and different to learn how to
collaborate and I can use my discernment
to try to see how well we can come into
a to MIT as a group you make it a meta
conversation are we in coherence oh I
just noticed that I'm dropping out of
coherence I mean it seems to me that you
may be dropping out of coherence you
know that kind of a thing so if you make
it the object of consciousness and then
you allow the other activities to become
the medium of experimentation I mean in
some sense that's all there is to it
that seems that it would require a high
degree of awareness and skillfulness to
begin with and it seems that is kind of
an advanced practice in a way or maybe I
know that there's I noticed myself in
this bias sometimes where because
something is easy for me or because I
know how to do it I assume that it's
that way for everybody else but I
discount that you know an average person
maybe you know hasn't had the time
learning the same skills that I have and
for them it's just going to be a huge
mountain to climb so this is why I was
asking about kind of a simpler framework
or a book some sort of reference where
people can get started without having
much prior skill or awareness yeah so
the answer to that is it turns out by
definition no but I can explain why so
let's start with the I think there's a
funny phrase from the 60s which is no
matter where you are there you are
everybody is entering into this thing
from where they are right now now maybe
the where you are right now happens to
have a lot of these capacities already
well refined for whatever reason it may
be that where you are right now happens
to have these capacities very poorly
we're finding for whatever reason maybe
it's because you're too maybe it's
because you're 73 but your life has been
one that hasn't exposed to these kinds
of things it doesn't matter you're here
now with the capacities that you have
now and the key is a sing
point and that is the point of making
the choice to endeavor to up gradient
that's it from where you are now are you
making a choice to get better at these
kinds of things in it where if you
happen to be at a very low level right
now here's the good news it's actually
got the ability to get a lot better
Bella to flee quickly because you've got
a lot that you haven't learned yet of
course the hard part is it may not be
easy to learn it it may not feel like
you're making a lot of progress because
you're moving from a low basis to a
slightly less low basis so you know it's
like the difference between you again
juggling as the metaphor drives of you
know how to juggle very poorly I also
juggle very poorly like I can juggle two
balls and I can juggle three balls in
the way that when Joe goes two balls
like there are three balls like there
are two balls yes same with me well
learning how to juggle is a thing that
you can choose and if you choose you
then begin practicing and you're going
to start with where you are and the only
committin you have to have is to
continue to practice and continue to try
to look for different ways that maybe
you can get better now here from this
point you can say okay I'm gonna look
for a book or a video or a teacher or a
community or a club now of course that's
gonna be depend on you you have to
actually do that if I say here's the
book it turns out book isn't work for
you I've actually hurt you significantly
I've actually overridden your own agency
without a deep sense now maybe that as a
teacher if I enter into relationship
with you I could develop a very high
degree of insight into you and I can
gently guide you into more effective
choices but then again maybe you're not
very good at entering into relationships
with teachers maybe you have a
relationship with authority that would
make my recommendations point you in the
opposite direction so it's gonna be you
sorry everybody has to figure this out
for themselves what we can do is we
could try to get out of other people's
way and we could try to make ourselves
capable of entering into relationships
with other people that are more likely
than not to generate positive effects
with Spinoza called joyful relations
meaning I
going to express to you in the way that
I can just kind of ordinary ways I kind
of try to be to deliberate I'm just
gonna try to be authentically expressing
these things and what happens as a
result is that perhaps you notice
something or you feel something or
something connects for you and in that
relationship maybe something for you has
upgraded and if I at least am NOT making
noise if I at least I'm doing my best to
provide as much signal as I can and
avoid as much noise as I can then that
generates the right kind of dynamics
that creates the space you have a better
possibility for learning on your own now
if we do it in specificity we could take
some stuff down it's hard to do this if
your body is a mess
so there's low-hanging fruit stop being
addicted to drugs if you're currently a
drug addict to stop being addicted to
drugs it's very very difficult to do the
any of these kinds of things if your
body is out of whack improve the quality
of your nutrition if you currently have
terrible nutrition have less terrible
nutrition that actually ends up being
you can get a lot of ground with that
kind of a choice because many people
have terrible nutrition and the distance
between those two is actually pretty
obvious bad relationships if you're
currently in a toxic relationship if
it's easy to exit that talks or
relationship deucey obviously it may not
be easy they may be your parent or your
child or your spouse in which case
that's something that it's gonna be very
intense but if they if it's say for
example a feud with a neighbor who's
garrulous at the very least try to stop
fueling the fire on your own part if
you're having a if you're in a weird
habit of engaging in flame worms
somewheres online
stop doing that those are actually
pretty easy and sleep is a big one to
speak to great shoulders back yes right
this is where dr. Peterson's not full of
 it turns out that 98% of humanity
has most of the basics out of whack
because our social infrastructure has
done a very poor job and that you can
actually gained a huge amount of ground
by doing a very small number of things
well clean your room this does not mean
either just clean your room and do
nothing else or if you have not cleaned
your room you can do nothing else what
it means is there are low-hanging fruit
and that if you take these low-hanging
fruit then you get the benefit of having
taken them which would vastly improves
your ability to do the next step and
that you have to be able to take
responsibility for those next steps past
a very limited threshold
it's a very intense direct relationship
you know this is why you know remember
he's a piece of practicing therapist he
knows how hard it is for a human being
to actually help another human being
develop their own sovereignty I cannot
write a book that conveys to you how to
build your own sovereignty almost
certainly I will do more harm than good
now there are certain kinds of books
that I can generally prescribe have you
read man's search for meaning yes that's
a good one really good one that's a
really good book because it basically
allows you to have empathy that gives
you certain capacities for me is the one
that was the most is humility meaning no
matter how bad I have it ain't even
close to being vaguely bad so I could
take it I can sort of not try to put
myself into a pity spiral if he can make
it through ouch wits I can probably
figure it out how to get past my court
date there are others other sort of
general-purpose good pieces of the wise
literature that help convey a feeling of
connectedness to humanists in its raw
sense and to the sacred in his most
profound sense those are good no
question certainly if you find yourself
allocating your attention to garbage
stop doing that and it's not hard to
notice with garbages or for that matter
just stop allocating your attention to
anything if you feel like you're
actually in trouble right now that
things aren't working out consider the
possibility that you don't know what to
do but you do know what not to do which
is most of the stuff that you're
currently doing so yeah slow down stop
doing stuff spend more time just sitting
in a park doing absolutely
your bodies actually doesn't suck it's
actually pretty good and so to the
degree to which you can enter into a
much more compassionate and
collaborative relationship with your own
body that's a pretty powerful tool in
fact it's by definition the primary tool
our prefrontal cortex is capacity to
make sense of the world is pretty
limited
so we're processing most of reality
through the rest of our body so be
useful to be able to have a good
relationship with that instrument I mean
I can go on forever so here's a fun one
music I'm gonna propose that you learn
how to play guitar but I'm going to
propose it in a way that is going to be
almost completely the opposite of almost
everybody's experience of that take a
guitar or any other kind of device and
do exactly and nothing but this pluck
one string and listen to it try to see
how carefully you can sense the sound
that it makes the difference between the
strength of the plucking and the
strength of the sound how it becomes
quieter over time literally just do that
and maybe maybe if you feel up to it
consider plucking another string and
seeing if you can notice the difference
between the two that's discernment that
is the discernment in its Raw's deepest
sense and don't do anything more than
that that's humility don't try to rush
into something don't try to suddenly
become be playing free bird or whatever
stairway to heaven
just learn how to listen to the sound of
a single note being plucked and die and
maybe also if you can see if you can
relate to that as the story of all lives
and that's the sacred so there you go
it's actually not that hard
effectively everybody everywhere has the
ability to enter into this journey from
where they are right now
with what they have access to right now
the thing that I would say is the most
needful is good friends but it's
sometimes hard to know what a good
friend is and it's sometimes hard to
find good friends but being able to do
that if you sort of had to focus on the
next thing above your own body being
able to be a friend with yourself but
being able to be friends with other
people if you get a crew of
three five people who have become
capable of being friends with themselves
and are venturing into entering into
friendship with each other that's enough
from that basis you can do anything I
think we have to wrap up it feels to me
it's wrapping up on his own anything you
guys want to close with well I think the
thing that feels to me like it maybe
wants to be said is just to remember
that kind of all in the same boat
that almost nobody and myself very much
included has any meaningful skillfulness
in this new game Daniel the Dalai Lama
fill in the blanks and by the way I'm
not trying to draw a comparison between
among us I'm trying to as I was thinking
about as like I will who might somebody
imagine is way way serious awesome and
to be sure the Dalai Lama has got some
mad skills when it comes to certain
things but this is a big game we're kind
of all at level one we're all just
beginning to try to figure how to do it
I can tell you that I don't have many
friends and I'm not very good at being a
friend in the context of what this thing
is about and so I think that might be a
bit heartening is to know that no matter
where you are almost everybody else is
more or less in the same place and we're
kind of trying to figure this out I
found one of the most interesting
stories that we talked about from the
last time or the first time we talked
was the conversation about your daughter
and your observation of your daughter
playing Minecraft and having this sort
of like swarm intelligence with her
friends and that has become like kind of
the most interesting thing for me to
like ask you about is your how these
things apply in your context of raising
a child watching something come from
nothing to functioning human being and
what it must be like to be a kid of
yours with such a deep understanding of
how people learn and in deep code and
everything like like what kind of wisdom
you would in part to a child well it's
not gonna be very much different for the
conversation we just had which by the
way is one of the reasons why I have
difficulty doing the e Li 5 because I
actually tend to communicate with 5th
graders or five-year-olds like I
communicate with everybody else and it
turns out that works out fine I
appreciate that I appreciate when people
talk to kids like adults expect
behavior of children that's it's nice
and they like it too of course they like
it
absolutely and because they would they
feel as they feel that you're actually
respecting them and your relationship
with them as a person and so I would say
probably by the way that's sort of the
central the central is to convey in
indeed in actual act that you fully
recognize that as a parent you are in
relationship with a soul that is as
sovereign as yours that while you may
have a particular relationship of
service to Stuart a body that is in the
process of learning how to be in the
world the much more important
relationship is the relationship with
the soul and that soul is as fully
realized as profound and as sovereign as
yours and so to act on the basis of that
understanding and of course being able
to do that is no joke and I can assure
you that I don't I don't I certainly did
not have the level of artfulness and
parenting that I would have liked
however your daughter might listen to
this and be like dad you're full of
but why did you grab me the other day
then Vanessa is pregnant so we will be
going through this process again and
that was actually done intentionally
obviously well not not obviously but in
this case quite intentionally we're very
distinctly having skin in the game in
this future world and and in this way of
being in relationship with each other
and with a being who we have a certain
kind of responsibility for and parenting
is actually precisely the right metaphor
you could actually say that if you can
reduce all of this to parenting how do
you parent yourself how do you entrance
relationships of parenting with other
people and by the way how do you enter
into relationships of parenting with the
world but recognizing the parenting
isn't authoritarianism if you can really
get to the essence that what it means to
apply these concepts of discernment for
example
to make exquisite choices under duress
and where you have amazing intense
uncertainty is what the right answer
might be like that's what parenting
really is every choice you make as a
parent is fundamental to the development
of the child every choice every
expression every tone of voice deep deep
deep and so the stakes are high and so
to the degree to which you actually have
this internal discernment this ability
to listen to what at the moment is
calling for and then to be able to make
an exquisite choice in response to that
is that its most stark its most intense
so I saw a post somebody who asked the
question what are the most unexpected
things they learned from being a parent
and one of the things they said was that
suddenly everything matters and nihilism
becomes impossible like air every
tiniest thing matters and thus if we
relate to the world in a similar way
how would that actually change
everything because there's so much
nihilism today in all of this
disconnectedness in all of this these
ways that we're relating to things or
where things are happening so far away
from us that we can't possibly see how
it affects anything and it's easy to be
very nihilistic but we can't be because
everything is connected in such a deep
way and our world is at a point right
now where if we don't observe all of
those connections we might well it all
might end I mean the existential risks
are real don't you think it all comes
back to responsibility okay in the
situation of being a parent you're
forced to have the responsibility but we
don't take that same responsibility when
we look at the rest of the world just in
our small little environment this this
folks with made a play on words but
they've transformed the word
responsibility to the ability to respond
and if you make that transformation I
think the answer is right and and I
think that the parenting
if you put parenting in relationship to
this notion of taking responsibility for
the whole world it actually provides a
very nice comparison and what I mean is
this parenting is overwhelming you
actually for sure cannot take
comprehensive responsibility at the
level of the responsibility that you
have as a parent no human being has ever
been able to actually have that level of
capacity to be able to do that so what
that means is that you have to be able
to make to do two things simultaneously
you have to have an enormous amount of
humility and self compassion for your
own inadequacy and then you have to have
a commitment to continuing to do the
best you can to be adequate to the thing
that you're responsible for and both
have to happen simultaneously well the
same thing is true in relationship to
the world you have to have an enormous
amount of humility and self compassion
in relationship to your own inadequacy
in the context of the world for which we
are all collectively responsible and
then simultaneously you have to have a
complete commitment to doing the best
you can to becoming adequate to that
level responsibility so well then
perhaps we should end here
Thank You Jordan for coming back on the
show you always give us so much material
to think about
so to summarize for our listeners this
was part two of our conversation with
Jordan Greenhalgh about deep code where
we dove into the practical applications
of this framework using examples like
fake news communicating across different
cultures and being a parent to get all
the links and resources that we
mentioned in this interview go to future
thinkers org slash 62 and you hear the
first part of the interview you can go
to the same place to check out our
sponsor and your hacker go to future
thinkers org slash brain hat we always
like to hear your comments and feedback
about the show as well as your
suggestions for future guests and topics
the best way you can get in touch with
us is via Twitter or the contact form on
our website if you're new to the show
and you like a list of our top episodes
and resources go to future thinkers org
slash start if you want to sponsor our
show go to future thinkers that org
slash sponsor if you like our podcast
leave us a rating and a review on iTunes
and elsewhere it helps others find the
show and we really appreciate it
thanks for listening and we'll see you
in the next episode
[Music]