I'll into meditating with shaumbra Vicky
I'm a cognitive psychologists and a
cognitive scientist at the University of
Toronto where I academically teach and
scientifically study phenomena like
mindfulness and related phenomena such
as Insight flow mystical experience
higher states of consciousness
transformative experience cultivation of
wisdom the aspiration towards
enlightenment all spent practicing the
pasta meditation Metatron Metta
contemplation Tai Chi Chuan and chac√≥n
over 29 years in teaching them for close
to 20 years welcome if you're joining us
for the first time you should know that
you've joined the course in fact the
introductory course is not complete in
order to catch up go to the notes in for
this video and you'll find links to the
previous lessons we're now in the
advanced session which means every
alternative Monday would they'll have
another one of these classes the money
that's coming up a Dharma day I will
teach an advanced technique that builds
on previous practices and principles
including those from the introductory
courses you meet every day even on the
Dharma days and we sit together and then
there's Q&A at the end every week Monday
to Friday for the QA at the end of these
sessions please limit your questions to
questions about this practice about the
ecology practice the course that I've
given you if you have more encompassing
questions of a philosophical or
existential or ethical nature or even
scientific nature please come to my live
Q&A live streamed on YouTube June 8
every third Friday of the month this
month will be June 19th at 3 p.m.
Eastern Time please like the stream to
increase its visibility and the YouTube
algorithm that will help me to help as
many people as possible
to these increasingly chaotic to help
people to become resilient and adapted
to these increasingly chaotic and
disturbing times that we find ourselves
in believe that's all we need to do for
today so please set your phone's on do
not disturb it's your basic posture
going and we will begin when I say begin
begin
[Music]
so they began to come out of your
practice trying as best you can to
integrate what you've cultivated in your
practice with your everyday
consciousness and cognition
perhaps by reciting the five promises to
yourself
all right we have time for a few
questions here at Kroger
welcome again Kira I noticed this little
micro contractions when I'm coaching
myself unwitting in telling us of the
look listen or when I'm labeling this
tractor when ing word contraction is a
criticism that I am doing it wrong
I should have Beth's handle that label
it
of course as criticizing please try to
note very carefully whose voice it is
very important when you are confronting
inter in a criticism that we know what
identity is involved what whose voice it
is is it you now is it some aspect of
you is internalize parental figure is it
an internalized peer figure is is maybe
it's also internalized ideal that
perhaps has not been properly integrated
so it's very very important to treat it
as a dysfunction label it right but try
to have a centered attitude towards it
try to note who's the voice is and see
if you can direct matter towards the
criticizing voice so it's very important
to determine try not to react to the
event try to I know this this is easy to
say hard to do but try and relax the
open realize you're not going to be
damaged by the criticism it's up to you
and instead try to see the source and
try to enter into a relationship with
that source it was it it originally had
an adaptive function now it's
maladaptive perhaps try and see if you
can enter into relationship with it so
you can grow it into a more adaptive
role it will take time label
become aware of the voice see the source
centered attitude towards it direct meta
towards it encourage it into a more open
and you chilly affording dialogue and
discourse you need to find out where
these criticisms are coming from not
what they are or what they're saying or
how you're reacting to them where are
they coming from
how was it adaptive why is it now
maladaptive and how can you grow it into
something it adaptive again
how can you ultimately befriend with the
source and have it befriend you
I think big time inventory one of the
differences in similarities between
Luxio Divina and passage meditation for
Alexio Divina is our Sirhan's
passage meditation selection includes
first reading I'm only I'm sorry I've
only had a brief encounter with us Ron's
work very brief very superficial I'm
largely ignorant of it so I not I'm not
the competent person to answer that
question I need to I need to know more
about about him and about positive
meditation in the passages I just don't
know I I know of him I believe it to him
and I I've seen the tax I've read a
little bit long time ago I just I'm
sorry I'm just ignorant I can't help you
very much on that and I don't know who
they'll recommend to you to help you on
that I guess the only advice I have left
is try attend and see if it is affording
reciprocal opening not mostly not most
importantly in the in the reading but if
that reverberates and resonates through
your life sorry I wish I could be more
helpful to you on each an intended
easily go into an observer state when I
meditated noticing images and thought
passing through but not getting involved
shaken sooner this is distraction
or the opposite that's a tough one
because there's a sense in which that
open monitoring meditation is a
meditative practice and it's often
sought after within the pastor tradition
it's it's very usually very difficult to
get into that maybe you've been
practicing a lot I don't know you it's
usually very difficult to get into that
with when you're nervous people often
confuse that sort of a mind wandering
that's drifting and and they're not too
involved with the mind wondering if if
things are rising and passing and you
are much and you're aware through them
of Connor's than processes of your mind
and you're getting a sense of that
tentative textured energy field of
consciousness and you're coming into a
more intimate conformity with it and you
realizing how it's not any of these
objects but the always active potential
for any and all of them for each and all
of them um then I think you should
continue doing what you're doing but if
you're actually just sort of entranced
by the show like figures walking across
the stage and you're sort of settling
there and I think you should pursue and
Kleinert and mindfulness much more you
should consider pursuing a project then
perhaps treat that as a distracting
state it's difficult to answer you
carefully because I don't know you don't
know how much you've been practicing I'm
not inside your head so what I'm saying
is it's two possible things and I have
to rely on you on your discernment and
your self honesty and some old personal
experimentation to see which one of
those it's most reasonable it's most
plausible with us what it is and then if
it's the first the seen through that
that what the Buddha would call a
wholesome state but if it's just sort of
entranced with sort of a mild
disinterested entertainment of one's
internal images and that's a distraction
that you should label and which
- the pleasures doubt bread is here
welcome Bret Bret I've been so lucky to
enter into a relationship with Brett and
the amazing work he's doing on the
discord server so here's an opportunity
for me to publicly thank Brett thank you
so very very much
I was trying minute today but found
myself very close towards myself and
others is that the time to push to
enforce it or just return to the Past no
so you're getting resistance but that's
the kind of resistance and so as I said
that if it's if it's a very active
resistance then do the five factors of
inquiring mindfulness on it become aware
of the resistance and do the five
factors of inquiring mindfulness you
might also want to ramp up the practices
for overcoming hindrances and what that
means is we're actively cultivate Buddha
I know you're doing a lot to cultivate
the Sangha and the Dharma so just keep
that up in fact it might be precisely
because this is something you still
affect precisely because you are so
sincerely and you know and passionately
involved in cultivating the Sangha and
the Dharma that you're getting some of
this resistance you're starting to you
Experion to permeate and challenge some
more deeply ingrained habits so take
that frame it perhaps that way and then
five factors of empowering mindfulness
and then perhaps do Metta on the
resistance itself to the degree to which
you can again always trying to befriend
it afford reciprocal opening here that
Kroger has a follow-up follow-up
question to my target question the
contraction I experience passes so
quickly that I'm not sure how to
befriend it is it's there and gone and
they just have the residual flavour that
it was there ah I see so it's
interesting that it's so is it but it's
nevertheless you're getting the sense of
criticism or guilt I'm trying to get how
it can be so fast and you get yet you
get the sense of it being a criticism
I would still even if it has passed I
would sit with the flavor there the
residual remembrance and trying direct
metaphors that try and open yourself up
to a dialogue I mean a dialogue in
mindfulness with the source of it with
the source of it and even if all you
have is the echo take that as an
anchoring point for your attention on
you need you like if it is this critical
thing you're saying if it's just I mean
that's the part that I'm responding to
if it's just a contraction you know
that's that's just a person for that
agree bound that's just you know left
and right hemisphere and different parts
of the brain talking to each other you
can get that shake so it's just that I'm
not just a distraction that's very
common so the part I'm responding to is
your sense of it being a criticism and
if that sense is still there even after
the event is past that's what you need
to sort of open up into a field of meta
Jim please rage five should I push
towards deeper stepping and how to spot
when I'm bullshitting myself with that
so don't push you don't if you're trying
to be a friend with someone you don't
push into them you try to engage in a
more gentle reciprocal opening with them
you try not to power your way through
but persuade yourself and the other to
come together I'm talking about not
talking I'm talking about
your frame of mind so pushing is not
generally a good idea so this is right
effort and the Buddha gave the famous
story right the the musician and the
apprentice or the barge coming down the
river and this helped him move towards
enlightenment the master is saying to
the apprentice know it's important to
not have the strings too tight or too
loose
if the too tight they snap and that's
what happens if you put too much effort
in and if the too loose
you'll never play any music that's why
right effort is one of the key things of
the Eightfold Path think about this is
what this metaphor is used in Tai Chi
and elsewhere trying to dance with
what's happening you're trying to dance
with your inner Buddha I try to push in
force you're not dancing you're reducing
your sensitivity you're reducing your
ability to learn remember that no matter
where you are what state you're in there
is an opportunity for an Enlightenment
there's an opportunity for new learning
there's an opportunity for opening so
try to be more receptive and grateful
for what is happening and let yourself
be more called into the depths then push
yourself into the depths off mark
the theft hi Marta it's always great to
get a question from you is there a good
way to sense when it's time to move
forward with the lessons how do you know
when to learn a new meditation skill
that's that's that's a very good
question
so generally the way you know when it's
time to move forward is the sense that
the previous skill is no longer putting
you into the zone of proximal
development it's no longer sort of
giving you a significant challenge
that's generally this where you can say
I could do this and the rate of learning
you'll still always learn I don't know
what I just said but if it's sort of
like the rate of learning is starting to
go down that generally means that it's
time to move on to the next skill try
and explore it now if when you move
there together you start to lose your
previous skills that's premature so
you're trying to hit this sweet spot if
you go and now when you start a new
skill you always get what's called
utilization deficiency initially your
performance will degree so you've got to
give a little bit of time for that bit
but if after you've given it quite a bit
of time you still feel fine like your
previous skills are being degraded then
that means it's premature go back we
gather right and if you're here
and it's okay the challenge the rate of
learning is dropping now I try again
initially I don't make any judgments
because it's utilization deficiency I
wait and see you know they give it a
week or so but and then oh now this time
now my old skill the old my older skills
are now coming back online they're now
working play differently and the new
skill is starting to come in and so
you're always trying to get that sweet
spot I hope that's helpful to you
so everyone excellent questions today
and we will always keep doing QA I want
to thank everybody for joining it's
wonderful Sangha I want to thank my dear
friend and techno major Martha working
about behind the scenes and Jason always
you know pinch-hitting here it got up
and closed the patio door again I want
to thank him and he's very very
important to the success of these sits
please subscribe this channel to be
notified of the next video on there
you'll find links to the lecture series
awakening from a meeting crisis the
discussion series voices with rebecky
both of them exploring in depth and
developing deeply right a lot of the
themes and a more comprehensive picture
for what we're doing here in this
ecology practices
invite others who might benefit from
this by joining help me to help as many
people as I can
there seems to be evidence that things
are in some ways getting worse
especially south of the border and so we
need to cultivate as much wisdom or as
much wisdom as we can and a growing
community a culture of awakening as
Steven bhature says to offer an
alternative way of being and seeing for
people so that they have adaptivity and
resiliency to confront what is becoming
increasingly challenging please join the
discord server to chat with others the
link is in the description
we know that Brett is here pleasure of
daily outside excellent question is they
keep saying that discord server is
amazing
they have people whenever I do it
whistles for baekje they have those
people come on and do it Q&A I do a live
Q&A every second Monday they are there
are people there who do the sits and
then meet after and do lectio divina and
discuss discussion and then there's this
broader culture emerging their
discussion please get involved with the
discord server community it's a really
beautiful and powerful resource we will
be doing this every weekday morning at
9:30 Eastern Time
please remember the continuity of
practice is much more important than
quantity there is no enemy worse than
your own mind and body
there's no friend no great Ally no true
companion on the path greater than your
own mind and body be lamps unto
yourselves thank everyone I'll see you
tomorrow