[Music]
James is a real pleasure to have you on
the channel great to be here thanks so
much I'm looking forward to it yeah so I
really love to explore a few of the
topics that we've talked about quite a
bit on the channel and I know that you
your work touches on as well and one of
the big topics and seems to resonate
quite strongly is the idea of the
meaning crisis that we're in a feigning
crisis and also my perspective is that
one of the one of the factors in that is
that culturally I worked in the media
for many years and was sort of very well
aware of the kind of might call it a
stranglehold that the new atheist
worldview in particular had on culture
and media and that seems to be shifting
quite noticeably that they don't seem to
be the force that they used to be in the
culture what's your kind of overall take
on the meaning crisis and where we're at
sort of culturally right now yeah by the
way I agree I think it's interesting to
see the sort of fading star of New
Atheism in that regard uh and in the
sense though why someone like Richard
Dawkins seems as loud as ever but I
think it's actually a sign of a certain
frustration on his part that he doesn't
he can't believe that he's not getting
the cultural uptake that he would have
expected and and yet I think he's not
getting the cultural uptake that he
expected because he doesn't he offers
such a flattened view of what it is to
be human do you know there's just no
that it all it offers is the kind of
self-congratulation of enlightenment and
then what do you mean like it there's
there's just not a way of life a vision
for the fullness of being human so I
think in some sense it just doesn't
speak to really deep human hungers that
we can't sort of face and we might try
to write over them but they are still
there so I'm I'm really intrigued by
this notion of the meaning crisis I
think that's a lot of
what I'm trying to speak into with my
latest book on the road with Saint
Agustin because I think that he's we're
in a moment of what I call cracks in the
secular where a narrative that we've
been sort of telling ourselves in some
ways for a couple of hundred years in
other ways for a couple of generations a
story that we've been trying to tell
ourselves a hasn't worked has generated
rampant loneliness social isolation
depression anxiety and and yet we also
feel like it should be otherwise it this
isn't the way it's supposed to be and so
I'm I'm I I think it's a really exciting
moment to be at the sort of waning end
of a very flat secularizing tale even
though I don't have any illusions of
there being some like glorious other
hegemonic narrative that emerges from
the process I think it's some I love it
that that people seem to be having
conversations that we couldn't have
imagined twenty years ago in some ways
is that is that your experience as well
like you're seeing openness and hunger
that maybe was sort of suppressed almost
before yes yeah definitely it does feel
like a certain kind of narrative is
visibly failing more and more readily
and I just wanted to go back to what you
said before what what what is your sense
of what is that narrative that you think
is I can't remember your exact words but
you said something similar that that
there is a sense that there is a
narrative that hasn't worked how do you
summarize that particular narrative yeah
and me and maybe it's not just one thing
I don't want to oversimplify but I think
there's a couple facets of a dominant
story that people have been told they
ought to live in to one aspect of it is
I think the sort of enlightenment piece
of it right that is
the most important thing is to be the
smartest person in the room and that
means a lying yourself with a very sort
of narrow vision of what counts as
rationality so I think one one thread or
stream of that story has been a really
reductionistic account of what it means
to be rational and and to be rational
then would require almost undoing all
kinds of aspects that we kind of in our
gut know are part of being human so I
think that's part of it I would probably
also say and I'll be really intrigued to
hear your your thoughts on this I think
a story of autonomy and independence
that has made it my sole responsibility
to make up a story for myself does that
make sense do you know what I mean like
in other words I think we've inherited
and and I grant I'm speaking from an
American context and I know that there
will be some differences with the UK but
I do think in in the West generally
we've ended up with this narrative that
says you could be whatever you want
there is no normative good there's no
specified good that you need to live
towards which sounds liberating I think
I get why that sounds Liberator
okay so nobody's going to tell me what
to do until you are left with the the
sheer burden and responsibility of
making up something and I think that can
be its own prison I think that can end
up being its own chain where now the the
burden is on me to be so innovative
and so unique and special and come up
with this story but it's also exhausting
I mean it's it's and and we at the same
time we are being sold a version of how
to buy that way of life so there's a
there's a weird way in which I think
consumer
capitalism kind of plays into this myth
of autonomy and independence and that we
have to make up our own story what I see
in young people I'm a university
professor so I you know work with 20
year olds all the time but what I see is
just an increased exhaustion with its I
say burden it's it's not because they
want to be irresponsible is just because
there's something that enslaving about
such a narrative and they're actually I
find people more and more hungry to say
okay I don't want you to take away my
freedom I don't want you to take away my
agency my burden but could you give me
some hints about what a good life might
look like and maybe there are other
people around that could help me live
alongside rather than just as this
autonomous independent individual I
think that's the other the other side of
the autonomy narrative is not just the
burden of having to make it up so to
speak it's also just the utter
atomization and isolation that comes
from oh well I'm I'm in charge of myself
but that also means I'm not with people
and other people almost are portrayed as
this kind of you know thefts thief's of
my autonomy and independence and I think
it's a it's a terrible way to try to be
human seems to be yeah you know there
were a few things that came up while you
were what you were talking that remind
me of so one of the the first the origin
of rebel wisdom was very much looking at
Jordan Peterson's thought and he there
are a few things that you said that
really sort of map onto a couple of
things one of which is the idea he talks
about Nietzsche and Jung I know that
Nietzsche effectively said okay so god
is dead we've got rid of these kind of
narratives which gave us meaning and
gave us a direction and we will have to
create our own and this is something I
think that you're saying it's like yeah
there's we've got rid of all of the all
of the traditional ways of being so we
we're now faced
to be autonomous and to create our own
meaning and then Peterson's reading of
young is that young then came along and
said not so fast we can't we are not
those kind of creatures we cannot create
our own meanings and we are embedded in
mythologies we are embedded and
archetype to be embedded in deeper
stories whether we like it or not and
they're actually part of our you want to
go as deep as you can go or if they're
actually part of our physiology learn
out of our and we're impersonating
stories and we're impersonating things
that we don't even fully understand
I saw a your I saw your lecture you are
we are what we love yeah you are we you
know yeah oh yeah we're you seem to be
saying very much the same thing that a
lot of the things that we are acting out
in our lives we're not fully aware of
when they're far beyond the realm of
sort of conscious thought but we are
acting out patterns and orey's and
beliefs and ideas that are very very
deep is that does that scan for you yeah
yeah absolutely in fact I was also
thinking of you mentioned that you were
just in Toronto and one of my favorite
novelists is a Canadian novelist named
Robertson Davies who is actually a huge
young devotee and and it just strikes me
and you see it in the novels of
Robertson Davies to be human is to be a
storied creature dude I mean like I just
when if we are beset by identity
politics today I think I mean there's
all kinds of reasons to be frustrated by
that but I think it's still an
outworking of the fact that people need
to know who they belong to and what
story they fit into in order to have
sort of motivation and meaning and so
even if I might be frustrated with the
way it manifests I still see behind it a
deep hunger and desire and a
manifestation of the fact that to be
human is to be storied we are narrative
and probably the best definition or the
best defense of identity politics I've
ever heard yeah I mean it's a little bit
like I wanna I wanna meet even the
things that frustrate me I want to meet
sympathetically and I do think like you
just said and as young as is pointing
out
what if it is the case that human beings
are made in such a way are wired in such
a way are scripted in such a way that in
fact we can't realize the fullness of
being human without honoring some
feature of ourselves I think part of
that is is noting that we are narrative
animals and I think it's also why mass
consumer culture can exploit us as well
though do you know to mean because in
some ways I think I think marketing
understands that we are narrative
creatures better than the university
better than the church to be honest and
and in that sense they actually play on
our deep hunger for story and narrative
and to live into something to become a
character in a drama but then they they
utilize that for the sake of selling us
crap and and so that's that's such a
cynical deployment of who we are whereas
I think what you're saying what you're
suggesting is maybe one of the reasons
why the experiment of this utterly
nihilistic Nietzschean project doesn't
work is because you just can't overwrite
the palimpsest of the human heart which
is sort of longing for some sort of
fullness something more and yeah I think
I mean I'm intrigued I mean I just don't
think we lived in a mixed reality where
there's a lot of people who are still
imagining that's a possible way of doing
it but I guess I'm I'm more intrigued by
the symptoms of exhaustion and
scrambling for people to say there's got
to be a better way to do this in a sense
so yeah just to say that we are in it to
say we are what we love is to also
recognize that our loves are susceptible
to narrative formation which means that
they're also susceptible to narrative
deformation
and I think becoming aware of that gives
us again gives us back some agency so
that I can see oh it's almost like my
eyes open and now I see I see what a
mass consumer culture is trying to do to
me
what would it look like for me to become
intentional and I think this is a lot
about what your whole project is about
what does it look like for me to become
just much more aware and intentional
about how to pursue a good life I think
mmm
this whole the very fact that we're
having this conversation is such an
encouraging sign of our cultural moment
yeah yeah I mean there's so many
different points to pick up here the one
the one thing I think would unite just
about everyone that we've had on the
channel is that they're all engaging
with these deeper questions and there's
some realization that we've gone we've
gone wrong in terms of you could call it
the materialist paradigm you could call
it the secular paradigm you could call
it and you look at the symptoms
everywhere from kind of the opiate
crisis to the various sort of types of
what I'd call kind of soul sickness that
we're seeing around the West but the key
the key question is I think there's a
there's a realize there's a common
realization that we need something in
the place where religion used to be but
but the open question is like from
Jonathan page I would say yes and it's
Chris yeah it's true it's religion I
guess playing sort of slightly yeah yeah
the word my question would be I'm
guessing that you would agree with
Jonathan Fazio it's like no we have good
religious traditions we just need to
renew them is it realistic that
Christianity could be renewed or could
be could come back in a meaningful way
or that's the question I guess yeah yeah
so and this is no this is exactly the
conversation we should have so now I'm
also a philosopher so when you ask me a
question what is realistic I'm
immediately wondering what the
conditions of realism are right so if
you ask is it realistic I'll just tell
you from where I sit
let's remember I believe in a God who
raises the dead so anything is possible
but I do think this is the question
and I am by the way I don't think you
can prove anything in this regard so
let's just think about how one could
even have the conversation or discern on
this matter it seems to me I agree that
I think we see people who are realizing
okay know I need something more lastly
something else there's to be a better
vision for how to be human
I need meaning I think when people
entertained the impossibility of
religion first of all I understand it 80
80 percent of it I totally get a tee
percent of religion is worth leaving
right to mean one way to think about say
that the difference between Christianity
and you know Russell Brand or something
who I love so many ways you know I think
we agree about a lot more than we
disagree is what vision for a way of
life will offers a gift and doesn't just
ask more of you do you know me and
others that I think so many of the
alternatives to I'll say Christianity
which is my confession I think so many
of the alternatives to Christianity are
they have a religious dynamic about them
but they are also kind of threatened to
eat me alive because they still are
putting our expecting me to perform can
you give an example of what you mean
yeah what kind of you told me yeah geez
or about what ideologies or yeah
ideologies will be one example think of
even like let's just say and and I don't
want to offend anybody with this it's
just an example that comes with let's
let's take walk
as kind of I do think that's that
somebody said okay there's got to be
more I'm going to devote myself to the
cause of justice which of course we
should all be devoted to but then what
happens is it turns into this
performative dynamic where really it's
still an act of self invention on my
part
and it's it's a it's a it's a confidence
in human willpower and I guess one of
the reasons why I follow someone like
Saint Agustin is because I have a very
what I think realistic set of
expectations about human willpower and
what I can accomplish and what we can
accomplish and instead it seems to me
the alternative that Christianity holds
out isn't just meaning it is it is
meaning but the alternative that
Christianity holds out is scandalous
because it's called grace it's it's this
gift it's it's a devotion to a God who
gives himself away and I I think um I do
think sacrifice is at the heart of what
we're talking about here in some ways
and I think one of the I guess one of
the distinguishing characteristics of
Christianity is that it is not just a
God who calls us to sacrifice but it is
a God who sacrificed himself and then
from that flows a gift of a grace that
is a gift now I say that's scandalous
because I do think probably the last
bastion of our autonomy is always the
pride that imagines we can do this on
our own it's one of the reasons why I
just find myself like kind of Alcoholics
Anonymous or the 12-step programs so I
was just gonna say in fact um as I've
been working on st. Augustine this this
new book on the road was st. Agustin the
thread that I kept kept coming back to
our recovery communities and and what's
so intriguing in recovery communities is
you have to
come to an end of yourself there's
actually a really remarkable book you
might enjoy by a writer named Leslie
Jamison called the recovery we just sort
of hurt inside her account of both
addiction and recovery but she also
looks at different writers literary
writers who've grappled with that and at
one point she says you know one of the
terrible things about addiction is it
narrows your repertoire to this very
restricted set of desire use repeat
desire use repeat and what the addict
really needs liberation from is what she
calls the claustrophobic crawl space of
the self and I I guess what I what work
that worries me but I guess what
contrasts so many other modes of meaning
making from the religious is they still
feel like they are dependent on that
claustrophobic crawl space of the self
there's still at least there's still a
lot of options that are saying I can do
this or we can do this whereas I think
what Christianity talks about is this
drama in which a God gives himself to
bring us to the end of ourselves which
is then finding the new grace of
dependence that's that's scandalous to
the autonomous mind right that that
dependence could be a beautiful
liberation but I do think I guess I do
wonder if that is what is exactly
distinctive and sustaining because it
also translates into a deeply communal
vision right like now again there are
all kinds of forms of Christianity which
I just sort of privatized me and Jesus
autonomous yes I have zero interest in
those and this is 90 percent of American
Christianity let's be honest but but I
think at the heart of this kind of
Christian vision this this Catholic
vision if you will that you see in
someone like st. Agustin is this deeply
communal picture Agustin at one point
says I could not be happy without
friends there's this this there's this
sense in which the self is porous
and that's an opening for others to come
in and actually well they could steal
from me or they can fuel me and one of
the things I think that that I'm
encouraged by in things like rebel
wisdom and other sorts of conversations
happening is they are deep communities
do you know like these are um I think
it's really clear that people find a
belonging there and I would just say
that what is built into the drama of the
Christian narrative is an account of why
we need to belong but it's a belonging
that also isn't just about what am I
getting out of this it's what am I being
called to and I think it's a hell of a
story
you mentioned kind of woke as a
particular kind of narrative or ideology
or perspective and that reminded me I
mean it's not an original insight a few
people have made this this point I think
I've heard Sam Harris make it before
maybe Douglas Murray that there is for
example in kind of woke culture what
they call council culture nowadays we've
got sin and we've got we've got this
sort of sense of almost like a semi
religious narrative but we don't have
redemption so this idea that you make a
tweet sort of ten years ago you maybe
apologized for it but you're still
you're still a sinner and there's no
like the danger I think a lot of people
are feeling with these modern ideologies
there they seem to be parasitical on
religion but they don't have the kind of
there's no place for redemption for
example yes yes yes there's no end I one
of the things that has struck me is
there is no time for repentance right so
there's there's no room for forgiveness
because you are just supposed to have
mastered the requisite orthodoxy and if
you haven't mastered the requisite
orthodoxy then you're canceled but it
also and this is true I think especially
in kind of social media spaces there is
an absolute
intolerance for giving people the space
and time to change their minds and to
grow it's like no you are you either
reflect whatever what we all think now
or you don't and that's your right I do
think it's acidic on religion it's a
little bit like sin without absolution
and it's a bit like having confession
but actually no space for repentance now
I I think that also stems from the fact
again there's still something so
self-generated about all of this so that
it comes from a space of a kind of
self-righteousness and therefore doesn't
really have room for grace grace grace
is just the Christian word for
everything is gift do you know I mean
like I I'm I'm a receiver I'm indebted
and it's not an accomplishment on my
part and I think what worries me and and
we shouldn't pick you know cuz when I
when I say whoa culture that might sound
like I'm picking on the left heaven
knows that the right has its own forms
of this and and in our in our context in
the States
I mean there's another version of just
being American that is as intolerant of
and giving room people people room in
that regard so no I think it's I think
what worries me most about that is the
confidence in one's own enlightenment
self sufficiency and purity I this is
another reason actually that's saying
Augusta and interests me is because we
live woke culture canceled culture is
also a purity culture it exhibits
remarkable self confidence in our having
mastered what we ought to be where as
Agustin who's a Christian bears witness
to he has no illusions of purity do you
mean that's there's there's no illusions
of my achieving purity there's instead
just a
deep appreciation for the messiness of
my own motives and I find that more
liberating then the burden of being pure
which i think is just doomed to cynical
hypocrisy at some point you've mentioned
sent a gust in a few times I'm not
hugely familiar with him as a sir
because he very interested in a sort of
st. Augustine for dummies why do you
think he's so significant and what what
what are the key things to know about
him as a historical figure yeah so the
baseline biography so san agustin lives
in the late 300s and early 400s in North
Africa is raised in a sort of mix of
pagan Roman and African Christian home
his mother is st. Monica which is a name
that some people will recognize Santa
Monica he's most famous for a work
called the confessions which some people
referred to as like the first memoir in
the West I actually think that's
complicated but what would he tell what
the drama that he unfolds in his
confessions is basically a drama of
looking for love in all the wrong places
I mean in something in some ways the
first half of Augustine's Confessions is
the is the narrative of a soul looking
for meaning do you mean that he's he's
on this quest any and he tries to find
one of the things that intrigues me
about Agustin is he's so perennial and
in some ways so contemporary because
where does he look for meaning he looks
for meaning in education sex power
enlightenment political influence
you know Fame I mean he's in some ways
all the places that we still look for
sort of substitutes for meaning Agustin
tried all of those now there are a lot
of caricatures of Agustin out there you
know the inventor of original sin hated
sex all these kind of things and there's
there's I mean there's parts of Agustin
we would want to deconstruct what I find
fascinating about him is a
he's a figure that basically tried all
the things that we keep trying
he sort of lived out this sort of
playboy pursuit and then came to the end
of it and realized there's got to be
more to it man but he was also an
incredible psychologist of the human
heart and and his confessions is like
this deep introspective dive into well
his hungers like what what am I looking
for how am I trying to be human and
interesting I think one of his most
enduring gifts just to the Western
intellectual tradition as a whole is a
reflection on the nature of freedom so
so related very much to conversations we
were having before about autonomy and
independence Agustin thinks freedom
isn't just freedom of choice it's not
just multiplying your options free true
freedom is empowerment for the good it's
actually a gifted agency so that I can
chase and become what I'm made to be and
III think his analysis feels very
contemporary when I read it in that
regard well I was reminded of there is
that there's quite a similarity in many
in as a Sloot pattern of behavior and
also in some religious tales of the man
who has everything
realizing it's not sufficient and then
then hasn't having some kind of
religious conversion I'm thinking of but
the story of the Buddha is very similar
in that the Buddha had everything and
then yeah one of my favorite poet John
Donne mmm if you're familiar with oh
yeah absolutely he was a very similar it
was a very similar story right he was a
Playboy
he was a kind of a successful out
heiress to crass and then towards the
end of his life became deeply religious
and then became Archbishop of Canterbury
I think towards the end of his life so
it's quite a mellow trajectory to a lot
of lives it seems and and it it it
undercuts one of the dismissive
narratives of religion as crutch or
substitute or something only insofar as
this is not people trying to achieve
something by means of their religion
because they actually had achieved
everything that one had hoped for it was
actually seeing through that and
realizing that that was almost a screen
to what was really ultimate and what was
really significant you know the other
thing I think is important I say in
agustín but I would also just say in
sort of historic Christianity is this
isn't even just about achieving a
perspective it's not even just believing
in something different it's about
actually being able to give myself over
to rituals rhythms practices liturgies
in which I in a way I give myself over
to the narrative even on the days I
don't believe it
even even on the days I'm not sure about
it even on the days I maybe don't I'm
suspicious of it but there's something
this is why again I think it's very
communal there's there is what Agustin
points to is Christianity as a practiced
way of being together and that that that
dynamic of ritual I think also speaks to
human hungers right that it's not just
yes it's not just that I need a better
story to believe about myself I need
tangible visceral tactile kinesthetic
rhythms and rituals so that that story
sinks into my bones and it's not just
something that I'm processing
intellectually and and this again to the
parallel it's a lot like a a it's a lot
like recovery in which the point of
going to meaning is not to get
information do you mean like I'm not
going oh okay I'm gonna go to the
meeting with my notebook and tell me the
things you you don't do you know the the
writer David Foster Wallace yes so in
his novel Infinite Jest actually
recovery house is a really really
important scene and there's a there's a
point where a character realizes
somebody tells this addict in that
recovery house who thinks he's gonna
think his way out of his problems
the the counselor says to your best
thinking got you here so you'll be like
you you all you're thinking got you to
was your enslavement to your addiction
you you actually aren't going to think
your way out of this problem you are
going to practice your way to different
thinking and I I don't know even as
somebody who's who literally makes his
life as an intellectual as a philosopher
I I think it's really really important
that for me the Christian life is
actually a script of how to live
together in practice in community and
that reminds me of something about
something more fundamental than my
thinking which is my loving yeah I I'd
love to for a lot of people kind of who
are not Christians or not sort of deeply
involved in these kind of conversations
the whole sort of Christian
denominations and the different kind of
movements around Christianity is very
confusing
sure did you tell me what your
particular denomination is and why does
it differ from the from the others and
correct remarks maybe you can tell me
why you're one is right and they're
wrong I wouldn't do that yeah I mean and
I don't want to be pedantic either cuz I
so I'm not sure where your listeners are
of course the the two great sort of
streams in Christianity are most
fundamentally divided between east and
west and Jonathan paggio who we said
before represents Eastern I'm in the
Western Christian tradition and then
within that Western and of which
Augustine is kind of the founding father
if you will of Western Christianity
which becomes Roman Catholicism and then
in the 1500s you get the Protestant
Reformation which is ah but here's
what's important I don't think
that that should be understood as either
a revolution or a fundamental rejection
of that Western quote/unquote Catholic
tradition it's a reform movement within
it in fact what's interesting this might
be more than you care about but the the
Protestant reformers Martin Luther John
Calvin they were all readers of st.
Augustine and in a way what they were
doing is they were going back to the
founding father to renew the Western
tradition so my Christian tradition
grows out of that Augustinian renewal
movement that we call the Protestant
Reformation so I'm part of what's called
the Dutch Reformed stream which is which
will sound odd because my name is Smith
and I live in the United States but
there's one of the fascinating things
about Christianity is what how
significant immigration patterns are in
migration patterns are to where
Christian streams go so I'm I'm kind of
an unapologetic Protestant but I'm a
Protestant of a Catholic flavor that is
I see myself in continuity with and very
much indebted to this deep heritage of
the tradition and one of the most
important things that I think has
happened in Protestantism over the past
even just 40 or 50 years is we've all
realized there were versions of the
Protestant Reformation and then the
Enlightenment that cut us off from
pre-modern wisdom and sources because we
bought into a narrative of chronological
snobbery in which we thought the newer
was always better and I think we've seen
through that so there's been there's
been I think Christianity's own
reckoning with meaning and and late
modernity and I think for those of us in
Protestant Christian traditions that has
meant realizing oh we threw overboard a
lot of gifts of ancient wisdom so one of
the reasons why I want to write this
book on st. Augustine was to go back and
say man we can go back to this ancient
African and find it's like he's reading
our mail today so the the reason why I'm
in
Protestant tradition is because I also
think that there's room for reform and
renewal within Christianity I'll also
say my stream I'm not gonna make the
argument for why my why my stream is
best I I don't not even sure I believe
that
you know I would just how deep sympathy
with sort of Anglican Episcopalian
renditions of Christianity as well I
will say one thing that it's important
to my tradition is how and why
Christianity was actually liberating for
women's voices and witness so so one
reason why I could never become a Roman
Catholic is because for me
what one of the renewals that happened
was a recognition of women's gifts so
that they can serve fully and that's I
think that's a really really important
manifestation of a Christian impetus you
your listeners might not know that the
first people that the resurrected Jesus
appeared to to bear witness to him were
women
and that was a revolutionary endeavor so
to speak and so I I'm trying to live
into that a little bit right and yeah I
wanted to ask you very quickly I want to
move on to practice because you
mentioned practice moving really really
important part of this conversation
becoming more and more important it's
something that I think everyone who has
been sort of following this this this is
a growing conversation is now getting
more and more into okay what are the
practices what's in media he's out into
our lives just before we go into that
I'd like to ask you about Jordan
Pederson because know I talked to Paul
Van de Clare a couple of times about
this and he said that he's had a lot of
people coming to his church who've been
pretty much interested in Christianity
because of watching Jordan Peterson's
legends and he's been the most
high-profile ambassador for a for at
least taking these religious story
seriously have you looked much of his
work and what have you made some what
one of the things that complicates it a
little bit is so I'm a philosopher
my training and my training is actually
in what we call continental philosophy
and so one of the things that
complicates it is Peterson has a
tendency to make claims about figures
that I know well professionally and I
don't buy his take on it do you know
what I mean so like I find myself just
slightly rolling my eyes at the way he
trots out Jacques Derrida or cultural
Marxism and things like that so that's
partly a professional frustration if you
will yeah but I totally and there's a
little bit of a way in which within
Canada maybe in particular he got hooked
up with a certain kind of public agenda
that I just didn't excite me that much
all that said I do I totally understand
and and see how he's clearly speaking to
a deep hunger for this meaning making as
you said it and so I'm I'm I see us
trying to sort of bear witness to the
fullness of being human in the wake of
secularism failure and and so in that
sense you know I'm sympathetic I'm just
a little bit concerned if I can be sort
of honest about this
the one thing that makes me sort of
cautious is how gendered the response to
Jordan Peterson seems to be and I don't
I don't claim to be an expert at all but
I'm somebody who wants to make sure that
the fullness of being human is something
that's not just painted for young white
men and it's it's one of the reasons why
I think an ancient African is so
interesting but it's it's also one of
the reasons why there's a chapter in my
book on mothers because st. Monica plays
such a huge role and it's just I just
want to make sure that the other half of
humanity is ink is included in this but
but I'm really intrigued and we share an
overlapping concern I think with
Toronto Carl Jung and then how it gave
rise to the novels of Robertson Davies
in fact date Robertson Davies who I
mentioned earlier was the first master
of Massey College at the University of
Toronto and so to me when I first
started hearing Peterson it actually
brought back to mind a series of novels
that Davies had written in the 70s which
I just think it's kind of cool to
imagine as a Canadian I think it's cool
that there's this burbling and bubbling
of ideas coming out of Toronto that now
the world is paying attention to - yeah
and like I said before i definitely
recommend jon bovi key as yes yeah yeah
no that's I'm glad to learn that and
just as you mentioned Foucault and
Derrida what do you think the Petersons
doesn't understand about them oh that
that would be a much longer conversation
but I just think that I think he paints
them as to paint someone for example as
Jacques Derrida as just this sort of
Nietzsche and nihilist is not to have
read his corpus so I I have another book
called who's afraid of post-modernism
which is Derrida Foucault and Liat are
and interestingly it was written before
the Jordan Peterson phenomena I think
it's a 2006 book but I was I have been
thinking about a bit as Peterson's take
on these figures has gotten off the
ground only because I think you see a
Derrida actually a desire for an
openness to transcendence for example
like there's there's a real it's in it's
a I don't want to deny that it's
ambiguous but there is a sense in which
Agustin sorry Derrida by the in the last
10 years of his career is talking about
the messianic right is talking about a
justice that is to come so there's it's
just a much more complicated story as an
academic who also translates ideas for
wider audiences I know that every
scholar who does that is in danger of
dying the death of a thousand missing
footnotes so but it would be some day it
would be it would be fun to have that
conversation because I think there's
there's
to be done on that front yeah definitely
I I'm not a I'm not so aware of Derrida
but I know that leotard for example
talked about the transcendent and the
transcendent the postmodernist idea
falls apart or the whole post modernist
project falls apart without fear of the
transcendent risk which is which to me
means there's an awareness of the sort
of Hall of Mirrors we can get lost in if
we don't have that sort of that sort of
fixed point so that's yeah it would be
an interesting thing maybe truth burn -
yeah yeah yeah one one interesting
footnote - is that one of the first
posthumous works of leotard that was
published after his death was a book on
st. Augusta yeah so so st. Augustine has
been this enduring fascinate Derrida
Foucault leotard jean-luc Mary are all
these contemporary and 20 century French
figures Camus they all engaged with st.
Augustine at various points in the 20th
century and that's kind of one of the
subtexts of my book on the road the st.
Agustin is that you could see something
someone like Camus Ibaka who also hunger
for meaning-making and and also
appreciated just what it meant to not
accept Christianity and yet he did and
and I actually think he's the most
Augustinian atheist he sort of he's it's
so deep he did his doctoral dissertation
on Agustin and neoplatonist it was
fascinating so that's one of the threads
I chase in the book awesome great and
just coming back to the idea of practice
because that that definitely seems to be
something that's really alive right now
what are the practices that we need to
engage in rediscover live out in our
lives
what's your what's your attitude to
practice yeah so I think we are what we
love and we love what we practice so so
in that sense for me practices are habit
forming heart shaping
rhythms rituals and routines that
actually gift me with an identity so
it's it's really really important to
then ask what am i practicing and what
am I and when I'm asking that what I
should really be asking myself is what
story is embedded and and enacted by
these rhythms and rituals what ultimate
story about Who I am what we call to be
so I use the word it's a churchy word
but I actually used the word Liturgy
liturgies to just talk about love
shaping practices now that means there
are all kinds of liturgies that are
outside of religious contexts right now
what is a liturgy a liturgy is a
performed enacted narrative it's a
script that when I give myself over to
it in a way that story is getting
inscribed in my bones it's getting under
my skin it's it's getting buried in my
gut and then I start living out that
story so I don't I don't think my way to
new loves I practice my way to new loves
now I do think that our late modern
culture offers all kinds of deformative
liturgies in that regard like we talked
about marketing earlier so I think
consumer culture is its own liturgy but
it's mostly one that defaces me and
deforms me and and tells me a story
about myself that it makes me less than
human and for me again just I'm not
trying to prove anything or but I would
say the way I understand Christianity is
not just a belief system it's not just a
worldview it is this enacted script of
grace and so at the heart of
Christianity for me is the practice of
the liturgy in which the story of God in
Christ reconciling all things to himself
is enacted and it's important that in
that like for example you know we never
go to church without engaging in
confession but we also never engage in
confession without hearing the good news
of mercy and pardon and forgiveness
that's pretty good practice
for how to relate to other people but
it's so that but it's deeply communal as
well so it's it's um it's what in the
Christian tradition we call these are
sacraments which means that they are
means of grace that there's a kind of
fuelling of capacity and possibility in
me just by giving myself over to them
and I know that sounds kind of crazy but
it's part of the mystery of it all I
think it's really important that it's
communal do you know I think this isn't
something I can you know no podcast will
ever substitute for the Eucharist no
matter how smart it might make me
there's a kind of enactment of a story
that physically I I really think it's
important Christianity is a deeply
Incarnation or religious right like it
believes not only does it believe that
God became human it believes that humans
are ensouled bodies and that embodiment
is really really crucial so the
practices are way for bodies to get the
story and then the last thing I'll just
say too is that I I guess I've become
more and more convinced that practices
of friendship are so crucial in this
cultural moment in which we find
ourselves I think I I think we almost
don't know how to be friends anymore we
know how to be companions we know how to
be a gang we know how to hang out but
I'm not sure you really know how to be
friends and and my sincere hope is that
that churches are not big performance
holes at the end of the day they are
congregations where people learn how to
be friends of God and friends with God's
friends and I hope that's its own grace
center and just pick up on something you
just said about we are what we love do
you think we can choose what we love so
I think it's complicated so I think on
the one hand I could say you know I
talked to David and I become convinced
oh man I've got to live for something
different so you know tomorrow morning
I'm like no now I'm going to live love
this the problem is I don't think you
can think your way to new loves what I
can choose to do
is to become intentional about giving
myself over to a different community of
practice which is then going to
transform my heart habits so that I am
learning to love something in someone
else do you know I mean there's it's a
bit like Mara I have been married for 29
years and and on the one hand obviously
I chose to marry my wife she chose to
marry me miraculously and and every day
you kind of make a choice but actually
what what keeps it a covenantal
relationship is doing things you know
it's just like these these check-in of
you know you never leave the house
without kissing each other goodbye you
know you never go to bed angry you know
there's there's just the rhythms of a
life together and that's actually what
forges it much more than what we are
thinking or believing or choosing rebel
wisdom is an Eve sense making platform
bringing together the most rebellious
and inspiring thinkers from around the
world if you're enjoying our content
then you can help us make more by
becoming a subscriber which will give
you access to a load of exclusive films
also you can then join our group zoom
calls to discuss the ideas in the films
and you can send us ideas for questions
for upcoming interviews we're also
looking for talented people to help us
out with editing graphics music that
kind of thing
and if you're a regular viewer you'll
know we talked a lot about the value of
embodying or actually living out the
ideas that we talked about so that's why
we run regular events in London check
out the links on the website for more
and hope to see you soon
you