but it's done
yeah same-same going Christmas is a lot
even when it's not a lot even when I
minimize it it's still a lot which is
good a lot but like things go awry um
what did I look watched our video make
sure to know we did it was full of aura
was here goofing off which means I also
put that video on unlisted so other
people don't watch it just because I
don't want her face all over the place
um with what I'm doing in the world all
right I've got here in biz Bansal some
 I don't really want my give up my
camera and also I think it's just ya
know
Denikin's and just to fully transparent
why last weeks isn't there it's there
but it's not there and we said I said I
was gonna sit with the addiction oh I've
been sitting with the addiction although
figuring out what what works and what
doesn't is like not doing it till at
least seven o'clock at night right like
making sure it's not during the day and
so that's what I'm doing right now and
it's working
ish right like I mean I know I get into
spaces event it needs to be a cut out
but I'm not there yet it's still kind of
pulling new stuff out of me which I know
I don't even need but in fact I need the
emotional stuff we pulled out not the
intellectual stuff but it's there's
something here that there's a reason
it's here but I am looking to
reincorporate I've been meditating daily
yoga has not happened by living room
with such a mess because there was
well-being leg I had to put away and so
now it's Christmassy and there's just
enough space to do yoga so I I can now
start doing yoga and the other thing was
to make a list of the videos and do some
videos I definitely didn't do any of the
videos but I did make a list on the and
and then just sitting with it thinking
about it in there in the background it's
like what what piece is my story
relevant or not are just like my story
and it is I mean part of what I feel I'm
here to do although I know no no I know
I'm
here to do it I just don't feel I'm here
to do it yet like it's like this in
little Colleen as opposed to like it
I'm good with I'm like yep I can figure
it that paid out but the what I needed
to become to do it and when I'm in the
process of becoming in the journey in
the path of like everyone has their own
individual path to follow and showcasing
that and part of showcasing that is
looking a little crazy in the stuff in
the sense of like right this is how this
is like I'm I don't know like it brings
together everything that I have been
through my childhood and adolescence and
adulthood into Who I am just like anyone
who's any age that is like who you are
is who you're meant to be doing so um
just sitting with it and like owning
that that right I am so there was a
video I wanted to do and have yet to do
pretty much just the non ego ego piece
of like I am awesome and I'm a genius
and I don't mean that in a hierarchical
way I don't mean because I'm awesome and
I think I'm you know I leave the genius
in this one little area that you're not
right that I'm better than you that I'm
more than you that's not the metric the
metric is like no I am awesome more I
get to know myself the more I love me
the more I live within this brain the
more I'm like oh this is what it's here
to do even if it can't do the rest of
this stuff which is not what people hear
if I say I'm awesome and you know what I
mean make you're like oh that's that's
ego and I have you go everyone has ego
but when I say that it's not from ego
and it's not from me I'm better than
it's from a everyone has this how can we
tap into everybody does this and that's
part of that the story so that was my
goals from last week have a bit of an
agenda thing to talk about today but
what is your goals were Dennis we're not
fantastic and not terrible I continued
working on it I realized that like the
general idea is there it's not I guess
sharp enough to send over look it wasn't
we're firing it was sort of gin
ideas and like the wording wasn't right
and it doesn't really make sense for it
to be sent over until like the wording
is right it's actually ready to get made
because things could change it a fair
bit so I worked on the wording it there
bit and sort of went through a few
different iterations and it's getting a
lot closer I've got like the general I I
just hope now I'm trying to refine the
word choice and sharpen the deaf of it
but I think it's actually getting close
enough that it's you know it might be
doable did this week is it something
that um like that you're doing other
things as well or is it like alright
you're stuck on this one so until you
figure this one out you're not doing
anything it was I also got a bit
sidetracked and started to sort of like
oh I could also make this infographic
and this and it started to brainstorm
there and then like no I'll pull it back
pull it back let's let's get this one
done alright yeah so Bentley and I
yesterday on the live board meeting
we're talking about like in the game be
space there's a lot of projects there's
a lot of people everyone has not
everyone a good I'd say 15 to 20 percent
of the people if not more maybe 80% have
their own project that they're
passionate about and so finding ways to
bring like the meta project of like how
can we support each other's project how
can we in my mind create a collaboration
platform how which is what the idea Cafe
is like a little bit of an iteration and
having having those things and he last
week like on Wednesday messaged me
saying hey what what if we use the idea
cafe space for brainstorming like other
people's projects right like had someone
come on board and we're like focused on
their project so they're like in the hot
seat for the for the week and we
brainstorm and help them problem solve
and and it's about helping them so like
they get to kind of either think you had
a say what would help them the most
right what wrote maybe there's enough
for few different formats that they can
pick they get to decide at the end
whether or not it's kept or delete in
write if it's gonna be helpful for their
project
helpful and so we were thinking if
you're up for it using this time that
like we because this is that is kind of
what this is supposed to be too right
it's like being project instead of just
the two of us but every week would be a
different project and then once a month
we would have a this is very preliminary
but like like an update right like
everyone who's been on can come and say
where they are but and not instead of
problem solving kind of like what we're
doing where it's like here's where I am
here's next steps right maybe not like a
weekly basis for like I'm taking on this
goal but hey so the idea is of course
just like the idea cafe that people are
bringing their influence and sharing it
right so people find whatever YouTube
channel we're doing that on we're
probably still going to be doing our
democracy for now
and then they they find the YouTube
channel bring some of their subscribers
but they also get some right like
someone might be here one week to listen
to cube spawn which is a cool project um
I have a conversation set up with him
you know in a week or so and you hear I
mean like you're into one project you
come watch it and then you help someone
else with theirs like oh I can't hope at
this woman I can help with that one like
some of your fans might be helping cube
spawn and some one cube swans that fans
might be helping Wikipedia or name of
your things wiki lucky which elections I
was like the beginning of the end wiki
then we can use the important part about
the PDF all right and so how do you feel
about that how does that that's
interested all right well that would be
and then also I think this time slot is
a good more people are available on
Saturdays than on a weekday ones and the
it's not an idea cafe like we're not
I'll take about five minutes to share
what we think of person's project arena
yeah yes and so we're thinking of an
he's he not me because I'm honestly not
great at maybe things but is idea Reid
actually kind of work who are we just
talking about it was a swarm it was like
projects form I was like has a little
bit of a bad connotation but at the same
time it has got like well this swarm yo
and then leave we'll see what what it
feels like are like what where you are
now and I
think within the game be space and there
will be tons of people who are and I
think it's like I know for me and my
project that's what I'm into he's like
talking about a problem solving it but
also figuring out what that process
looks like so that it's he's by going
through it right by being comfortable
with like okay keep eating whoever it is
that was in the hot seat right what was
good about that what wasn't good about
that what would you have done
differently what would you you know what
I mean to keep improving the iteration
of like how do we help this person in
their project and how do we get people
to that project and then hopefully
through that it showcases that we do
have common pain points like marketing
and like getting people you know I mean
and creating the platform that hopefully
organically does that or someone else
sees that and just rates it but even
that I don't want like there are so many
projects out there that are designed for
one person's idea of a collaboration I
want a collaboration platform that's
designed on collaboration it's like the
showcasing part of this process right
that's why we have our life board
meetings now having live Mehta board
meetings for everyone's bringing their
project and seeing how we how we help
move it forward is is exciting I think
that'll be fun and then using this time
Suttles means they're not adding another
call to my week right already getting a
little a little hectic especially since
this one this one my board meeting and
the idea cafe for game B are all ones
that like I'm hosting and so I need to
be there I can't I can't leave what does
game B game be what is it what is game B
it's what comes after game a game a is
up till this point in society so it's
like our since agriculture arts really
all of it but like agriculture the the
Industrial Revolution capitalism in my
mind's other people might not fit under
communism probably also all of it falls
within under game a that isn't
sustainable we can see that it's not
sustainable our societies are a little
bit breaking down or environments
definitely breaking down so we need a
game B we need something that comes
after and what comes after in the game
be space this is necessarily the truth
but it is I agree with this truth is
that it needs to be something that is
omni win it needs to be something that
isn't 1% owns everything 1% is that only
arbiters of like power
in truth and and resources that everyone
has access to resources everyone has a
quality life and that the hopefully most
of the things that are in game B are
anti rival risk meeting the more people
that join braining is an advantage to it
like their common example is language if
you're the only one who speaks your
language that's not so helpful if you
have two people speak your language now
you know what I mean three people four
people the more people that speak your
language the and to rival risks the more
anti rivals it is without demanding
people speak your language right
everyone must speak English would not be
antivirus but giving people the option
of having that and software in
technology I think is often antivirus I
think that's why it's so powerful the
more people that join it the better the
thing is and yet then there's a person
or like an entity that owns that that's
the one profiting off there right like
Facebook is anti rival risk but it's not
because it's game a capitalist
Zuckerberg and shareholders own it right
so it's a very different structure than
if we all own Facebook and the more
people that were on it the better and we
can see the things that we don't like
about it and improve it and do that's
not what game beats doing that's what I
want to do it's like I want to own a
Facebook and keep improving it the other
speaker Atlantic it's not like Icelandic
in Greenland combined is that what they
speak in green legs I don't even know
what Greenlandic is so it's clear idea
very like here in Canada we have two
official languages English and French
but we of course the people that
actually like a live on this land aren't
part of the official languages but part
of I think they would be if they had one
right but what like that's not how that
works that's not like Europe doesn't
have one language that's not how
humanity works so um anyway there's
there's a cost definitely to having only
a tiny group of people plus it's a lot
easier to have cultural genocide right
or you like race that language from
whether on purpose or just but Apple
owns is the wrong word
by accident right by consequences you
didn't foresee from your actions or
actually on purpose
still still wiping languages off of them
off of the map which i think is
disastrous because we we think
differently we act differently when we
speak different languages I've never
experienced thinking in another language
but people who are brought up in a
different language have different words
for like language is really important
and so happy and the diversity of
languages on this planet the diversity
of people who are brought up in those
languages I think as part of the key of
how we figure out how we get to
solutions is through that diversity of
experience but I digress
that's what he is I noticed even more
much better liberate mankind has a much
better little video series on his
YouTube channel on the little pieces of
game be like antivirus versus rival race
complex versus complicated what's the
third one
Oh broadcast so like one Center
broadcast the information out versus
like multi decentralized which is kind
of funny because when I was listening to
his talk on those his intro talk often
these are the three points um having I
was like writing down the values for
together tech and I was like they
actually all a line I don't remember
which is which but like diversity attack
was one of them transparency tackles one
of them and democracy tackles one of
them I was like oh this is but like my
version of it right so I'm like what we
need to do is go back and have the
conversations on anti-radical is versus
rival res complex versus complicated and
make a like not a decision this is what
we're doing from now until the end of
time that's never what we're doing but
what is a first step right what is that
what is the best way we can have complex
instead of complicated what is the best
way we can have antivirus what is the
best way we can have broadcast no sorry
decentralized information and then
starting and then saying how can we make
it even more decentralized or what piece
of this decentralization works and where
would it work to be more broadcast right
it's like you can't just hold on to one
side of the little bit of a spectrum
like this is the solution which was a
this week I had an amazing conversation
with max quarters he wrote a book called
social singularity and I have put in the
game B space it was like I keep being
triggered by decentralization like every
time someone says it's a solution it
like I'm like but it's it there's
amazing powerful stuff there but to say
that you first need to apply the
decentralization stamp before it's a
solution is like turning every problem
into a nail to apply a hammer it's like
it's like it's having a conversation
what the problem is what's the best
solution if decentralization is the best
solution it's the best solution but to
make it decentralized just because and I
get it I understand why we want
decentralized because power centralized
is bad like it's historically we're not
so great at that and at the same time
I'm like it's the power centralized it's
the problem having you know like if our
governments weren't this hierarchy down
Authority in our lives and they were
actually there to be stewards of our you
know anything like our country's it
wouldn't be the same as it currently is
and so to me that's like it's the power
piece it's the profit piece like people
want to and even when I was talking to
max Porter's Oh No thank you he would
disagree with one on the same but anyway
um that people want to keep the profit
piece they want to keep the little
capitalism piece without like it's like
without like decentralization will let
us still have profit and fix things like
band-aid solution and that's not what
he's saying he's saying that like
technology gets us the singular like
eventually through competition we get to
that point and I don't think that's how
we get to that point I think it's your
cooperation and not centralized like now
you have to follow this rules but they
just decentralized community and
protocols I like that idea I do like the
idea of protocols and having it but like
and a diversity of protocols that you
can choose from but I don't like the
inefficiency of competition I don't like
each of us having our own collaboration
app and no one get being successful at
it like I want one that is actually
makes has 90% of where all of them
there has to be a blend there has to be
competition to help you sort of get the
good ideas surfaced and then at some
point some cooperation or collaboration
to say great here the better idea is how
do we grow on these yeah then also
always keeping that spirit of
competition because that's where a lot
of the good ideas and that's where you
prove yourself yeah I mean that's part
of my issue is all about that like how
competition works in our current world I
don't think it gets the best ideas out
there I do think it got amazing ideas
that got us to where we are but I mean
I've had them sure we've had this
conversation so many times but like it
doesn't it doesn't mean the best ideas
out there means the best idea by someone
who can communicate who has power who
has privilege who has all of those
things is the one that gets out there
how it is because if you have a great
idea and can't get it across no kidding
like that's my world that's what I'm
looking in which is why I'm like part of
it it's coming up with that solution
that like no we need a place you can go
to that isn't through the 1% where it's
like hey you know what I can I invent it
a new mushroom foam which I just saw
IKEA is starting to use right like a
styrofoam it's very lush and if you make
that and you have to go through the
process of like well people already have
a place in the market places they're not
going to use it and you have to you're
not going to unless you're really really
passionate and it's like that yes that's
how capitalism works oh you fail if
you're not going to be willing to do
that
but I want the solution I want the
actual solution like mushroom styrofoam
sounds like a great idea if you had that
idea you've proven it you can bring it
to the arena and say hey this is in we
can say well is it safe how long does it
last you know what I mean like go
through the specifics then you don't
need to do the marketing together we can
design a system or mark because
marketing is already broken down you
spend hundreds of millions of dollars to
flip the trust right to be like well
we're gonna string yourself now if
you're willing to try it and so it's
like you don't mean like coke we know
coastal rest
so we tactics marketing uses yes could
serve to go away like advertisements for
the most part
kind of stupid I have been a few ads
that have actually introduced me to
products I like but in 99.9% of it
yeah it's pointless yeah and so we want
the truth for all of them right like
what's in Coke why do I want to use it
does it taste you don't I mean like
versus oh they told me it's gonna make
my life so much better look at all these
friends and diversity I'm gonna have
when when I drink Coca Cola everything
like we know consciously that's not
happening then subconsciously it is and
this lack of trust and then like forget
about being a new person to the market
and then you have all the competitors
like all the knockoffs they come right
away and all that so like right now it
we've already broken competition it's
like if you have a ton of money you can
compete if you don't have a ton of money
in your product for stealing it anyway
there are a few I don't even know what
to say like a few of the criteria that
lets something get through competition
that are broken like you know not every
like the main criteria shouldn't be can
somebody make a lot of money off this
regardless of how they do it that's you
know a bit you know a benefit of which
in my mind is one of the areas where
capitalism isn't working great right now
is the whole people playing it just to
make money instead of you play the you
know your specific game to do well on it
and if you do well a lot of your reward
is profit yeah but that's probably
literally makes that happen because
you're gonna pick as an individual if
profit is your motive you're gonna pick
the space not the year the best sympathy
you can get the most profit in in that
space it's gonna be the people who seek
the most profit and willing to lie the
most a millions in order to for that to
happen I have I I don't know how to fix
that where you can keep profit and that
is the incentive and not have it be
corrupted without it being completely
transparent in which case it kind of
fixes it but doesn't at the same time
and hello a few many going stuff I like
going south left up for a second but uh
he said Greenlandic has a perfect word
for game a Adger pork I stuck it even
pronounced in English I would have order
be bad be ineffective not competition
arises whenever at least two parties
strive for a goal which cannot be shared
when when skin is the others loss
yes or like this is where his
competition
I don't think competition is bad and
this is where also I was like I don't
hate capitalists I hate capitalism and I
know that there's other people that are
in the same space as me who don't hate
capitalism it's not one of them but
nothing so and I think having those
together is good I don't think that
everyone should come on board with what
I feel but having competition being the
demand you can't be cooperative in our
society you have to play game a there's
no other option that's like one of the
best things I in the ten that we've been
talking about game B that's one of the
things that I like the most about it is
that in principle it plays in the same
arena as game a but then it out
completes it and it completes it because
it does away with certain things that
you're like yeah we don't need this like
profit being the number one mode of the
end LBO
if that's not there you can make
different decisions yeah that's one of
the things that I do like a lot about it
and competition it does sort of you know
one wins and one loses in the case of
let's say sports in theory it doesn't
always count that way the better team
should win most of the time so in theory
you know each year the the best team
that year wins first that doesn't always
happen but at least it's in in in some
cases you can be pretty sure that you
know the worst team didn't win or you
know the you know even then they're the
best they did they just aren't the best
at what we want them to be to be the
best at they're the best at Daniel oh
yeah exactly at getting elected at
telling you stories and making
conferences are the best at fulfilling
his promises who knows yeah and I think
that is the piece is like what when you
throw in an incentive you skew the whole
game and so if the incentives to win at
the game good that you're gonna do
anything within the rules to win and
there's a referee and there's like and
that's where with competition we thought
he said is it's like someone wins and
someone loses and there's ways to
compete that isn't right that isn't I
win you lose like there's a an example
they did a study on musical chairs where
like the cable
musical chairs even playing since I
don't know if I'm gonna say the 60s I've
no idea when we started playing so
chairs um anyone who doesn't know kids
at a birthday party play music and when
you stop playing music you have to sit
in a chair and there's always one less
chair than there are people in the
person who doesn't have a seat is
removed there's another cooperative
version of it that is used to let's say
you start with ten people and therefore
nine chairs and you have to get ten
bucks
or ten people on nine chairs with no one
touching the floor right and then you
you keep going until you can see how few
chairs you can get everyone on right
like can you figure out how to get ten
people on one chair so it's a
cooperative version of musical chairs
and the point is they had people play
both of them and say which one they
enjoyed more right and they enjoyed the
other one better
it wasn't like everyone should play this
one because that one's broken it's like
this one's more enjoyable cuz we're
tackling like our competition is the
goal not each other and that's where I
think that like having fun competition
where it's like maybe we're competing to
create the best the best iteration of
something and that one wins and goes
forward but having that be literally
beer' I'm not we're not in competition
in the marketplace where you might
starve I might starve instead it's like
okay no one's getting no one's gonna get
the unicorn and get millions of dollars
we're all gonna have enough resources to
be able to compete in that space and
have the outcome and we all get the
benefit without it being this okay well
you have to figure out how to get a
product off the ground and you have to
figure out how to get a product off the
ground and everyone does if ever is
first to market might have a bit of a
foothold and then it's gonna screw
everyone else over it customers don't
get the best product cuz that's not the
best system to get that there instead of
like no customers want the best who's
got the best one and then how do we all
make and improve it and making it in a
way where it's like is it fun for the
people making it and is it fun for is it
a good product when it's done without
like well competition works cuz anything
else has not worked so let's just keep
the system going because I want to be
able to compete and possibly make
millions and millions of dollars it's
fine that's how some people fit but to
create the co-operative system that is
parallel to that that people have an
option to come and cooperate is my
vision and I think that that one out
competes the competitive one because you
can't compete with a cooperative one
you just can not if there's enough of us
over there a competition splitting
operators you need both you need
competition to get rid of if not to
bubble the best idea is to at least
hopefully get rid of the worst ideas and
then use cooperation to focus on the
ideas like okay we think that this is
the best way to do it let's cooperate on
this until we have something better yeah
which is not like I mean having some
kind of process or it's like let's
brainstorm everything we want in this
solution some of those ideas are gonna
be crap but the person coming up with
them isn't crap right the person like
any ideas a good idea at that stage it's
just right we can't we can't move
forward with all of them so what's the
best ones and then how do we include
these in the internet first iteration I
hope you include the most of these in
the first iteration and then now we have
the first iteration how do we make it
better and break it off into groups and
competing to make the best one right if
you need to be incentivized with tons of
money in order to participate you're not
the one I even want playing that game
anyway
whereas if if you need a little bit of
money because you need to live we all
need to live and you like the process is
fun that's a different there the
incentive doesn't break it it still
breaks it a little bit which is why I
think we don't have the incentive like
beauty contests are a good bad example
of this right like a point like
lightning yeah scholarship money for my
kid it's like okay the top prize its
beauty children pageants it's like a
thousand dollars yeah you spent five
thousand on the kids dress like this is
not you're not even breaking even this
is not about finances at least admit
that under my point that was oh that
like that like having a token a token
prize right but it's like a thousand
dollars as the prize is like oh don't
spend any money okay you bought it the
people who are super money driven I
think what the core is is they just like
to win and because the money thing makes
that really easy to understand do what
have more money am i winning yeah it's
just it makes it numerical it makes it
really easy to understand
and I think that's in a lot of cases
that thought
process like the whole you know III need
to win at all costs the needing to win
is fine they need needing to wear that
all costs is not people who go into a
game saying I want to win sure I most
people do that's the entire reason and
the only reason that you're playing the
game probably not the healthiest and I
would bet you're probably not a very
good player compared to somebody else
who actually plays it because they enjoy
the game and because they they want to
be there and you know they plays a part
of a team that whole thing that person
is probably like that you know in those
situations those people will probably
end up winning yeah and that's like for
in my personal worldview how profit
breaks everything but yet we need it in
our current world right you're not gonna
get the top brain surgeon unless you're
paying them the best you're not gonna
get the top coders unless you're paying
them the best kind of is the top brain
surgeons still go and go Doctors Without
Borders right they still will do the
things you just aren't guaranteed to get
the best one you aren't you know what I
mean like there are coders who are so
sick of working for Google or taking on
their own project that when you give
them an option to make a living and have
a purpose they will take a pay cut buddy
like Oh 100,000 you're gonna pay me
75,000 and I get to feel good about
myself in the morning that's worth 25
quickly and so creating it one of the
things I want to do is just like a brand
new thought was um yesterday was I want
to have like idea cafes with people in
technology not so that like like I want
to do this big vision right we're like
we're gonna work together and create
this big cooperative but I'm like okay
we can just have a conversation that's
already so I'm getting a bunch of women
together from this women in tech space
that I'm in yet to post them saying like
hey the let's have a conversation of
what technology a technology company
that was designed for women looks like
right who have charged child care needs
are just the assumption that they're
going to have child care needs and
therefore don't get to progress right
what is it what would it look like to
have female only teens or you know name
like that kind of I don't know because I
don't work in tech I just hear like so
and then having people there's a ton of
people in tech with autism like what is
in neuro diversity what does that look
like how could
better support you how do like other
people with disabilities especially
physical disabilities well today is it
accessible physically is it you know
accessible mentally if you're good with
with everything else but emotionally
like having people have conversations on
what does if we recreated the tech
workspace from the ground up what does
it look like for you especially if it's
a remote right like I'm not creating a
new Google world like a new campus that
everyone's coming to and working at what
does it look like to live your life well
you're contributing right like how many
hours do you want to work what does what
do benefits look like that are all new
in an anti rival risk and I think we
discussed that before like having an
uber that we all cooperatively own we're
part of it can be well there's health
insurance we all have together right so
even if you're driving an hour a month
if you can buy this health insurance
it's a lot cheaper than what you can buy
house words elsewhere to deal with the
uber driver what's their cost their cost
is car maintenance and what if we
brought down that cost right instead of
increasing the costs to the driver what
if we had cooperative mechanics or
they're getting paid but you know you
can trust them you know like they're
working for the drivers and like you
know what I mean like there's ways to
problem-solve around it where it's it's
a benefit but it's not ten bucks more an
hour so that we have to like the
economics of that makes it unsustainable
right so then we have to charge X amount
or and that breaks everything down
versus okay well what about giving you
things that are bringing your costs down
as opposed to and everyone right like
it's across the board
so it isn't finding five more dollars to
give to everybody it's it's Oh an idea
that saves us all five dollars and
therefore it's effectively giving
everyone five dollars without having to
find five times however many drivers are
and those those kind of solution um yeah
I think I heard that either
uber or lyft actually like in I want to
say New York opened up like an auto shop
specifically for their drivers know it's
meant to be in a probably like a lower
cost options I don't have much trust in
those industries it's like you all
they can come here and it's now it's
surplus you took a solution it's like
you have to be seen at this one
otherwise and there's like thousand
dollars just to walk in the door yeah no
I mean they want there they do want more
more drivers they want them to be happy
enough to stay and they want their
freezers just happy enough to stay and
that's like they're playing with that
tension so they can feed off of the
profit right we can play with that
tension in a way that's like the drivers
can speak for themselves then the
writers can speak for themselves and we
can collectively come up with solutions
that are Omni wind that are like okay
how do how does someone like me get to
facilitate getting my needs met without
necessarily putting that on uber like
sorry a driver right like I need to
grocery shop well if I could get
groceries delivered I don't need to use
so that's a solution and if I can
coordinate with other people we can make
that cheap and accessible but if I need
to actually physically get somewhere
like cohousing a few times a week and I
know when I'm going there and coming
back right like well if I can put that
in a system and there's other people who
are going around the neighborhood that
time we can share every time right and
the odd time than it isn't maybe my
price is increased or me you like the
point is is just have the function to be
able to have those conversations to be
able to create the next iteration
definitely going from a big event or
uber has surge pricing we can create
that to be more economical or it's like
I know I'm going from stadium to my
house and there's other people who are
going from there to around my
neighborhood as long as they're you know
not a serial killer
I'm going to drive me with them like put
more emphasis on the theme of things the
uber pool during peak times rather than
just jacking up the prices for the uber
X
yeah me too so I mean you would have
both but like where it switches where
the whole point is to keep the costs low
and as you said you know you want to
make sure that you weren't sharing with
a serial killer
you may even do things like hey if a
certain kind of event maybe you try to
put women in the same vehicle yeah
absolutely and like that's like from
from the like is that also I feel there
are things they'll go wrong when I was
talking with max Porter's this was one
of the things that was talking about
uber right that uber was in a gray area
when they first got made and now they're
kind of and same with like aetherium and
blah and big one Bitcoin where are like
kind of grandfathered in and others new
laws and stuff I was like that's the one
thing the co-operative can't do we can't
break actual laws like the patent log
when we're big enough but we can't work
in the morally gray of the legally gray
area without first changing the law
right otherwise we get sued like it's
like okay like we couldn't
now we could create new burr because you
were exists right like now we can be
like what do you mean you're letting
them be there but the co-operative can
be very you but we wouldn't be able
to start a brand new burr that never
existed right like the can't work in
that ambiguous gray area of like there's
no law make a law will make a lot like
because it's being transparent you're
not in the market yet right well you
know where things are generally legal
unless they're illegal right so there's
a log this thing that says that you
can't do it then okay we won't do it
like I like I think Vancouver had uber
for like a month or two right and then
was like oh no and then I don't know if
we had two per month which I know it was
illegal but now it's finally starting or
it may have been less than that one more
than that but I'm pretty sure that
whoever did and then they pass and let's
legislation let's be honest because the
taxi Lobby said hey they're taking our
money yeah absolutely and that's kind of
the so like that Mort that gray area I
don't run point if that was but like
that is a point that like the market can
do like the capitalist for-profit partly
I have to say uber wouldn't exist either
if it wasn't already powerful rich
people who made it right like it wasn't
it wasn't two guys who don't have any
connections and no money who came up
with over and they made it in a morally
gray area that's the point having a ton
of people though we have concentrated
I'm sorry like exponential power and
money there's a flip point right we're
like when there's 10 million of us and
we want to change healthcare laws we can
when there's 10 million DOS who want to
change patent laws like it if there's 10
million of us alone country then we can
however when we're just talking about
changing things that's the space of like
if we were doing ooh burn people will be
like oh no that sounds like you're
breaking the taxi in the street
stamp no that's illegal we're just gonna
stop you here because we don't have the
money we don't have the power and we're
operating in full view right so that's
what I mean like the what we gain in
transparency we lose the more liquor
they legally great area we have to have
a legal department who thinks about
absolutely everything right and be like
be like okay no no that we can't do that
because of Acts right or we can try but
this might happen
at a certain point you probably need a
lobby because that's playing the game as
it is right now like but yeah
transparent I love there talks about you
know these citizens getting together and
hiring a high-powered lobbyist to
represent their interest in the
government okay what is that on the
onion oh oh yeah two real yeah so
literally what the government is
supposed to be doing but there is like
there's this this book that I want to do
an interview with him as well it's
called legacy the future started
yesterday and there's like it's basic
vertical farms desalinization solar
energy
maglev transport how to implement
universal basic income and the basic
premise is there's like a billionaire
who spends his whole life gaining money
and then he's gonna die and so he like
oh how can actually implement this and
there's some guy who's written this
manifesto that he comes in contact with
and he goes through and makes like a
city talking about any basically is like
getting them I think like homeless
people or people who don't have like
refugees into a city that is like well
all you have to do is work X amount you
get like food in a restaurant and all
this stuff and some of its great and
then a part of it I'm like okay well a
billionaire is just like that's what
you're waiting for is a billionaire to
step up and do it like we need a billion
people to put in a dollar and even if
they don't get to live there do that for
10,000 people right do that for that to
see if it works then have those people
make keep making it like if your first
step requires a billionaire step in and
do it and it's like it's a lot of risk
and money like it's like this could
absolutely fit
you wouldn't know because he'd be dead
billionaire it's like everything is
astronomically but it's kind of cool
like how it's that's just the easy way
to be like here's how we get the money
here's what we can do with it if you can
just skip that first step on here's a
different way to get money cool then in
theory the rest of it should be the same
ya know but that's like I said it there
was someone else who was talking about
comic books which I really liked the
thread it was like how our generation
isn't letting go with comic books was
quite frankly adulthood wasn't really
like we don't have mortgages and we
don't have that so like yeah we're gonna
stay with our like growing up stupid
anyway yeah we can see that both because
we can't grow up and why why would we
give up the things that are fun at all
even if we could have mortgages right
like well what's wrong comics I'm like
my issue with comic books and I love I
don't really read comic books but Harry
Potter and things that I do like and do
the same thing and I don't think I don't
think JK Rowling broke the world by
doing it like this idea that a prophecy
comes and makes you into who you are and
that gives literally what Harry Potter
is right it's like there's this prophecy
and it could have been him or Neville
they made him the person because it's
not like it's like it could have easily
been Neville then he would have been the
person whose parents tried to get
Bergeron you know what I mean it was
really like geez so Harry Potter yet
yeah we're past that Lord of the Rings
there's that there's a statute of
limitations after the ten years after
the last book was published
is that about statue limitations so
having a bat-like idea that one person's
gonna solve it right like where's Batman
where's the billionaire right in the in
the suit I'm like you're the Billy like
you're not the billionaire in the suit
and we're not gonna put on capes but it
this literally requires us all to stop
waiting for somebody else to solve it
what does it look like for you to solve
it like what what was and she was like
all comic books are kind of like a lone
hero or a tiny group of people and she's
like you're reading the wrong comic
books I'm like well which way and it
isn't even if there's five out there
that aren't that the culture is you get
a prophecy or you have a superpower or
like you're rich and then you become
that person yeah
back stronger than your like your single
person rising up and blah blah blah like
it yeah it it a lot of it usable to
power of the individual yes and it's
like although I love the power of the
individual if we're waiting for an
individual to come for the solution to
climate change or our governments to
come for the solution of climate change
it's not gonna happen
so if we know play with me here then our
governments aren't gonna solve it and
our corporations are gonna step in and
magically solve it in the name of profit
what do we do right and it's it's not
march in the streets because what are we
asking for it's not it's like how do we
actually solve it and it's like how do
we understand the science how do we what
is everything we need to do right cuz
it's not just co2 it's all the we
pump into the world and so we have to
know the chemistry of it right like we
have to know that like this is how much
phosphorus were making and where it goes
it's in the ocean for this reason here's
what happens with it and those are
things we can actually organize and get
together and do and one billionaire yes
if I was a billionaire I would find it
and do it if it was a millionaire I
would fund it and do it but it it's
better for a million of us to get
together and create that it's because
then we know we already have the will of
the people like me created a new it
capilla that explains climate change I
now can get you on board for it instead
of us getting together and saying what
is everything we want to know about the
environment what would keep what it is
my project
yeah no absolutely but it's like getting
those people together right and then
even like then there's the next layer of
like then your project has to figure out
how to get people on board right is that
not you're not a millionaire but like a
millionaire created then hoping other
people come on board it's like how do
you get the trust and you get the
marketing and how do you get and that's
part of the meta project again you like
that idea out there both to prove itself
and then also so that people know hey of
the thousand things trying to get my
attention why should I pay attention to
this yeah exactly and that's where I
like I like to just that back and be
like well what is the thing right like
what how do we know everything about
something we don't ever but like and
that piece to the piece of like uh well
you need to do the same research I did
so you can come to the same conclusion I
did and then we can
it's like debate doesn't work knowing
switching sides no one is like that's
just not how our humanity works other
people watching light but like there's a
much more efficient way way to get to
the truth and it's great for profit I
think it's great for for people watching
it's it's a competition but instead of
like competing with the thing right like
it's like okay what can climate change
activists and climate change deniers
agree on you like breathing right
yeah like food you like water like what
how do we make sure we have clean air
clean water clean
maybe it isn't climate change right
maybe maybe you're right and humans
aren't the ones destroying the planet
what's the science we can get into right
like but like why why are our oceans
rising in temperature maybe it is some
aliens Steve so weird that billions of
us pumping constantly into the
world would have an effect on it literal
 and chemical
all of the above but like tackling a
problem we can agree on and I don't
think that is the problem we can
probably even though we do all the water
and clean air like that we wanted
surrounding planet I think is maybe some
of them think of their gods coming back
so they don't necessarily need to see to
that but in that case I think it's yeah
pretty much everybody would agree yeah
we want you know clean air and clean
water and stuff like that the issue is
that they a lot of people don't think
it's under threat and that's why I like
well I don't want to lose my job went
for it you see that's not real yeah
which I totally get I get that
especially if you don't think it's real
right yeah
even if you do think it's real you still
don't want to lose your job you're still
yeah I got the Jew engineer experienced
are then conflicted like to have that
cognitive dissonance where they're like
well I want a job and I want to eat now
but I want to be able you know I have my
kids to have a world in the future there
at least conflicted people who don't
think there's any issue think it's all a
lie and I think it's just you know a
Chinese plot to ruin Western economy
then yeah I think it's you have to sort
of also include that
conversation on okay then who's funding
this is there any truth to that Park
yeah no exactly and that's for finding a
common thing we can tackle takes thing
you versus them out of it if we can and
puts it into the we're tackling the
aliens right we're like combining forces
to tackle this thing and I think climate
change if it's done in the right way can
be that because it's like um our planet
is you know and whether it's human or
not what do we do about it right how do
we put systems in place where even if
the oceans rise we can still move people
around and get food and make sure every
human being is taken care of because
it's not their fault they were born on
an island what you know to me it's I'm
their fault that humans no wait no we're
not saying humans God said like what is
the thing we can tackle that is and part
of it is also this isn't a country right
this isn't a that we don't need to
nested read this thing is worth tackling
you're not invited right like if you're
like climate changes are real at all you
know I don't like it there's it's not as
a human centered or not human Center
it's just is it happening you can come
like if you're still willing to tackle
you don't I mean the problem if the
problem speaks to you but not otherwise
because why would you just be like
actually I just want to talk about
cartoons and comics cool that rooms over
there exactly or like me just bring up
conversations it's fine yeah exactly as
long as we're not talking about the
weather
oh wait no it's climate change probably
talk about like in a real way yeah no
and finally that's a good like kind of
also the talk about collaboration versus
competition where right now we're kind
of at the point where collaboration in
that discussion like there's always
going to be competition in this case
it's kind of a bad thing because at
least one of the sides is lying but
there's an issue where like people
themselves need to collaborate and I
think you know as we said people want
clean air and clean water and that type
of thing but then if you don't think
it's a problem right now
right now it seems like people think
it's a personal
come then like it he doesn't believe in
climate change well then they're stupid
well no what do they believe why do they
believe that include them in the
conversation and then figure out okay so
why don't you think that climate change
is real okay here two years old great
let's also talk about that that's a part
of the conversation on just looking at
all of the science is okay who's funding
it and this thing about you know why
isn't this and why didn't happen twenty
years ago
cool let's talk about that too because
if there is you know ten percent of that
side has a point
all right let's figure out why it didn't
do that as someone who is alive 20 30
years ago and knew about this
twenty thirty years ago I can tell you
it was real twenty or thirty years ago
we weren't we just weren't this close to
the threshold tipping point where
there's no way back we were getting
stage of like hey it's gonna be really
easy if we think about this now oh yeah
I that's where the media get sort of
into part of being the problem where 20
years ago they were still publishing
articles saying look we have to act
right now we're all gonna die in five
years and now people are going back and
posting like hey look at that stupid
article 20 years ago thing we're all
gonna be dead in five so that's 15 years
ago like TV part I do agree and I do
this too is like had a streak at making
it really hit sound really horrible what
we're what we're in for makes people not
want to act because I'm just and
I'll just curl up in bed that but it's
also the boy who cried wolf yeah I'm
always gonna end when do i believe it
it's like the cult leaders who are like
whatever are aliens God whoever is
coming back on this day Oh actually we
got the numbers wrong now it's this day
three years away until the day comes
then we push it up two or three years
again yeah it's very similar except that
it's being presented in a lot of cases
like as scientists agree on this well no
three of them do and you just published
it because you needed something for the
front page yeah and the other thing is
like also like I get it people don't
understand science like we're not saying
that we all all of humanity's wiped off
the face of the earth in twenty years
from now it's that if we don't take
drastic action in the next ten years
there's no point like we don't get back
to this steady state we don't get back
to this this amount of abundance the
humans have evolved and in need and so
the earth is gonna probably be okay if
we stop doing nucular like just
it'll be fine and there'll be some new
species that is sentient or not who will
be the top of the world but or we might
be right and that's where Charles
Eisenstein has a video of like what
future do you want to create as opposed
to which future do you want to avoid
right like we probably will survive
we'll probably survive and live in these
horrific cities that have like no trees
and no and like we're we have invented
mechanisms take carbon out of the air
but like we don't have trees right and
insects
we don't have insects but we have
whatever it's growing inside and we've
lost all of those foods and I said well
do you want to like I'm not only
creating this world because of climate
change it was a big catalyzing reason
but I want a world of abundance I want a
world where everyone has their needs met
so we can all benefit from each other's
ingenuity and if you don't want to give
your ingenuity because you don't get
paid for it then I don't want your
ingenuity like I'm like I'm good if
that's your own priming factor someone
else come up with the and I think
from all the previous conversations in a
way you do get paid for it just the
multiplier which you might be subject to
will be less like there are there you
there's certain roles that might pay
more than others but it's not gonna pay
a billion times more that's not one of
the outcomes like the best outcome might
be five times actually still really good
there's a lot to be said about like
let's say with the collaborative I'm
just kind of ignoring your comments
human only because I look at climate
change
flooding oceans will bring salt water
into nucular plants according metal I
don't need to know more I knew that I
don't need to know what worship is gonna
be catastrophic we need to take action
and roll it back as far as like we need
to know where every nuclear power plant
is and know what's being done to make it
make it accessible like to make it safe
in the event of any and all natural
disasters including humanity collapse
Aidid now who's taking care of them like
those are real problems
but with clouds has passed all tipping
points if no energy is used
starting today their eyes and
temperature will continue which is
possible but I also think that humans if
we can tackle that together if we can be
honest about the problem we can figure
it out we can figure out how to
sequester carbon and the implications
that come with that in a safe way it's
that if we're all got our head in the
sand and the people are cat whatever
there's a lot of there's a lot of
going on um but and the issue is castor
what I propose is that it is kind of
easier to work together that you can't
yell at people all to stop using plastic
straws if our world is designed around
right you have to be super busy you have
to work 60 hours we gotta get you
Starbucks coffee so you know don't sit
down and drink a coffee you like we've
designed it this way and so you can't
just start taking out little pieces like
we have to redesign people's lives so
they're happy and connected and that
feels anti intuitive like it's like no
we got a concert on this like thing it's
killing us and yes we do but through
allowing people to have time and energy
to focus on it to be able to say okay
maybe I don't need to get my cup in
there right like we need to recreate the
entire supply chain so when you come up
with a new source of something that's
actually a solution it's easy to get
that solution on the world and figuring
out how we help people who are in the
climate change crisis who were going
through fires her going through floods
who are going through a stop war
altogether because it's the most stupid
thing on the planet we've been doing it
in our entire our entire evolution
basically and now we're smart enough
we're not like because I'm so reptilian
but we're smart enough to like offset
that in the good times right be like
momma had murdered some people I should
probably now be taken away from society
like figure out metrics around it like
um and there was a point I was gonna get
to you before you even started this so
that I read bit we gotta change but I
don't know mother was on an uphill media
channel no no kill me no challenges but
more carbon has been released in the
atmosphere in the last 30 years that are
not with man's time on the planet I
don't doubt that I know the science I
know the science for I mean I don't like
know the science
as well it's like a climatologist but
yeah knowing about the carbon cycle and
how most of us in the ocean and then
like I understand the tipping points
the issue is yelling like I'm not saying
you're yelling at people I go with
people but like screaming into the void
that like we're doomed we're doomed for
June makes people just curl up and want
to die like as I'm on this is a
realization I came to this week about
myself and it was like all I laugh
write a lot and I make everything into a
joke and I know that that is a coping
mechanism I know that that is like I but
I and I don't even know how to nod that
it's actually both masking and in autism
and stimming at the same time but
because I do that I have this higher
level of like happiness in my life that
I've been able to tackle this really
heavy but not really because it you
don't I mean it's a masking and so I
still feel this underneath where I don't
have access to it in order to tackle it
but it's kind of reached the breaking
point which is kind of what what it all
is and I'm like so do I stop doing it
cuz I tried even I was like I can't I
can't stop doing it so it's about owning
that and like cuz other people like
that's heavy out a lot of time when I'm
like what do you mean it's not that
heavy we gotta solve it and anyway like
that there's a learning they're like oh
cuz I talked about it in this way I
write I have a smile on my face and I
laugh about it it helps me well attack a
little more of it but not really
and so it's like now I need this to
go away like now I need to not know like
about the carbon cycle and we're all
doomed and I can't not know that so
instead I gotta fix the carbon cycle at
how we're all right and this mask
because part of masking is knowing when
you're doing it and I'm doing it because
it's not like your true self and I'm
like but it kind of is like it's become
Who I am and I don't even know how to
not do it like I would feel like masking
to try to not do it right like it's like
I don't wear deep uh does this go look
exactly like what is this me you know it
isn't me no but like when does masking
become like who you fundamentally are
because I act like this in private - and
that's to you how I know is how I treat
like like Aurora we're not alone right
I'm like oh this is who I really truly
am I am affectionate I am loving
I am also bitch sorry I mean like this
is because it isn't about looking to the
outside world it's like this who I am on
a deserted island this is why I'm in
isolation when the cameras aren't on I
also still joke
I'm joke with my guides all the time
like I'm sore you want to give me the
solution to the world and not be able to
communicate it I it was us to save the
entire world and I can't handle any
stress like that's not a joke
like it's like of course that's my
journey on this planet like it's a
sarcastic ironic of course of course
that's what I'm here to do like I have
to look like I don't know what I'm doing
to get to where I actually can do it
like it's like all of it is like okay
I'm in the process I'm in the weeds and
I have to keep being like right I don't
get to look like a genius at the leader
I get to look like an idiot
at least in points put myself out there
and have it you created in a positive
way
Herman extraction done for profit only
there's no need for the energy I mean
everything done for profits utterly it's
not my butt but the issue is like you
can only have it out there when it's for
profit which is part of like median when
it's like this teenager created
something it's like yes and his parents
are probably engineers and he probably
had like went to private school and
probably there's other ones who probably
like sitting in in Kenya like the guy
who created like the window his entire
town he created like electricity for
them like that's who we need but the
issue is someone needs to hear about him
and then propagate it right like someone
else with power and privilege and
finding creating the avenue for when you
have a new idea right when you know how
to clean plastic on the ocean like
here's the top things we need and both
those are human need right like I need
to eat I need transportation I need this
how do we get those needs met without
the whole horrific supply chain that is
destroying us without putting force on
anybody and that's where uh sorry that's
what I was think of as getting into
before but I don't rember one another
piece of it like a million of us coming
together and figuring you know it's very
different than forcing it on the rest of
us like a costume choice and so creating
a system where it's like you can choose
this this way and this is where
of greenwashing and the anti-capitalist
stuff that i used to be a part of and
now no longer I would say Manta
capitalist but on this piece of it it's
like everything costs money to be more
environmentally friendly like even the
more organic like organic salad dressing
comes in smaller bottles because you
can't buy in bulk and it's like this is
not this is ridiculous you don't think
people who love the planet also have
families like why they don't also have
like having you have to go to the
farmers market and buy stuff every day
it's like that takes time it's not
accessible to the poor it's not
accessible to the sick the people who
already are most affected by the
it's not actually accessible to them and
so needing to buy a bag to put my
clothes in so that the micro plastics
don't wash into the ocean isn't broken
I'm not paying 50 bucks to put you to
stop making clothes with plastic
stop destroying like because I'm gonna
give this so I don't even own this
plastic gonna give this away and then
someone else is gonna get anyways even
if I like the whole thing is broken and
we have to look at the whole thing but
that's a lot and so we have to like look
at pieces and say okay well you can't
tackle all of them but someone can
tackle plastics in the ocean
someone can tackle carbon sequestering
and not by themselves and we can do it
more as a collective so that when you're
working on something and this is kind of
what I'm working on we have to go spin
an hour but working on figuring out what
I lost it completely cuz I realized it
was an hour uh are we taking on things
for next week it's Christmas I'm not
taking on things I'm taking right I'm
doing this I'll continue working on
myself over the holiday but yeah we
don't need to necessarily meet next week
well I don't know what I was gonna say
it I don't know it's gonna be next week
or the week after but could you afford
green to change this into the thing then
we need someone with the project who
wants okay yeah I mean I'm cool with
yeah
so I will contact that Lee and let him
know we're not meeting him and I aren't
meeting next week and so we're meeting
the week after that will be our first
next board meeting and huns and then
cage into that asking and then he's
working on the fur bench for like
putting it out to game be what to ask
people for projects so as long as
someone's available during this time
period even if it's just me you and
Bentley as the crowd that's fine as I
can
more people are on and people are
watching that's awesome to you to be
able to say here what their project is
and then what level and then talk about
maybe the process as well so I'm that
sort of goal because that's in no way
measurable but like okay we've decided
so now how do we kind of move forward
posting it and game B breaking it down a
little bit and hoping that by next two
weeks from today we do have somebody to
do that with and it might even be a week
from right if we're meeting next week
because I would I'm okay doing that the
last few days of the earth so I gotta
bring in successful Amir hey what I'm
gonna be doing over the break is this is
working on wiki elections so a couple
days off but for the end of the year so
I'll be taking most of my days in
January all right bye YouTube we'll see
you in two weeks