okay so I was going to go live on
YouTube but it turns out even when you
go to do that for the first time you
have to wait 24 hours are you sure
you're not yourself to the world so I'm
pretty sure I verified it already so
within 24 hours I should be allowed to
go live but how perfect my first one
because what my plan is to do like a
10-minute live video people aren't
necessarily joining the live video and
are going to comment after and see after
I don't have anyone I have a few people
following me is I don't think that
should be a problem but I don't want to
record it like I have been because then
I second-guessed and a five-minute video
becomes a 20-minute video because I redo
it and redo it and redo it so instead
it's gonna be ten minute chunks it's
gonna be my process of what I'm going
through to get this idea in the world
because the whole point so many people
that I know and are my mentors it's like
I got my together and I look at me
like they may have come for poverty or
come from from a backgrounds that that
they're like I've overcome this but you
only got to see them then once they've
overcome it right like you don't know JK
Rowling when she is a single mother on
welfare you know her when she went
through that to get Harry Potter and I
want to have show the process but more
so than that the process is what's
creating it so I have to be willing to
put this idea out there in its unn and
its chaoticness and it's like undone 'no
stan done perfection that it is like oh
we have this piece and this piece and
this piece because it's the only thing
i'm capable of in the moment and every
time i try to do anything that isn't
easy and flowy and like as me trying to
like fix my brain and make it work or
trying to communicate beside to you in a
way that makes sense to other people it
doesn't work i have to let my brain do
what it wants to do and life kind of do
what it wants to do and in that process
is the magic to get this thing out there
and I'm in the process of learning to
trust it but I'm not the greatest at it
all the time and so I have to keep
learning the same lessons again and
again like put it out there and the best
of it is the best of your ability the
right people are going to come on board
at the right time
and it doesn't need to be perfect that's
old paradigm that's like if I needed to
sell this to you if I needed to make
millions of dollars at it then I need to
convince you that I am a confident
person who has all the answers and I'm
the opposite of that I'm going to be
honest about what I'm good at which is
problem-solving which is this big world
thinking and then I saved the world and
I have this thing in my head if it
wasn't good enough like I'm I'm not a
perfectionist I have looked at all the
atrocities of the world since the time I
was a kid I was collecting them
my health has paid the price for that
and I didn't know I didn't know that's
why I was doing it I always felt like I
was just to save the world but then all
this unlike things click to the more
they click with this like global
cooperative the more I'm like oh and
this is that solves this and this solves
that and like the beauty of every crappy
thing that's happened to me and all of
like my good side and my bad side all
amalgamating to this idea because the
truth is someone who's confident and
type-a personality and the CEO of a
company is gonna be the CEO of a company
they're not gonna create a cooperative
that we're all gonna be part of the
point is we're messy human beings that
aren't perfect and how great that we can
change the world that way because I
don't need to do the pieces that are
hard and difficult for me because
somebody else will do them we just have
to create the system to allow that
happen it's much gonna be much more
chaotic beginning well we're creating
the system that allows people to not be
perfect because technology makes up for
some of our areas and other people make
up for all fairies we can't all be like
have a perfect home and work 80 hours a
week and volunteer our time for tea like
you can't you only have so many hours in
the day you don't have like so many
personality points to dole out and
unfortunately they're not even some
please get like to to figure out
hundreds we are imperfect people I'm an
imperfect person and so I'm going to
live in my imperfectness to get this
idea out there because the idea is
amazing I'm also gonna own where I
 suck
which is that like this idea it's not
coming out of my mouth in the way that I
want it to ever it's never gonna be a
crystal clear flowy and then we do this
and then we do this like I have this
base
I have technology ideas that can help
with this piece and this piece but
explaining that because everything needs
other things to be explained first and
so where do you start and so that's me
needing to explain this to the world
doesn't work I need to explain it like I
would need to hear it and then people
that are like me are gonna hear it
they're gonna it's gonna resonate with
them and then the right people will
contact me to be like oh I know how to I
can I wrote that up for you here's a
blog post like oh wow thanks it makes
sense perfect that's maybe never gonna
happen
and in the process I'm also writing and
also doing video and also getting better
at communicating the idea to myself like
it's like oh yeah that's more crystal
clear that's because yeah anyway it's
all working out and it's all awesome and
I'm gonna you post 10 minute videos here
going through the global cooperative
because that is my big thing it's my
life's purpose it's what I'm here to do
and it's a messy chaotic process
figuring out what you're here to do and
doing it and I'm gonna make that process
so much easier but for everyone else by
going through myself cuz the whole point
of me struggling with this is less
people have to struggle later on but I'm
also a human being I struggle with
health problems and so that is is always
on the back burner because I'm always
lacking in energy I'm always in pain
right now it's tooth pain which is not
normal but just the body pain you're not
too bad it's a new fun different that
I'm also a single parent and my
parenting has taught me so much and it's
my kids five so still still a big part
of my life and even when she's older and
grown she's gonna be a big part of my
life so parenting health with my health
I have my medicines also my addiction I
smoke pot and so I've yet I keep also
getting the message from the universe
like just flip on and go on camera and
I'm not comfortable doing that yet and
so there will be there's times where
where that will absolutely happen and
that will be my ten minutes and
yeah I'm just gonna let myself show up
as I am and move this thing forward and
so there's gonna be an in you get an
imperfect slice of ten minutes of my
time or like a slice of me in my life
ten minutes a day as I'm living whatever
is coming up to me in that moment I'm
also queer and still figuring that out
but I'm also like not brave enough to in
any way have a relationship or date so
like that's probably not gonna be part
of it but I'll be back and I'll be
something I talk about about clearness
and gender and all of that stuff but
with the understanding omit like it's
all book learning because I've not done
anything all right so that's a bit about
me and my chaotic what this is gonna be
this one is in July video as you can see
there's a little live thing but I
recorded it like it was live so that um
you have to start that process so it's
like it's live I'm posting it and I will
see you all tomorrow I'm also taking by
Benton tomorrow so okay the see me in
both states because today it's not a by
Benton day and I only do it once a week
which is a it's an apt medication
alright so I am gonna post this and I
will see you all tomorrow
once I'm allowed to go live