howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
this is a current episode currents are
shorter and less heavily produced than
our full-length episodes and generally
focus on a single topic as always links
to books articles and organizations
mentioned are available on the episode
page at Jim Wright show.com that's Jim
rut show com
today's guest for this current episode
is David fuller a uk-based journalist
and filmmaker and founder of rebel
wisdom it's good to be had Jim hey good
to talk to you again David always
interesting conversations
yeah David's rebel wisdom is one of the
most interesting and impactful of the
new distributed sense making platforms
it's truly an innovative example of the
new journalism you can find rebel wisdom
at rebel wisdom co uk or search YouTube
for rebel wisdom today we're going to
hear from David about his views and the
history and what comes after the
intellectual dark web so David let's
start what is the intellectual dark web
who are they when did it start what do
they do yeah there's a there's a fair
bit of history that we have to recap Jim
let's let's try and kind of keep it as
light as possible why I think this is a
really important topic right now is
because the intellectual dark web was a
an attempt to solve the problem of truth
and the problem of sense making in the
digital age and I think all of the
things that it was responding to when it
was kind of constellated and that was in
around 2018 are even more pressing now
and I think I don't know if you'd agree
with me but this sense of solving the
problem of truth and the problem of
sense making in the digital media age
seems that it's at the core of solving
any of the other kind of really pressing
problems because if we don't know what's
true we can't really reward innate we
can't react I would certainly agree with
you and you know in our work in the game
be world for instance I would not say
that sense making is necessarily the
hardest of the problems that need to be
solved but it's the first one that needs
to be solved because without the ability
to identify truth and have
and people adhere to it and apply it in
a sensible fashion it's very very
difficult to solve any of the other
parts of the so-called meta-crisis so
absolutely with you there yeah and I'm
glad he brought up game B because and
that's why I think this is a really
valuable podcast that you put together
because it's it's listened to by a lot
of people who are approaching these
questions at a really high level and so
originally the intellectual dark web was
framed as something of a game B
enterprise and I don't know if you want
to recap what that what that might mean
what game B is at this point before we
go any further into it yeah to my mind
game B is the attempt some of us have
been working on including some of the
members of the IDW since 2012 to develop
a new social operating system for
humanity which his goal is to avert the
failure modes itself terminating modes
that we what we think of game a is
headed on to whether that's
overpopulation overheating of the planet
running out of natural resources
endogenous failures such as Wars or
economic collapse etc and literally
replacing that with a better social
operating system that whose hallmarks
are self-organizing Network centric
decentralized and metastable yeah and
then I guess within the sense-making
realm you're looking at kind of what are
the game a self terminating systems that
are destabilizing or a corrupting the
information ecology and I look at the
intellectual dark web and particularly
Brett Weinstein and Eric Weinstein had a
conversation on the Rubin report so Bret
Weinstein the evolutionary biologist
Eric Weinstein is a mathematician and
that there's that they're brothers that
it's not a coincidence they have the
same the same surname but they were on a
show called the Rubin report and talking
about how truth seeking cannot survive
an encounter with market forces and I
think of all things that sort of
summarizes the problem and and that's a
problem that then infests academia
because you get motivated research
it infest journalism because you get
financial motives like truth as a as an
enterprise and in a way you could argue
that academia and journalism properly
exercised is actually a game B
enterprise if you're making truth the
highest value it's actually a game the
enterprise-e you then look at what are
the market failures and the and the
failure conditions of that kind of truth
seeking enterprise and the intellectual
dark word was originally consisted of a
group of public intellectuals a group of
podcasters including people like sam
harris joe rogan jordan peterson brett
and eric obviously heather high-end
Bret's wife Claire layman of quill EPS
and quill let the magazine was sort of
considered something of a kind of
in-house magazine for the intellectual
dark web it was framed as people who
tended to reject orthodoxy who engaged
in first principles thinking didn't go
along with the crowd and it was also if
there was a if there was a perspective
that it was sort of coalesced around
that was often criticized for it was
that it was acting in response to what
it saw as the constraining of free
debate by the excesses of campus culture
by identity politics by the sort of the
woke left so it had a political aim but
also I know that it was considered
certainly or especially by Eric and
Brett as only the sort of media side of
a much broader conversation that needed
to happen in terms of orthodoxies and
consensus thinking that have built up
within lots of different disciplines
obviously Brett would be talking about
evolutionary biology Eric will be
talking about physics and their argument
was that so many of these different sort
of academic fields had got stuck at the
same time obviously that's a huge
conversation that we don't want to dig
into but the intellectual dark web was
was named in early 2018 and then it was
identified in the New York Times by a
journalist called Barry Weiss in may 20
18 and then it rose to it picked up
still
there were loads of Facebook groups
there was it it it really landed as a
concept or as a meme it was very very
strong and there was a lot of energy
around it and a lot of discussions was
it what was the intellectual dark where
was it this group of people was it a
certain type of interaction was it a set
of good faith principles and Eric would
say he came up with the term in the
first place he'd say that he
deliberately did not define it because
he wanted it to be you know to have a
little bit of mystique and to also that
he thought defining it would be a
mistake but it but it certainly I
interviewed quite a few of the members
of it and I think it was Jordan Peterson
who said it he obviously pointed he kind
of questioned whether it really existed
but he said it had to exist in some
sense because the name stuck and then
the fact that the name stuck meant that
it was referring to it to a real thing
and you can kind of argue what that real
thing was but it was all for me it was
really the coming to consciousness of an
alternative to the mainstream
traditional media entity it was kind of
uniting a very disparate group of people
but all of whom had thrived in the
digital world had kind of grown up
outside the mainstream bubbles and had a
lot of heterodox opinions and a lot of
different perspectives that that weren't
fully I think the reason that they
succeeded a lot of what they were saying
was not fully reflected in the kind of
traditional media
that's quite a lot of words Jim I don't
know if you wanted to to jump in at any
point yeah let me jump back to that and
again as a new Brett and Eric new Brett
quite well and Eric a little bit and has
we've had some conversations mostly
about science actually so I did watch
the rise of the intellectual dark web
with some interest and with some
sympathy right and I do think that there
you know Jordan Peterson
despite what maybe Jordan Peterson had
to say there was some organizing
principles that may not have been
entirely obvious to maybe even the
people involved but struck me at least
as where they were coming from and then
then also some motivations call it basic
human motivations which I'll talk about
in a second
look at the people who are generally
thought to be part of the IDW and of
course one of the things about the IDW
is there is no such thing there is no
actual club there is no actual members
is just sort of a consensus of who is or
isn't it an ID w ER and what stands out
- for me is that there are people from
the left and the right people I'm
probably about the farthest on the right
would be Ben Shapiro farthest on the
left at least of the personalities that
I know of it might be Brett Weinstein
who's actually pretty far left but they
all fall within the broader domain of
classic liberalism essentially the you
know the theories that I think we can
point to is that were come from the work
of John Stuart Mill and the in the 19th
century and you know essentially confirm
and the evolution of that thinking into
what we might call a modernist
perspective and that what they stand in
opposition to is we call it we label it
woke but I would suggest that the the
deeper intellectual history trend there
and there is post-modernism and critical
theory and in fact one of the members of
the intellectual dark webs Steven Pinker
has written quite eloquently and also
john hate on you know the dangers of
post-modernism and critical theory as
applied in academia and you know
truthfully you know from my perspective
with similar sympathies post-modernism
and critical theory just sounds like
moonshine and nonsense tell you the
truth i mean some of this horseshit we
hear about you know though we can't say
there's only two sexes as well you can't
say there are only two sexes and from a
certain perspective with a certain lens
looking at let's say DNA you can say
people are either XX or XY there's a
tiny percent of percentage of people who
are XX y but it's ignore that small
amount of people you can say there are
two two sexes but in certain parts of
academia you're not allowed to say that
for reasons of postmodernist
race basically so that's to my mind the
real organizing center of those of what
self-organized
essentially as the IDW then in terms of
human motivation one of the things that
I think stands out is that essentially
all these people these the ones that I
know of
we're victims of various attacks by mobs
online principally though in the case of
Brett actually in person and the famous
Battle of Evergreen State University and
it's a natural inclination of the
victims of mobs to mob together
themselves and produce a gang you know I
remember when I was in seventh grade
you know seventh grader in a fairly
rough neighborhood and you know we were
at the mercy of the ninth graders until
we formed the pickpockets Club
eventually we had about 80 members and
even the ninth graders were afraid to
 with us right and so I think that
at the human motivational level again
perhaps subconsciously the part of the
binding energy of the IDW was that these
people have been attacked by various
insane mobs and you know chose to club
together to fight back collectively or
at least to find solace with each other
and again that's one of the things I
found is a big plots around the IDW and
again a kind of a meta organizing
principle is at least to a degree these
were folks who were committed to saying
what they thought was true irrespective
of what the mobs thought and by the way
while as you pointed out people tend to
think of them as in opposition to the
woke post modernist mob I would say
every one of the ones I know of is also
in strong opposition to the willfully
ignorant right-wing mobs right these are
all people who believe in evolution oh
how what a striking idea I'll bet
there's not a one of them that think
that the Koba 19 is a you know a Chinese
hoax right these are people grounded in
science in logic in in realism and
they're just as opposed probably
actually strong more strongly opposed to
the willful ignorance that we find on
the right so that that's my take of what
the binding energy was and and where
they fit in space and in intellectual
history what do you think about that I
think I'd agree with most of that
there's a
few things that you mentioned that I'd
like to pick up on but not dive too much
into one of which he mentioned Steven
Pinker
now whether Steven Pinker is in the IDW
or not is a very interesting question
and I know that some of the members
would think that he probably isn't
because he duh and actually that he's
kind of even though he's had his own
run-ins with kind of identity politics
he and his very skeptical of of it
he actually he's got a very sort of pan
glassy and view on the world and
actually the sort of the core of the IDW
saw it as an existential project to to
recover certain values that he that he
that he wasn't so you can kind of dive
into that but the question of whether he
as a with with his sort of beliefs is a
part of it or not is a very interesting
question the other the other point that
I wanted to make which is when you
talked about the sort of dividing line
why that's really relevant right now is
that over the last couple of weeks
there's been a series of revolts in
American newsrooms arguably you could
say that that I'm putting out a podcast
later today saying asking the question
whether whether journalism is dead
because and that there was an
interesting that the woman who wrote the
original IDW article Barry Weiss
who's an opinion writer of the New York
Times wrote a series of tweets that went
very viral and caused a real reaction
where she said that what we're seeing in
a lot of newsrooms most famously at the
New York Times when the opinion editor
was forced to resign maybe about a week
ago after an editorial by a US Senator
Tom cotton and then a revolt within the
newsroom and she described this split
between the new younger generation of
woke journalists and then the older
generation of liberal journalists who
were then they were realizing that they
actually had fundamentally different
values the new set of journalists were
much more focused on whether something
was causing harm and a lot of them all
tweeted in unison that this op-ed by Tom
cotton was putting their colleagues in
danger and and the older journalists who
believe in more sort of freedom of
speech and classical
all values and she said that that that
split was playing out throughout
companies and news organizations
throughout America and this is that the
astonishing thing is the speed this has
happened like this is this has come in
in the last two weeks really and I think
I think most people looking at what's
going on now would agree that a lot of
what the intellectual dark word was
pointing to and warning about has now
come true
very very prescient I think I think a
lot of people are saying and you look at
something like you mentioned Brett
Weinstein and evergreen being the sort
of the the most clear example of what
happens if you get kind of mob rule in a
university campus and a lot of that
seems to be playing out more broadly now
in in society and in culture so I think
exploring what the intellectual darkweb
got right whether it was a successful
prototype of something that we need to
recover or whether it failed I think
there are different perspectives that
you can take my my take on it is that it
it succeeded in some ways and failed in
others and I think looking at why it
failed is really valuable because it it
points to a lot of the failure
conditions of sense making some I could
kind of cut with on the top of my head
is audience capture they're they're sort
of rewards that you orient towards not
just financial rewards but rewards in
terms of aligned incentive structures
you mentioned this sort of sense of them
being and I think you pointed to the
idea that they became a tribe as well
if you define yourself as being anti
tribal what happens when you become a
tribe of anti tribal thinkers that and
itself starts to create issues of
in-groups and out-groups as well and now
I'm also interested in of that original
constellation of people who are in the
intellectual dark web who is still I
like the frame that samo Berger came up
with with when you talked about live
players and dead players who's still a
live player and who's who's a dead
player now and I think I think some are
still alive and some are no longer
really generating any novelty or
generating any kind of interest and and
there's all of these different different
issues that I'd be interested to unpack
later on in the conversation yeah let me
make a couple of reactions and then and
then I'll turn it back over to you to
talk about you know where it's where
it's been successful where it's been a
failure or where you may be thought of
as a prototype with some level of
success you know this issue of the last
two weeks in the newsroom and more
generally in popular culture and their
revolts in the streets is to my mind
highlighting what I talked about
previously that you know the correct way
to think about is and or positioning at
least was in opposition to
post-modernism and critical theory and
essentially you're seeing is people who
educated principally at elite
universities and this is an important
thing to keep in mind the post modernist
moonshine is not a general disease at
least not the United States but it is a
high level of infection amongst people
who went to elite universities
particularly those who study the
humanities and/or the social sciences
and these people have been rising in
percentages in elite you know
institutions what we have called in the
game be world the blue church think of
it as Yale plus the Episcopal Church
plus the New York Times and and its
friends and allies and this is very
similar to the generational uprising in
the late 60s where a different group of
people actually were successful in many
ways in overthrowing the previous status
quo in the elite institutions I mean the
the changes in elite universities
between 1965 and 1971 when I showed up
at one were absolutely immense and we're
probably seeing something like that now
or at least an attempt at it and I would
suggest the IDW is an attempt to oppose
that you know the post modernist
nonsense moonshine is the opposite of
sense-making science and reason at least
I was I would say so as in with respect
to the tribe how could anti tribalists
form a tribe that was my point is that's
human nature
and is the natural human reaction to
having enemies is that you find your
friends and at a minimum the old famous
Middle Eastern quote the enemy of my
enemy is my friend and while it may be a
little logically contradictory it's
extremely human which is that's why I I
framed it as such so those are some of
my some of my reactions I'd like to turn
it back over to you David and get your
assessment overall of the intellectual
dark web
to what degree it's been successful and
a failure or some mix of two that could
be thought of as a prototype actually
before we do that I'm gonna reference
some data I pulled up this morning I did
a Google Trends search which basically
looks at the occurrence rate of searches
for various terms on IDW and it Peaks
very highly in June July August
September of 2018 and has been gradually
downhill since then with a few ups and
downs but is now down at you know maybe
a twentieth of what it was at its peak
and then just for fun just now I
compared it with the search term game B
and interestingly game be an
intellectual dark web or not are now at
about the same level of salience on
Google Trends even though game B was
basically very very little two years ago
so gives you a sense that at least at
the at the level that's captured by
Google Trends intellectual dark web is
is on a downward trend had quite
happened yet but it's close yeah I
wanted to pick up on just some of your
framing before about post-modernism and
the the values of the intellectual dark
web because and I find I I'm pretty sure
that you're you're not a fan of ken
wilber I'm reading him right now I'm
reading a brief history of everything
and I we have a tentative agreement by
Ken to be on my podcast
right and I am surrounded by
integralists in my life and I didn't
know much about it and I've dug into it
and my quick reaction is probably no to
no surprise that part of it I find
useful and part of it I find shall we
say three question
marks the part I found useful so far are
the so called four quadrants I actually
have started using those when I
approached certain classes of problems
and found it actually a useful framework
now some of the upper levels of his
levels I find to be in the category of
moonshine and nonsense but that may just
be my Philistine anti spiritualist self
so I'm digging into it I hope to know
more and so far I find it an impressive
body of work yeah I was I was thinking
principally and I would certainly
recommend the e-book Trump in a post
truth world where he goes through the
difference so he uses a system called
spiral dynamics which I think originally
came from Clare graves and it looks at
different different ways of looking at
the world and the principal one is the
tension between modernist values and
postmodern values and so I wouldn't I
wouldn't throw out post-modernism
completely I think there are there are
valuable parts within it but the and
this is where I think this particular
frame the Wilbur frame or the spiral
dynamics frame is really really useful
to understand the intellectual darkweb
because the question is whether a
realization that the Left can go too far
and that this this particular postmodern
worldview can become pathological
whether you're moving on to a potential
higher synthesis or you're falling down
to a simply kind of reacting a place
where you're just reacting against it
and I think some of the people in the
intellectual dark web did push on to a
sort of higher synthesis and some just
kind of retreated to bashing bashing the
left bashing post-modernism and I'd say
sort of Jordan Pederson at his best
would go to the synthesis and that his
worse would kind of go go to a sort of a
lower kind of what do you call it a lack
of synthesis it's difficult to talk
about without the understanding some
some part of that map and I would say
highly encourage people if they haven't
familiarized themselves with it to look
at the Trump and a post truth world
because it goes through the value
systems in a very
in a very clever way that also talks
about current events I always found it
quite hard to understand wilbo and it
was just talking more theoretically but
that book really applied it to the
current world and some of some people
you're probably familiar with so Jamie
will talk about integral as being a
really useful operating system and that
the best thing to do with it is to
understand it and then forget it
because if you if you've spent too long
within it you start talking about you
start basically just getting lost in the
territory you start talking about these
colors and these sort of Integra leaves
that mean that you're no longer talking
to people outside that world so it's a
hugely useful frame and I think within
integral it really shows are you are you
pushing on to a to a higher level
synthesis that sees the value of some of
the some of the challenges that
post-modernism plays to the original
kind of modernist perspective and I do
think there are more I mean you'll have
this conversation I'm sure with someone
that Hansy fryin apt who will challenge
challenge your perspectives on
post-modernism but but I do think that
that way of looking at it that
developmental lens is something I've
said quite a few times that the
intellectual darkweb needed and didn't
really have and I think if it had had
that developmental lens it would have it
would have helped be a little bit more
discerning about where the criticism was
coming from the critique of
post-modernism was coming from a more
integrated place aware was coming from a
more disintegrative place yeah that
actually I'd have had two conversations
with Hansie Frye neck on my podcast and
they were very very interesting and we
did disagree a bit about post-modernism
but I would say surprisingly I think we
were in strong agreement that has
actually manifested in the real world
right now post-modernism is much more of
a negative than a positive though as a
set of critiques it is useful and indeed
that is my top-level take away that
post-modernism as a school of critics is
perfectly reasonable and they have said
a lot of them poor
things that need to be said but when
post-modernism tries to become
constructive to actually build what
comes next as they're trying to do in
these newsrooms that you referenced it's
a disaster it'd be as if you took a
academic movie critic and put them in
charge of a moody movie studio just an
insane thing to do and I think the you
know that these eruptions over the last
few weeks is just proof positive that
that you turn loose people with that
point of view on actual institutions and
they're gonna do nothing but trash them
but you know there are different points
of view on that and so my own hope is
that we can find a way to get to a
higher level of society maybe like meta
modernism or at least in the same
neighborhood similar values I wish I
call alignment beyond agreement if not
the same in all the details but without
having to traverse the swamp of
post-modernism think of it as a side
toolkit but not as a main road to go
through to get to the other side yeah I
think I think I definitely agree with
that
if we're not sort of throwing the baby
out with the bathwater again think of it
as a toolkit on the side it's perfectly
reasonable think about it as actually a
road we need to go through in terms of
our social evolution I say moonshine and
nonsense love to get your views and now
that we've talked about the history a
little bit of positioning in historical
space and in philosophical space overall
whether you think the intellectual
darkweb has been a success of failure or
maybe just stay stay interesting
prototype love to hear your thoughts on
that yeah I think it definitely I did an
interview with Brett Weinstein quite
recently that I'm putting out probably
in the next couple of days where he
describes it as a prototype and how it's
really important to have a good
relationship with prototyping and so I
would say yes it was it was certainly
successful there was something about the
phenomenon of the intellectual darkweb
and of Jordan Peterson as well that kind
of broke a conversational seal in the
culture and things that were that had
not been talked about were being talked
about in in sort of mainstream circles
I I look at a lot of the the problems or
what happened with it a lot of it
centers on in particular Dave Rubin
because Dave Rubin was he's a chat show
host who very much identified himself
with the intellectual dark web early on
he saw a kind of an opportunity he did a
lot of really good work at the beginning
of bringing together a lot of the the
people on his show in in Los Angeles
there were some really exciting
conversations probably in 2018 that
seemed to be kind of going into new
territory I think the really interesting
thing for me is this sense of a
conversation going into new territory
how do we how does that happen and one
of the ways that that certainly brett
has talked about is that you have to
bootstrap a kind of safety and that's
what the intellectual dark web did
because they knew each other there was a
familiarity they all agreed and trusted
each other too yet to engage in good
faith conversations that they were then
able to go into new territory and the so
you had these conversations between say
Bret and Eric on the Rubin report you
had one with Jordan Peterson and Ben
Shapiro that was really fascinating
whether they were talking about
religious truth and you've got this
sense of intellectual exploration you
got the sense of real excitement and
then something happened over the next
couple of years and it's probably
various reasons why that sense of
novelty sort of seemed to fall away
there was there were lots of
high-profile public events run by a
company called Pangburn that then came
to an end because Pangburn was
incredibly badly run he lost a lot of
money some of the events were canceled
and that and Pangburn didn't give the
money back to the people who booked the
tickets and that failure really affected
the kind of inertia and trajectory of
the conversation so there were lots of
high-profile conversations and then that
stopped I think Jordan Peterson's
illness certainly didn't help and he is
sort of retiring from public life
probably about eight months ago
really also took a lot of the energy out
of the the the situation but why I
mentioned Dave Rubin is that he he was
highly identified with the intellectual
dark web but then had a series of
encounters that and and he was he was
criticized by by quite a lot of people
there were some articles in in quality I
think there was a general sense that he
was starting to coalesce around a much
less sophisticated perspective that was
just an T it was just criticism of the
left and nothing else and that he wasn't
really open to dialogue wasn't open to
criticism I had a conversation with him
I had an interview with him on his on
his show where I put some of those
criticisms to him and he was very
unhappy about that and I think the fact
that he was identified so strongly with
the intellectual dark web his own sort
of lack of curiosity and lack of
interest and lack of one lack of the
potential of sort of moving his ideas on
really started to to have an impact on
the on the wider topic but then at the
same time you've got so I look at this
idea of live players and dead players
I'd say that Dave Rubin is a is a dead
player probably someone like ben shapiro
is is a dead player i think he's too
aligned with certain red-meat
perspectives that he has to that for
conservative listeners that he probably
that he probably can't move on some
certain topics but also the the
positives are that you have brett
weinstein is has created his own podcast
of darkhorse podcast off the success of
the intellectual dark web eric has
created his own podcast the portal which
is doing really interesting work now as
well but the other failure factor and I
know that Eric and Brett probably
wouldn't agree with me on this but I do
see a certain grouping around I don't
that there are there are perspectives
especially from the left that I don't
see being included in some of these
conversations and there's some times you
would argue that some of the people who
who you might involve are acting in bad
faith and there was a famous
there's a guy called Sam cedar who was
challenging Dave Rubin publicly asking
to debate Dave Rubin and the the
argument is that he's acting in bad
faith and whether or not he is what I've
seen happen especially from likes of
Rubin but this this accusation of bad
faith being levy to keep people out of
the conversation and it's a very
interesting question because how do you
is bad faith not always a subjective
judgment I mean I think we know I think
I think we can maybe agree on some
general principles but the way that I
often see it being used it seems to be
used as a subjective judgment and I
think I mean most of the people who
you'd accuse a bad faith who probably
deny intensive their acting acting in
bad faith but what I saw happen
especially on Twitter was a certain
balkanization around certain
perspectives and my my good friend Peter
Limburg has done some really interesting
work in this area about mimetic
mediation who are the people in
different he talks about mimetic tribes
so that there are certain certain tribes
group around certain perspectives what
he calls mimetic tribes mimetic
perspectives and how do you then mediate
between these different tribes and he
calls that the hard problem of culture
war 2.0 I'd really highly direct people
towards Peters work Peters essays and
some of the we've also put a film out
with him as well I think he has grappled
really intensely with what does it look
like to to mediate in this culture war
and what I saw with the intellectual
darkweb generally was there wasn't
enough of that sophisticated
understanding of how do you how do you
strategically mediate between and bring
more people into the conversation I
think it coalesced around a certain
perspective and I don't think it really
was a had the ability to to mediate and
to navigate and to bring in other
perspectives that would be my main my
main sense I know this is a felt sense
that I got just looking at
interactions on Twitter because Twitter
is just this
it's a machine for kind of enforcing
vulcanization of certain perspectives
like it it seems to be a very very
dangerous and malignant actor on on
conversations because tribes are
sketched out tribes are enforced and
these divisions are enforced and it just
seems to be happening Connie in real
time on Twitter indeed indeed um let me
let me react that a little bit thinking
back on it now I think you've you've hit
on something which is that this group of
people for whatever reason have gone
into different modes right some would
continue doing what they've always done
you know Steven Pinker whether he's in
the group or not you know John height
and his heterodox Academy are doing
their thing and that's and that's kind
of interesting but what I don't really
see and I think you you point this out
is a community of thinking that let that
ratchets each other up and you know in
my notes this morning I was thinking
about this I thought an interesting
thing to do would be to compare and
contrast the IDW in this compare him
with a couple other earlier intellectual
traditions that did ratchet each other
up you know think of the Bloomsbury
intellectuals in London in the early
part of the 20th century and when I
happen to have just done a deep dive
into preparing for a podcast the German
romanticists around Goethe and the
University at yenna
in the early 19th century there these
people had very intense arguments
disagreements and agreements within a
small intellectually sophisticated
community and that's how they ratchet
each other up it it may well be in fact
I would say it is true that you don't
really ratchet yourself up or ratchet
other people up I have in conversations
on Twitter right or frankly having
podcasts other than rarely I've learned
a few things on podcasts but I would say
that they're not crucibles for creation
of intense new models and perspectives
and it may well be that the tools of the
modern world
that the IDW was using for coherence
just don't provide enough coherence it's
very difficult to think in public as
well yeah it is and you know bluesberry
people most of that thinking was done
over dinners often which led to
lecherous evenings right the German
romanticists in classrooms and in coffee
houses and those were face to face
communities and it may be that these
virtual tools are just not strong enough
to ratchet up intellectual content to a
high enough level to be really
interesting yes and I think you're
pointing to an issue I think that exists
now in the more in the set this sort of
sense making web that that I'd say that
your podcast is part of and rebel wisdom
is part of and a few other few other
places maybe like the future thinkers or
and the emerge Network I I don't think
there's anywhere near enough
conversation around the different
perspectives either privately or
publicly I think there's an issue with
doing that publicly it's very difficult
to have especially when you are quite
high-profile I think one of the big
failure conditions for me of the
intellectual dark web was and in some
ways it kind of died at the moment that
it was named by the insert by the New
York Times because as soon as it was
named the intellectual dark web the the
obvious and frequently made objection to
it was how on earth can you say this is
dark or that these people are excluded
from the conversation this includes Joe
Rogan arguably the most powerful
broadcaster alive this includes sam
harris who's got one of the biggest most
popular podcasts it includes etc etc etc
like these are people these are not
people who are excluded from the
conversation so it immediately provoked
an immune reaction from the mainstream
traditional media that that I think I've
heard Eric and Sam Harris
talk about before that they that it did
provoke this immune reaction which is
kind of inevitable because you're you're
not an under talk at any point in that
you're not going to get positive that's
that that's the issue with with the
media and if you're an underdog you
might
positive media if you're not an underdog
you're you you're always going to be
people are always gonna be looking for
ok what's the angle what's the criticism
rather than boosting then in in the way
that actually the Barry Weiss article
did but so that's that's one of the
issues I think that the intellectual
dark web was a kind of paradox that in
the moment of it being outed or shone a
light on was kind of it was difficult to
hurt to sustain the sort of the sense of
oh these are these are kind of
marginalized truth tellers which in some
ways they are in some ways now and they
all had those high-profile encounters
like evergreen being the classic one
with with Bret but the but the other
question and the one that I keep coming
back to is how do we create
conversations that that take us into the
place of novelty because this sense that
I have and maybe you have as well as
that none of the solutions on the table
right now and anyone who thinks they
know what's going on or thinks they know
what the solution is to the problems
that we're encountering now is by is
definitely wrong so we need to have a
way of having these conversations that
take us into new places take us into
places of novelty and to find a way of
doing that either in public or in
private that there's also my I mentioned
Peter Lindbergh before but he he's
talked about the concept of the dark
forest theory of the Internet which I
think originally came from Yancey
Strickler of Kickstarter where he said
most of the interesting conversations
now are happening in sort of back
channels they're happening in the dark
forest and not happening out in the open
because those conversations are easily
attacked those conversations are easily
blown up by various accusations that are
easily made on on social media so that
for me is that is the question that I'd
like to kind of put out to people
listening to this podcast and and the
wider community that we are that we're
part of like how do we have these
conversations either publicly or
privately that that move our thinking on
words because I don't think enough of
them a hat
I don't think we're challenging and
stress testing our ideas enough and I
don't think that the structures and the
yeah the structures and the habits are
in place in the way that they need to be
that that's my sense at least I might be
missing out on all the good conversation
so it might just be me no I don't think
you are I mean I think there are some
good conversations happening in the dark
forest or in the shady forest you know
we have our game B group on Facebook
which has some pretty good conversations
but to your point we have to
relentlessly police that thing because
there are attacks organized attacks
amazingly from both what you would could
be thought of as the far right and the
far left a couple weeks ago we had to
bounce six neo-fascist infiltrators and
at the same time booted a dozen kind of
proto and Tifa types simultaneously and
you know suddenly the conversation went
back to normal but it's extraordinarily
difficult to do these things on public
forums and in you know in our case we do
have a membrane we have membership and
we can kick people out but we'll let
pretty much anybody who's not obviously
insane in after answering a few
questions so I don't think these are
near the platform's we have today are
not nearly enough and you know part of
the answer may be pointing to the bat
back to the past and again as I
mentioned Bloomsbury and you know that
that crucible German Romanticism at
yenna University in the in the duchy of
Aimar in the early 19th century or even
the early days of game B where we
basically crucible that idea in five day
and a half long face-to-face meetings
where more interesting intellectual work
got done in was less than 10 days than
any 10-day period I can point to in my
whole life so I do think it's time to
drop our over fascination with these
online platforms as they're going to be
very important for disseminating what is
created but I've now come to the view
that they're only part of the job of
creation that we have to find hi
coherence higher binding energy more
real work has to be done than it then
can be done today on these big platforms
yeah and is your sense that that has to
be done in face-to-face well I think
face to face is best however you know
everything in life is trade-offs in time
and in space and in money I have found
here during the zombie apocalypse that
zoom culture works quite well for some
things it's not as good as face to face
but it's a shitload better than text on
Facebook or on Twitter I'll tell you
that so I think we can be more
intelligent like I have a project going
on right now all based in zoom which may
actually create some interesting things
but I think face to face also needs to
be part of it you know if there was
going to be a game be meeting in Austin
Texas in May but that you know the cove
at 19 thing destroyed that I think that
having a traditional in one place
community meet-up event for any of these
new intellectual trends would be very
helpful and as we all know the formal
sessions are only about 25% of the value
the real value is the conversations and
the lobby in the hall room around the
coffee table and at dinner and drinks
afterwards so I think we need to be
stopped being so hypnotized by social
media platforms as the place to form the
intellectual ideas unfortunately I think
we're stuck with them for a while for
propagation but I'm not convinced yet
that they are gonna take us real far in
the creating the next generation of good
ideas yes and I think there's something
about staring into the critique as well
or steering into self-reflection and
criticism that needs to to happen as
well
and I don't know whether that's
something that it seems very very
difficult to do that in public and it
may be much easier to do it in in in
sort of private conversations yeah I'm
actually having a conversation with one
of the well-known opponents of game B
about potentially doing a convergence
in private to find out what it is that
we agree about and why the hell are we
so fixated on what we disagree about and
I do think that techniques like that are
going to be important as well and we
have to stress test our ideas right you
know you didn't really go into it in
great detail but this problem of
audience capture is a real one right you
know you you get a platform that has a
specific point of view and you capture a
bunch of listeners and unfortunately
you're kind of caught in the bind of
giving your audience what they want
right and that's not how you really
stress test your ideas you have to and
perhaps do those offline using different
techniques yes and there's audience
capture that's so there's yeah it's an
interesting question because there's
different facets of that in the digital
world there's audience capture in terms
of giving the audience what what they
want and anyone who's got I know as we
run a YouTube channel there's a comments
thread I'm very aware of that and it's
it's do it certainly acts as a
gravitational force it's one that I
think I have struggled to resist like I
could have certainly put out way more
popular films but I think it would have
been a short cut and I don't think the I
don't think the community that the Revel
wisdom has built up and they're yeah the
the reputation that we built up would
have survived if I'd taken those
shortcuts but it's very easy to feel
that as a gravitational force but
there's also in the world of sort of the
big tech platforms there's another form
of audience capture which is algorithmic
capture that I know is something that
I've seen Brett and Heather talk about
the beginning of their podcast that
they're aware that their podcast is
being grouped together with effectively
sort of generally right-wing content and
I wouldn't obviously they wouldn't
describe themselves as right-wing but
somehow because of the nature of what
happened to them and because they they
were appearing on certain podcasts at
the beginning that the algorithms are
now pushing them towards so you can be
you can be vulcanized in many different
ways and not and not always be
of actions that you yourself are taking
there are also the big tech companies
got their finger on the scales in
various ways as well so there's there's
lots of different levels to audience
capture and some of it is not even to do
with what you're personally doing that's
a very good point and a very interesting
point and you know actually I think I
might well use this as an opportunity to
announce something why not I decided I
don't know six weeks ago to take a
six-month break from the large social
media platform starting July 1 and part
of it is this exact thing the sense that
yes interesting work is happening here
but it's influenced by audience captured
in it's influenced by the paucity of the
affordances provided by the platform's
it's influenced in a negative way by the
algorithmics especially in the public
parts of these platforms so I'm going to
take an intentional six month break from
them and I have turned over the
management of the platforms that I lead
on those platforms to other people
they're already trained prepped and
ready to go and I'm gonna go do
something else for a while and I'm gonna
see what I find out there
good for you let us know what it's like
out in the wilderness I've done this
every year on for Facebook for the last
four years but I am much more in the
middle of things and I was previously
and I'm gonna also add Twitter to that
band so yeah it'd be interesting I'll
give you a report back from the real
world and I'm sure we'll have some
conversations in between yes I think
with that it's time to wrap up and I say
one thing Jim before we wrap up sure
just to to say so rebel wisdoms in the
process of doing a big series about
sense making not only about the
intellectual dark web but we've got to
put out a couple of pieces about that
but also looking at information warfare
talking to Tristan Harris about the
influence of the big tech platforms all
of these different issues and I'd love
to hear from from listeners I'd love
them to check out the series and then to
hear any solutions like practical
solutions to these problems
is what we all need to be working on
right now so I'd love to hear any
thoughts and suggestions that people
have yeah and I would second that I
listened to the first one of that series
and it certainly motivated me to listen
to some more and David and people
listened to the podcast know I hate
listened to videos goddammit so that's
pretty high testimony thank you Jim
thank you for the invitation and keep
doing what you're doing
all right appreciate it production
services and audio editing by Jared
Jane's consulting music by Tom Muller at
modern space music com
[Music]