howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
listeners have asked us to provide
pointers some of the resources we talked
about on the show we now have links to
books and articles referenced in recent
podcasts that are available on our
website
we also offer full transcripts go to gym
rut show calm
that's gym rut show calm today's guest
is Beth piles a solo pastor for a small
country Presbyterian Church in the
western mountains of Virginia hi Jim how
you doing I'm doing good great to have
you on here a neighbor good to be here
yeah this into being a pastor Beth has
been a reservist with the Christian
peacemaker teams in Iraq serving short
stints there every year from 2005 to
2010 prior to becoming a pastor Bethel
trial lawyer in West Virginia for 22
years before retiring to attend
Princeton Theological Seminary where she
graduated in 2005 Beth is a mother and a
grandmother and best says that she is
passionate about and blessed by God's
gospel of peace and justice beautiful
days in the country and her family and
friends but don't think she's all you
know good times on the beach kind of gal
she's also a self-described curmudgeon
listener two of different drums a girl
boys used to write poetry to an angry
woman oh yeah and a Craver apiece let's
not forget that absolutely and she's a
good friend of mine and my wife's her
church is in the town of McDowell in
Highland County Virginia what do you
think McDowell has population at 50
something like that I'm gonna say yeah
that's probably a good guess on a good
day yeah that's what we always guessed
it's so small doesn't even appear in the
census records oh well my wife and I
live a mile five miles down the river
there maybe 20 houses between us and
Beth so amazingly low the population
density there is in the county so Beth
what's that amazingly low population
density mean to you and the work that
you do well that's a good question
I think that it's the blessing of
neighborliness because there are so few
of us it's not just that we know all
each other it's that
we have to count on each other because
there isn't anybody else so I'm the
chaplain for the fire department for
example and we often talk there about
they respond to whatever call it doesn't
matter if your best friends are not
because they go because you need them
and that's really the the credo I think
in a sparsely populated place it doesn't
matter what we think of each other we're
always there to help because we have to
yeah we certainly don't have that
standoffish suburban thing right if
someone needs help they'll come and ask
you right and then the expectation is
you will help right
well absolutely and that's the way
community used to be and should be at
least in my opinion I'm with you there
my brother the other thing that we
noticed after we moved there is that I
think there's something about the very
low density population in Highland that
allows people to be unique the people
are each one quite different from the
other and we found that to be very
interesting and also probably because
they don't interact with people as much
as people do in more populated areas
some of them at least are amazing
talkers in fact we still have our rule
of thumb don't talk to acts unless you
got 45 minutes you know and why 90
minutes and one of our dear friends now
passed on who very much kept to himself
it did enjoy company but if you stopped
in you better have four and a half hours
and I'm not kidding I could probably
guess who you were talking about but I
know exactly what you mean I just love
that about Highland each person is
different and they could tell you some
stories now those stories are well worth
listening to
so what obvious question to ask Beth is
what kind of personal transformation led
you from being I'm presuming knowing you
pretty well a hard-ass trial lawyer
becoming a pastor that's a big cage it
is it's a radical change the short
version or the long version of the short
version is I was connected with someone
in my life who was profoundly alcoholic
if you can be profound an alcoholic at
the same time and over time and the
course of my own journey I ended up
going to a 12-step program and from
there basically I came to a faith in God
and from that to church
and then from church to just becoming
more active and feeling like I was
supposed to go do this thing and I
thought it was ridiculous so I leased a
sports car because I thought it was a
midlife crisis it was great fun I got to
tell you everybody should have a sports
car at some point in their life
especially a convertible but the feeling
didn't go away and so I then talked to
friends and trusted loved ones and
nobody laughed and I thought okay maybe
this is a real thing maybe God really
wants me to go be a preacher and so
that's what I did very interesting I
mean that's a really interesting
transformation it wasn't what I was
looking for that's when the some of the
most interesting journeys in our lives
happen when we take the step that we
weren't expecting boy and that's the
truth and that's some of the best things
to particular another thing about our
County is the place that's getting older
every year you know I look in the mirror
and say it's happening to me - how
could this be what challenges does that
make for a church pastor well I think
there's certainly a lot of challenges
with it because you have more deaths and
more health issues and people are slower
and less active because they're in that
stage of life but there's also some real
blessings I think because I'm I've got a
church not of parents or grandparents
really bit of great-grandparents and so
most of them are at the life stage where
they don't get too awful fussed about
too much because they've seen too much
you know it really is I think a life
stage kind of a thing and so if I were
with a younger congregation given some
of my traits they might be judging me
pretty harshly but these folks they take
it all in stride and that's a real gift
that I appreciate very much and I do
think that is something that comes from
an older population the W word wisdom
haha
absolutely absolutely you've seen a
thing and you know a thing and you've
learned a thing yep and you know what
things not to be worth getting too
worked up about but probably just as
importantly what things are worth
getting worked up about boy that's a
good question isn't it I'd say in in
these folks lives for most part really
not much of anything you know they pray
about folks and they care about folks
and they do what they can for their
community but they just don't get too
fussed about too much I haven't reached
that level of wisdom you
but maybe as I keep turning the pages on
the calendar I will me neither
I've heard you talk sometimes about
affluenza a term that might have been
coined by f scott Fitzgerald I couldn't
find any proof of that but we could
describe it as the plague of prosperity
and spiritual moais did you say some
more about that sure I think that that
in in our world in the United States as
we understand everything from this very
Western point of view it is shaped by
wealth really never seen before in the
history of the world as I understand it
and I keep giving F scott Fitzgerald the
credit but I'm with you I'm not sure
that's right
but certainly the Great Gatsby would be
the exhibit a of affluenza that whole
ennui and and you know I'm so bored with
myself I can hardly stand it but in in
seminary one of the scripture passages
that I remembered jumping out at me came
from Deuteronomy and Moses is getting
ready to lead the people into the
Promised Land then it becomes clear he's
not going to get to go with them God's
just promised him it's gonna be a land
of milk and honey and wealthy beyond
your belief there's gonna be natural
resources like you couldn't imagine and
you will not have done a thing to earn
it I will simply give it to you and so
it'll be blessing upon blessing but God
doesn't stop there then he says but
here's the deal when you get there after
a while you're gonna forget me and
you're gonna say I did this the work of
my hands got me all that I have and then
you're gonna forget me and then the Lord
says one of the scariest things I've
ever heard for a believer woe to you on
that day yeah it strikes me that one of
the things that happens when you have so
much that it's never enough it's like
trying to fill the hole in the soul with
stuff and it's never enough and it's
like trying to find meaning and purpose
in our stuff and our acquisition and our
measures of success and it's never
enough and so the needs of the world
haven't changed probably from about the
beginning of time but right now we can
somehow afford to act
like they aren't omnipresent because
they aren't on the present for us and so
we get bored and we get I don't know
like a low-level depression and we stop
looking for meaning and we stop thinking
about service and all the other things
that we do are just empty calories and
so if I were to diagnose America and I'm
I'm certainly no doctor of any kind but
if I were I think spiritual malaise
would be right up there at the top of
the list yeah and the way we get there
something that some friends of mine and
I we often use the term hedonistic
treadmill oh you like that one I do I
hadn't heard that I like that a lot yeah
the hedonistic treadmill and actually
there's a fair amount of good cognitive
neuroscience to back it up which is that
each hit of wonderfulness in our lives
oh now I spent $1,200 for a dinner in
New York City well guess what the second
time it wasn't that wonderful in the
third time you've been just as well
going off to Hardee's so now you got to
go to $1,800 to get that same hit of
wonderfulness and it's actually built
into our dopamine and serotonin systems
and so we are all if we let ourselves
stay on it on the hedonistic treadmill
and it strikes me that one of the key
features of what our society has to do
if we're not gonna drive our society off
a ecological ledge here in the next 50
years has learned how to step away from
the hedonistic treadmill and to find
meaning in other things I think that
sounds pretty wise and I love that
phrase it's so descriptive but as I was
listening to you describe the actual
science it also sounds very much like
addiction processes doesn't it you know
you need more and more and more it
absolutely is yeah Wow Wow I think it's
literally true the other one it's just
on the annoyance side a little saying I
like is if you're not careful
once you become affluent you end up as a
janitor to your possessions Wow
I love that yeah there's a prayer in
Proverbs on I couldn't lay my hands on
it but it's in the book of Proverbs in
the Bible and basically what it says is
Lord do not let me have
two little right that I may resent what
I don't have nor too much and we often
hear that prayer in one form or another
about not having too little but you very
seldom hear somebody praying not to have
too much yeah man they may win may
actually be good I will say I'm not the
best in that department I will say my
wife is a lot better than I am and she's
a great one for throw it out if you
haven't used it in the last year and I
think that's really important to not let
oneself be inundated with all this
of the world in other words you
mentioned in passing which again is
getting a lot of discussion in the
circles that I hang out in is meaning
the M word what do you say meaning what
does that mean are you being rhetorical
or do you want to know I really would
like to know I suspect that for us in
our postmodern life that it means
whatever we wanted to mean if we're
being quite literal right for me as a
person of faith meaning is simply about
putting God at the center of my life
because God is the capital M meaning of
course everybody has their own journey
right and and their own process in in
looking for meaning but I think one of
the things that gets thrown away when
you have so much is you even cast aside
the journey seeking meaning and and
mistake all kinds of other nonsense for
purpose and I think that whether we
think of it in an evolutionary way or in
a spiritual way or in some other way I
can't even conceive of because my
imagination is pretty limited that we
are we are beings created to explore and
delve into purpose and finitude just one
piece of that and I think it's actually
the least consequential piece but that's
just me
but yeah so meaning is is the journey
right if you get into the you know the
popular memes of the day not the
destination and I think it's
interchangeable with purpose like I said
for me that question got answered a long
time ago and it's God's right at the
middle and then everything else revolves
around that and you got there by faith I
presume God didn't come down and tap you
on the shoulder Dee
um with in my case kind of so no I
wasn't looking for God I think God was
looking for me and I'm not sure why but
it's been kind of a fun journey but ya
know faith is certainly a big piece of
that and thinking about what what faith
actually means because it means so many
different things in different contexts
right yeah because you know I'm not a
believer in religion in any conventional
sense so I really don't have a solid
sense of this faith thing but I'm
interested in it so I'd love to have you
articulated as much depth as you'd like
what faith is in your mind and why is it
important or what or what is it good for
either and what is faith good for well
you fortunately you give me a heads up
on that one and I had a little time to
reflect the the none of it for me is
actually really short and sweet I can
certainly and would be happy to
elaborate but I think faith is in in
religious terms and the way I understand
it is simply the acknowledgement of
reality a reality that is both seen and
unseen and so Paul writes in in the New
Testament that faith is the evidence of
things hoped for so faith is
acknowledging that there are things
beyond the five senses but that's not
particularly helpful because that's true
in every discipline right there's all
kinds of things we can't see that we
know are true but even science takes
certain things as an article of faith
unless and until empirical proof has
been established right with the language
of what hypothesis so maybe maybe if I
were gonna speak in that language I
would say that faith essentially is the
hypothesis of the experience of God
what's it good for
well it's the center of everything but
the thing is for Christianity which is
the you know the perspective from which
I come the important thing to remember
is that faith isn't about Creed's and
tenants and and propositional statements
nor is it actually about human beings
the point isn't what I believe in when
we're speaking of faith the first and
foremost thing is actually the faith of
the divine that God is faithful so in in
those scriptures
historically people aren't talking about
God or no God which tends to be the
discussion of our day at that time
they're all pretty much thinking yes God
what is that God are those gods like
what is their nature or his nature or
her nature and so the the central kind
of unifying piece for the Hebrew and
Christian scriptures is that God is a
being who is faithful and so from that
then everything else flows so so what is
faith good for for me it is establishing
the linkage by which I know the nature
and identity and character of the divine
whom I worship and thus know what I am
made for and how I am to be yeah I'm not
sure what it's good for it just is
whether it's good for anything or not
you framed it which I thought was
probably about right as the hypothesis
of the existence of God in the science
world typically we'll start with the
hypothesis and hypothesis are often not
confirmed sure so we look for evidence
to build the case for the hypothesis
what's the evidence that you've
accumulated in your journey with respect
to the existence of God experience so so
the scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments of Judaism and Christianity
for me tell the story of God in a way
that is helpful and interesting and
fascinating but I that's not how I came
to God so so I know the identity and
existence of God through encounter and
experience and I encounter God and have
encountered God in my understanding both
directly and mediated through other
people and events in my life most often
through other people and so you you or I
may know people who are have a certain
quality we might want to think of it as
the quality of goodness but that's not
it the people who just look like they
are happy and whole unto themselves
some people may describe them as having
a light shining from them people with
that inner serenity and contentment and
those folks that I have encountered in
my life have been people of a
great and constant and unwavering faith
and they had something that I wanted and
they shared with me the best they could
their own journey and experience and
then as I said I've had my own
encounters and so my my credo of faith
if you will is pretty simple because I
came to faith as an adult I can say I
have lived my life with God and without
God with is better that's it with is
better and when I say with is better I
don't mean my life got better the truth
is after I came to faith in God my life
got so much worse you can't even imagine
but I got better and that's the paradox
it wasn't about the quality of my
circumstances it was about the quality
of how I experienced my circumstances so
I have that as a very pedestrian feet on
the ground kind of an experience and
then I've had a few experiences that
would be what would the word be I guess
transcendental you know where you feel
like in the Scottish traditions they'll
talk about thin places meaning
geographies where the distance between
you and the cosmos where the divine
resides is so thin you could literally
reach your hand out and touch the face
of God and so I've had a couple of
encounters in thin places and those have
been of course very meaningful to me and
transformational but the irony is none
of them came to me to help form my faith
they came after I was a person of faith
so they were just part of the encounter
story and and one or two of them I'm
yelling and cussing at God pretty good I
got to say but Big Shoulders Devine took
it so I don't want to push you on this
but would you be willing to talk a
little bit about one or more let's take
one one of these may be called mystical
experiences or near encounters with the
numinous sure so one was the most recent
one that I was thinking about when I
said it was yelling at God I was working
with a group of Christians in another
worshiping community not my own who were
in conflict and trying to resolve the
conflict very unsuccessfully and they
were quite angry
and they were ultimately very angry
with me I was representing you know the
whole and and so it was a very
challenging time and you know I'm a
peacenik right and so I'm doing a lot of
peace and reconciliation work and none
of it's working and ultimately none of
it did work at least in from my point of
view about getting reconciliation and so
for about three days at one point I
found myself
weeping continuously not like sobbing
crying but just tears were running down
my face I'd wake up in the morning tears
I'd go to bed at night tears it they
just didn't stop and I actually started
looking stuff up because medieval women
did this and I always thought it was
kind of creepy frankly and a little like
the hysterical woman in quotes right but
I just couldn't stop it and I was quite
annoyed as you might imagine as I'm
driving you can imagine it down to 50
right into McDowell passing the Griffon
house and God is sitting in the car seat
beside me not like a guy that you could
see and physically described but I just
I don't know how to explain it but I
know he's there and I said and I quote
what the am I supposed to do with
this and there was a pause and then I
heard a voice very distinctly say love
them that's it love them and I said you
have got to be kidding me
not another response I look to the car
seat because I'm talking to someone
who's sitting there you know and and I
said really you're the God of the
universe and that's what you've got for
me love them are you kidding me not
another word and I said really now
you're gonna go radio silent and so and
God stayed radio silent and but what
happened in that 60 seconds was the two
tears had stopped I didn't will them
come and I didn't will them to leave and
they had just stopped and so I sighed
and I said out loud to God and myself
well that's what you told me to do
before and I thought that's what I was
already doing but fine that's what I'll
keep doing and I usually don't like to
tell it because because the language
actually was part of the conversation
and most people don't like to hear that
I cussed at God I wasn't cussing it
I was expressing my own frustration if
anybody needs that caveat but but the
the feeling that I was left with was
that I actually was doing exactly what I
was supposed to be doing and that it was
painful and it was breaking God's heart
but it was how it was going to be and
I'm not the agent of change if there was
going to be change God would see to it
and I was doing my part simple as that
but the Train the transcendent piece of
it was that all of a sudden God was
riding in the car with me and yeah and
it was very comforting I wasn't looking
for comfort I hadn't even asked for
comfort I was mad and I was mad at God
you know that because it was just a very
impossible situation but so that's a lot
of words to say that that's one small
moment in a lifetime but where I just
you know weird things were happening who
cries for three days you know me not me
you could be my witness on that yeah
Beth is tough as nails let me tell you
that's right
and I'm not pretending not at all thank
you for that story that is a very
powerful and moving story and I really
appreciate you sharing that with us and
our audience let's go back to this
earlier description of the experience
from others you described people have
you know great serenity or you know the
goodness from inside they kind of glows
to the outside in another part of the
world of people that I deal with these
people call themselves spiritual but not
religious and truthfully I argue with
them all the time in fact I referred
famously referred to spirituality on
this show as the S word and I act in
mock horror that people would claim this
stuff and I'd say one way or the other
people either you believe in a spirit
why do you call it spirituality or you
don't but most of them will say no they
don't believe in spirits but they can
through things like meditation
introspection various bodily practices
even breathing sometimes psychedelic
drugs some of them I think really do
seem to reach this sense of serenity and
contentedness and some of them
I will tell you actually do have this
goodness glow inside to out what's your
take on that well I'm gonna sound like
an obnoxious Christian but I'm not sure
God needs me to know he's there for him
to be there so that's probably where it
begins and ends for me but I was looking
at some stuff thinking about this you
know spirituality versus religion
because I tend to I probably tend to be
more like you but there is one one place
I remember where was online that I was
looking where they defined it a little
differently that helped me understand
that take you were talking about which
was they defined the terms religious to
mean having a deity as its object and
spiritual to mean having self as its
object it's not a distinction I
particularly appreciate but if that's
the distinction you're going to make
between spiritual and religious then I
think it makes a little more sense most
people around here that I encounter when
they talk about spiritual but not
religious they actually mean the
opposite of what your friends are
talking about they mean they believe in
God they just don't go to church what
they literally mean is I do my worship
by myself that's the thing I have very
little patience for because by its
nature and by humanity's nature we are
communal we're communal beings do we
know anything from birth maybe to be
afraid of falling right we know how to
suckle maybe from birth and very early
we learned to be afraid of snakes also
things headed for our head there's a few
but not many but you know we have to be
taught right and so the notion that that
I appreciate that I have to be taught to
read I have to be taught how to go to
the bathroom I have to be taught how to
use a fork but but when it comes to
religion and faith nobody else has
anything to teach me well that sounds
like the height of hubris to me frankly
we learned together and in my tradition
we worship together we are different as
a group than we are as a series of
individuals even a collective set of
individuals so really when we get to
that spirituality versus religion thing
I don't know because they've done
Studies on people who meditate with God
is the object I don't know if they've
done Studies on meditation of people who
simply meditate
yes they've done a lot of them in fact
Dalai Lama as well but the Dalai Lama
whether we think of Buddhism as a
philosophy or religion it has a center
that is other than self right it's
pretty subtle I mean Buddhism can easily
exist without any sense of the
supernatural and there are forms of
Buddhism that do have the supernatural
and there are forms of Buddhism that
don't so Buddhist meditators could be of
either sort and both of them seem to
have rather similar brain patterns in
fMRI now it's interesting I'm not aware
of any research that looked at say two
different Buddhist traditions that use
similar techniques some of which were
theistic at some of which were not right
right I may have to go back and check
and see but if I were to hazard a guess
probably not cuz you know I will say
that my own view on such things is
what's really happening in meditation is
that we are through various techniques
pushing our brain rhythms and networks
into places they usually aren't
and then our internal confabulate er the
thing in our brain that tells us stories
to try to make sense of things even when
things don't make sense
attempts to knit them together into a
story sure and so I would expect them to
be relatively similar whether they were
theological or not
that makes sense yeah that may well be I
don't know you know they they do a lot
of studying of monastics in that regard
but of course they obviously have have
God as the object so I don't know if
there's necessarily an other and other
or not you know in 12-step programs they
talk about needing a God and frequently
it's they don't care what your God is
but it can't be yourself so I'm always
suspicious out of that tradition of the
the the extreme focus on self as the the
center of the the personal universe
simply because what's the saying my best
thinking's what got me there in the
first place indeed and it may not be a
good place sometimes I guess that's
that's the point of the 12-step process
for sure as a scientific materialist
realist I actually put forth a third
perspective okay which is it's the
universe that's real God spirits all
that stuff not real stories we've
invented for various purposes and they
have actually worked for both people and
groups and societies and then this thing
self is a very curious new relatively
new thing that is evolved in the
universe in the last at most two hundred
million years maybe less and it's way
less substantial than we like to make it
out to be and it's much better to put
the universe first and think of us as a
kind of a program that runs on a little
piece of the universe and runs around
and interacts with the universe oh we're
the Borg well when we come together we
might be the board but as individuals we
run around individually so I tend to to
the annoyance of my spiritual friends
say hey people frankly all your
spiritual delving is internally for this
truth of that truth it's just a bunch of
hallucinations and I tell my religious
friends that's just a bunch of kids
stories to get us over the fear of the
dark meaning death and then reality is
we just have the universe out there and
it's our job to go out there and explore
it and do something interesting with it
so I would say that mine is the third
perspective that's neither spiritual nor
but I don't see any of those is mutually
exclusive so I don't know that they
really are either/or propositions you
know they may be but they could just as
easily be both and propositions that is
both the universe could be the material
whole of which we are a small part we
could yet be an integral part which
touches on the notion of self right
I don't know and there could be the the
existence of God in all of that one
doesn't negate the other I don't think
necessarily not necessarily
philosophically trying to get at the
nature of being is exceedingly difficult
and I love to point out the people it's
logically possible that the universe was
created 30 seconds ago with all of our
memories in place and all the objects in
motion and motion you cannot disprove
that and so just because something is
logically possible to my mind at least
doesn't buy much credibility in terms of
figuring out what is relatively more
likely to be true and I guess my
grounding is because we don't actually
know and we can't actually prove
anything at least so I would argue you
may be able to refute me and I'm open to
hear that because we can't really prove
anything it seems to me to make sense to
take one's faith commitment make them as
minimal as possible
why because we don't know what we're
talking about the less we say the less
errors were likely to have ah okay yeah
and then also let's use our experience
and our perception and our measurements
to try to you know rule out as much as
we can so you know you know my minimal
metaphysics and those people listen to
this show know what rut has metaphysics
I thought he always says when I hear the
word metaphysics I reach for my pistol
which I do say because usually when I
hear someone talking about their
metaphysics this long convoluted what
the hell where the hell did you get that
from and when you push them on it you
say well they just made it up right or
they found it in some book somebody else
made up and so I push for a minimal
metaphysical commitment and my
commitment is basically the world that
we think is out there
is out there the human sense of
consciousness is a biological phenomenon
no dis different from digestion in fact
sometimes I'll add and often with the
same final output that when we finally
understand consciousness we'll find it's
a lot less yeah you got it you got it a
lot less mysterious than we think it is
that there are no spirits because
nobody's ever been able to put one in a
bottle and weigh it and so I say my
minimal metaphysical commitment is just
that but being of a scientific mind I'm
happy to be proven wrong so the day
somebody can show me there is more that
I will add it to my metaphysical
commitment but until that day I will
keep my metaphysical commitments as
small as possible so when when and if
God shows up you'll be like uh-uh
I guess for me it's a I think we're in a
much more agreement maybe than others
might think everything's provisional
isn't it and and I could be wrong isn't
a bad credo by which to live so you know
my certainties are a few people mistake
that about me in my case I don't know
about you and yours but me in my case
because I'm emphatic about everything
even when I'm emphatically wrong but if
once I learned that I'm wrong then I'm
emphatically emphatic about the fact
that I was wrong so you know I guess I
look at it is I live in the material
world of course I'm a material being of
course I am the sum of my parts of
course but I also seem to be in some odd
way something a little bit more and less
at the same time of the sum of my parts
and in the 1500s Martin Luther of all
people said and he knew nothing of
quantum physics and I know little
actually said there is nothing so large
that God is not larger than there is
nothing so small that God is not smaller
than and to me he's he's just perfectly
describing that quantum existence right
that seems to have no sense relationship
in many ways at least in our narrative
storytelling form with with the physical
and material world and yet we are pretty
sure that it's real as in material or
tangible even if not measurable but
day to day we know paradox day to day we
know and count on the existence of the
intangible that we can never see or
measure you know we might measure the
scientific impact of love or the way
chemically love shows up on a brain scan
or you know in our bloodstream but to
define it or to measure it or to explain
it that becomes the work of the poet's
most of the time and it's there's always
an indefinable quality and then
biologists will tell us that that human
beings like any other critter will only
act out of its self-interest and that
and yet there are times when we act not
only not in our own self-interest but
even against the interest of our tribe
or our kind
however we define that so maybe the
exceptions prove the rule or maybe the
exceptions prove that there is something
there that I can't see or touch or
quantify but yet and the yet is also an
important piece of it you know I love
science fiction I I don't read it as
much as I can frankly because I'm too
illiterate in science to understand a
lot of it these days but so you know I'm
a Star Trek girl but that's about as
deep as I get but isn't it amazing that
we can imagine worlds that exist in
parallel or in tandem or in conflict
with our own that we're not aware of as
a scientific phenomena but bulkhead at
being a spiritual phenomena because we
think those two are mutually exclusive
and I think maybe that's more about my
lack of understanding or my lack of
knowledge so far so I don't know about
you Jim but I'm kind of bummed out that
I'm 65 or going on 65 only because
there's some amazing things they're
gonna be happening in the next hundred
years and I'm just not gonna live long
enough to get to see some of them I just
turned 66 so I'll be a bit older and
there will be some some things I'd love
to find out which I just won't but I go
oh well quite literally and I will say
you know in the last five or six years
I've been taking a pretty deep dive into
cognitive science and cognitive
neuroscience and
the more I learn there the more I've
come to see that these spiritual type
things seem to be programmed in and when
I look at the anthropology and history
of how faith communities have worked to
establish group cohesion I see a
perfectly reasonable story of how those
could have become evolutionarily fixed
you know that groups shared a belief
system live together more strongly
fought together more strongly and fought
with each other less and reproduced more
let me ask you then so does the the
biological truth of something or its
sensibility negate its its spiritual
reality one just doesn't seem to have
any impact on the other to me yeah I
would say they don't Frank and in fact
my general refutation is well if
religion makes us good it must be true
then I say well does that mean that
because Santa Claus makes four-year-olds
good Santa Claus is true yes all right
the trial lawyer comes back and the
child and the child who love Santa Claus
on Christmas yeah yeah yeah but if I use
that as my standard refutation to that
line of argument which is just cuz it
makes us good or even that it works or
is biologically good for us doesn't mean
it's true in an objective sense but it
doesn't mean it's not it doesn't mean
it's not yeah yeah it doesn't mean it's
not just like I cannot prove the
universe wasn't created 30 seconds ago
and I will say that I think you and I
are very similar in this regard the way
I describe my views is strongly stated
but lightly held I like that I sometimes
sound pretty ferocious about things but
I have on several occasions turned coat
and gone to the other side if I see the
evidence and so I hope to remain that
way to the end you know hope I don't
become a crotchety old curmudgeon who
will never change their mind but
sometimes I do bark a lot more than I
bite and I don't think there's anything
wrong with that really I was also glad
that you said you were a Star Trek girl
that means we're the same tribe one of
my big divisions of the world is between
Star Trek people and Star Wars people oh
there's no contest yeah
not at all how could anybody be a Star
Wars person but they're out there by the
bazillion sir absolutely no that's a
that's maybe a generational thing but
yeah I like to think it's a
thoughtfulness thing but that's just me
being obnoxious did you know there's a
new Star Trek thing out the new Picard
series that take yes the next-generation
storyline up to a new level I've been
watching yeah yeah it's fabulous we
haven't started it yet we got a couple
other streaming shows that we're
watching but it's on our list I'm glad
to hear that it's good I figured it
probably would let's take another little
different turn here and maybe a little
surprising from the previous line of
comments of mine at least is into
theology one of the things you mentioned
is that within your religious tradition
it happens as a group I will confess
having been raised a Catholic which I
rejected after having an epiphany when I
was 11 that the whole damn show was
something made up by humans that control
other humans our view was that the
Protestants claimed that religion was a
personal thing and not a corporate thing
could you unpack that minute yeah I was
11 years old last time I heard any
Catholicism so I probably misinterpreted
it but you know would you compare that
Catholic view on Protestantism versus
your claim that you see your kind of
religion as community based or
collective well I think that I think
there's a fair critique from the
Catholic Church towards Protestantism
and my Methodist friends are gonna call
and complain but I'm going to blame John
Wesley the founder of Methodism for the
notion of individuality and and
religious experience so out of out of
his own spiritual journey
John Wesley comes up with a couple of
things that are I say from my point of
view good in and of themselves but get
taken to a place never intended to be
taken particularly with the American
experiment that is our Republic so it's
a confluence of events
pietism is the first thing personal
piety an emphasis on good behavior
so in Methodism which is not my
tradition the path of salvation is the
perfectibility of the human being that
we are capable of perfection
and that our journey is one ever toward
that and our practices of personal piety
are what get us there and so that really
does emphasize individual not
necessarily experience but individual
behavior you see
and so then couple that then with
Methodism growing in the Americas and
particularly in North America and
particularly in the United States and
what you have is with the Enlightenment
and post enlightenment creation of the
Republic and recognition of the
individual citizen up to a point
right this odd combination so we start
talking about separation of church and
state to mean one thing and then by the
time we come along it ends up meaning
what I think about my god is nobody's
business but mine and that's a direction
that John Wesley never intended and I
believe it's not what the founding
fathers were thinking about without
getting into a whole political discourse
but so you have these strains where that
critique from Catholicism is actually
quite fair
and so you see particularly in the 50s I
think in the 60s the good Protestant is
the one who's going to church on Sunday
and then cutting whatever business deal
he or she wishes to on Monday and being
a good person to their family being a
good Christian becoming defined as how
you treat your family as opposed to how
you treat your world so we lose that
sense of what you were talking about
earlier that universality right and that
was never part of the deal so within
historical Protestantism and certainly
as I understand it as a Presbyterian
there is an emphasis on individual the
state of the individual soul so in
Presbyterianism which gets into
predestination which is a whole other
debate or argument but the emphasis
there is on you don't need to worry
about the state of your soul it's the
counter critique of Catholicism that you
must be continuously worried about
whether you're going to hell and
continuously doing all these deeds that
are prescribed or else you're going to
slip into hell even accidentally it
seems and so John Calvin is trying to
give everybody
pastor ole word of comfort to say there
is only one soul you need to worry about
and lucky for you it's the one you know
something about and it is your own and
but once you know that you are in
relationship with God it's all good
because God will never let you go you
don't need to worry about Timmy's soul
Timmy's soul is between Timmy and God
and you have no say about that but you
can have comfort about the state of your
own soul because God has chosen you and
grabbed ahold of you and under no
circumstances will let you go like all
good things of course it gets taken and
twisted around too but the individuality
of that pastoral reassurance your good
quit worrying about it was meant to say
so now you can go out and serve the Lord
in freedom and gratitude without
worrying about heaven or hell that's
already taken care of but you still are
part of a community
hence Presbyterians for example we're
just one example of many are the gift
errs and I know people will argue with
that today too but the gift errs of the
notion of public education and of the
notion of hospitals in their modern form
because and that's the the main mission
you'll see from Presbyterians all over
the world even today is the idea that it
is our duty to share whatever we have
with other people and it is our
privilege to share whatever we have with
other people so it's not just that it's
a rule by which we're supposed to live
it's also something that we get to do
out of gratitude because God has been so
gracious to us both individually and
collectively so it's not accidental that
for every Christian tradition that
participates in the Eucharist the Lord's
Supper communion that it's called the
Thanksgiving the communion communion
means together so again in a literal
sense you can't have a communion meal
alone it is by definition a shared meal
and the shared meal has Jesus as its
object and it's subject but it's not me
and Jesus my only boyfriend hanging out
somewhere together it is me and Jesus
and the community so in community I hear
the voice of God it
is a check on my individual tendency to
go off into my own lala land and think
oh well God's telling me to blow up the
planet because no it's not the voice of
God if my community of faith isn't
hearing it too it's just me indulging in
something that's about me and not about
God so the community is a literal check
on on my excesses or my tendencies to
worship myself by mistake and call that
God the community is where I celebrate
and experience God most seriously Jesus
literally says and this is how Church is
established or the notion of Church
wherever two or more of you are gathered
there I am and so he doesn't call people
one by one he calls people to follow him
in all these groups and he gathers
groups around him all the time and so
you know we come from the Middle East
and I guess we don't appreciate that as
postmodern Westerners but the Middle
Eastern cultured almost doesn't even
have a conception of I as opposed to we
and so that can play itself out in some
ways that are particularly unattractive
too but there is very much a sense that
identity is communal even existence is
communal because in a desert you can't
survive by yourself you just can't and
so there was a practical understanding
of that that also played it out itself
out in the spiritual realm the tragedy
of the Holocaust particularly for the
Jews is not just what we think of as the
enormity of numbers it is that you know
for my family you might wipe out my
family if you kill me you kill the
Jewish family by killing the Jews
because it is that understanding of
communal identity and descendants right
and continuity of line both spiritually
as well as physically so we come from a
tradition that is if we want to say
tribal but definitely communal in nature
God refers to God's self in the Hebrew
Bible more than once as we sow is that
multiple gods or is the
the Royal we or is that an understanding
like a Christian might say of a
Trinitarian understanding of a unity of
of selves that make up the whole but
yeah so that's a whole bunch of jumping
around but to simply say that there is
no there just is no possibility of being
a Christian without being in a community
I think I was very well said I think I
think in a very important thing because
we are communal right even with all of
our more advanced world if you were put
it 1 year old by themselves in the woods
you know what's gonna happen they're
gonna die right exactly
even if you put an adult in the woods by
themselves most likely they're gonna die
unless they're the most amazingly
trained you know SEAL team 6 person
around or something and even then it's
more likely than they're gonna die we
are a communal species there is no I
without us exactly I mean you know
solitary confinement is considered to be
cruel and unusual because it is because
it is you hopped over something which
you and I have talked about a little bit
in the past and this is another 11 year
old Catholic kids caricature of
Presbyterianism they used to say oh
those goofy Presbyterians
yeah they believe only 144,000 people
are going to be saved in the whole
history of the universe and once you're
saved you can go out and rob banks
horrors do heroin whatever you want
doesn't matter you're saved
predestination we actually believe that
 when we were 11 years old that's
what the priests and the nuns were
telling us I imagine there's another
side to the story
tell us about free destination there
always is isn't there ok I want to give
you two things not necessarily from
Presbyterians one is I don't know what
Francis Thompson's faith tradition was
but the poem the Hound of heaven I fled
him down the Knights and down the days I
fled him down the arches of the years I
fled him down the labyrinth and ways of
my own mind and in the midst of tears I
hid from him and under running laughter
up visted Pope's ice bed and shot
precipitated a Down Titanic glooms of
chasm fears from those strong feet
capital F feet that followed followed
after
and it goes on for quite a way but it's
the image of God as the Hound of heaven
who pursues us unrelentingly out of out
of great love rubia is a woman Sufi
mystic from the area of what is now
modern-day southern Iraq and 7th century
if memory serves me and she said that
true love of God does not love God out
of either fear of Hell or desire of
heaven but for God's own sake
predestination
John Calvin is again trying to comfort
people who have been raised in the
Catholic Church to believe from his
point of view that you are in eternal
danger of being burned into hell forever
and ever amen every second of every
minute of every day and he wants them to
understand they have they can stop
fearing that okay the second thing to
remember is John Calvin is a lawyer
that's important to the story because of
the nature of lawyers lawyers are not
speculative by nature so when you come
in to see a doctor a doctor may you know
you come in for your foot and your
doctor may say you know you look at you
a little yellow in the eyes a lawyer
never does that you come in for a will a
lawyers not gonna say oh do you need to
adopt a kid while you're here did you
have a car wreck should we be suing
somebody no you came for an in for a
will we'll deal with the will see you
later bye they deal with what's in front
of them that is who John Calvin is very
much he's not a theologian he's a pastor
who writes a lot about what he thinks
but he is not a theologian he does not
develop a coherent systemic school of
thought he deals with the problems that
were before him and the problem that was
before him is that people were
frightened out of their minds literally
people would not take communion because
they were afraid to take it because they
take it wrong they'd go to hell this is
the world in which he is living right
and so his point is grace is what saves
us and grace is God's gift to us that is
it's God's out of God's goodness that
our unity with God is possible right and
so from that he reasons and it mostly
his reasoning that you have this notion
that God chooses and so what he's saying
is okay Beth you believe in God you
believe Jesus Christ yes yes
well that's because God planted that in
your heart and what God plants in your
heart is never gonna be uprooted so quit
worrying about it it's not gonna go away
it's all good you can relax and do what
God wants you to and so we do what God
wants us to not out of fear of Hell and
nor out of desire for heaven but because
God wants us to do it and so when folks
talk about well you know it's just
license to sin I would say to you that
when I was 12 15 maybe even 20 I didn't
murder somebody or steal because I
didn't want to go to jail I'm 65 I don't
murder people because I don't want to
murder people I don't steal because I
don't want to steal and a part of the
reason I don't want to steal is because
I understand it to be hurtful to my
community and thus wrong in God's world
because anything that does harm is wrong
broadly speaking I don't need a great
big rulebook all the time in front of me
because I have some wisdom I say it
comes from God maybe it just comes from
age I don't know but only a child or
someone who stays as a child obeys rules
out of fear of consequences adults obey
rules because the rules make sense and
they choose to disobey them when they
don't so then to come back to
predestination it's not that anybody's
running toward heaven or running from
Hell it's just to relax into the
existence that you have and know that
because God has chosen you and you
didn't choose God then you can't undo so
if you flash forward because then
problems develop with that because then
some later Presbyterians say oh that
means that God chose some people to go
to hell that's not what Calvin was
talking about but then you flash-forward
to the 20th century and German
theologian named carl bart VAR th says I
think Calvin got it right about God's
choosing election is what that means in
in the theological words but he said
I think he got it wrong who and what God
was choosing and this is where it makes
the most sense to me
Carl Bart says God chooses yes and God
is a choosing God by nature God chooses
a and thus not B but when when it got to
the point in Calvinism that it's saying
well a and not B is Beth and not Jim
no no no no what God chose was God's own
self that is Jesus Christ on the cross
so the election or the choice that God
makes is I will die for all of you that
you might live so the election or the
choosing that is predestined for
salvation that is unification with God
is the choice that I will make the
sacrifice so you don't have to because
you can't but I can
and thus I will and so at some place
it's reputed to be said I can't find it
so I can't verify to that bartman said
you know I'm not a Universalist but I'm
pretty sure God is and so that actually
makes sense to me that if God is
choosing then it is not Cindy and not
Suzy know that that's so arbitrary that
doesn't even make sense but it is God is
choosing all of humanity this beautiful
creation that God made for who knows
what reason
in some ineffable way to be in God's
image and has chosen that we will be
redeemed
because God has decided we are worth
redeeming we may not be worth redeeming
in any empirical measurable sense but if
God is God and God's decided then that's
the end of the conversation so to speak
so that's pretty destination is getting
at the idea of stop worrying about
whether your quote saved unquote and
stop you know listening to everybody ask
you the right litmus test questions and
see if you pass the test because I have
stories about that too that are horrific
and just start relaxing into the
enormity of God's love for you and live
it how hard is that
there's a story I like that's a good
threat does that mean Presbyterians
believe nobody goes to hell
some this Presbyterian believes there is
no hell that if there ever was one that
Jesus redeemed it and it's over that if
there was a battle it was a cosmic
battle and it was fought on the cross
and Jesus wanted and when you win it
that kind of a battle it's once and for
all time Satan and God so there's no
fight left to be fought
there's just the after effects like
aftershocks in an earthquake
so Satan's still sort of hanging around
causing trouble I don't know I I don't
believe in the devil in the sense of a
figure that people describe is almost
co-equal with God I think that's
nonsense but if you read the book of Job
ironically one of my favorite books in
all of the Bible it's one of the most
difficult ones
it begins with Satan as the figure of an
advocate ironically a lawyer he's the
one who roams the earth you know and
comes back as kind of God's emissary and
gives him the reports and so as the play
and job goes right God says to Satan one
day you know have you considered my
servant job and Satan says yeah he's a
good guy but he only loves you because
you give him stuff and gods like that's
not true and Satan's like yeah take it
away from him then see what happens and
of course then you have the whole story
of job and the real ending of job
because there's an add-on later which
disappoints me but the real ending of
job is joke demands God come down and
give an account of God's self and God
does and can't you imagine it
imagine Star Trek you know and imagine
the queue shows up for the first time
right holy other than anything you've
ever encountered and what's your
reaction silence
utter amazement total bafflement words
that don't make any sense and that's
exactly what Jobe does basically he says
he falls down in the dust and basically
says my Lord and my god every question
he had disappears because God simply
showed up what wouldn't it you know I
have all these questions well how does
it work like this why did this happen
why do these children die why why why
and all the sudden this holy
being that I can't even imagine let
alone comprehend is just standing there
and saying hello the questions become
immaterial is is the takeaway I have
from that so the satan figure is there
ultimately to provoke the conversation
he is a device a literary device and
whether there's an actual being like
that I don't know most of the time I
think we do that to to try to personify
external to ourselves the badness that
resides within us there's a story in the
Bible that and it always troubles me too
and Jesus says at a certain point in
time we'll say it's Judgment Day
you're all gonna show up in front of me
and the sheep are gonna go to the left
and the goats are gonna go to the right
sheep to heaven goats to hell is the
clear implication right and so you're
like oh my word so the story goes that
there's a group of nuns who are at a
seminar with this priest and this
passage is really worrying them because
you know they're dedicating their lives
to try to do everything right right and
but who's a sheep who's a goat and so
the priest says okay everybody stand up
they do and he says all right if you've
ever done anything kind for another
human being go stand on the right well
they're nuns they all go stand on the
right and he's like okay how many of you
have ever been thoughtless or unkind or
cruel to another human being well
they're nuns so they're honest so they
all go stand on the left and he says now
do you get it we are all of us all sheep
and goats at the same time it changes
everything if you understand that the
winnowing is not Beth from Jim but what
is within Beth from Beth the winnowing
of if we want to be simplistic the bad
from the good the wheat from the chaff
that which is of God which versus that
which is not of God
because I carry both within me all the
time so is there a real Satan walking
around with real demons tempting me
maybe maybe you know I'm not in charge
of the universe and I don't know is it
smart to act as if there is probably
you know but but at the same time do I
get to use that to get me off the hook
not ever not ever and because God has
predestined me to live within God's
grace I am thrilled to be able to do
anything I can to live out God's will
the best I can and ask God's forgiveness
when I when I don't do it the best I can
which is pretty much every day beyond
kind of like that you know that's much
less horrifying than a lot of which gets
passed off as Christianity with the
Hellfire and brimstone well you know
people have talked to me about that and
I'm like you know there might be hell I
don't know I'm telling you I don't think
so but remember what we said earlier I
could be wrong here's the thing I do
know because I was in a whole lot of
churches as a child I was raised by an
atheist right so my faith journey is
from the opposite spectrum going toward
faith rather than away but a whole lot
of people talked to me for a whole long
time you know about different faith
issues and anybody who tried to scare me
into Jesus it never worked now maybe
there are some people who need to be
scared to Jesus I'm not one of them the
more you try to scare me the more I'm
not interested because life's scary why
do I want to sign on for more scary you
know if I have a choice in or say in the
matter
so that just never made sense to me you
know people have tried to threaten me
into all kinds of behavior it never
works as soon as you're threatening me
I'm digging in those West Virginia heels
and saying uh make me maybe some people
need to be scared to heaven with threats
of hell I've never met them yet that's a
very hopeful way to be if you're gonna
be a Christian I like your form of
Christianity more than I like many of
the other ones I've heard of let's
change topics a little bit here one of
the other things that you have done in
your life in your later life besides
being a pastor of a small little Church
in very rural Highland County Virginia
is that you've been a participant in the
Christian peacemaker teams in Iraq tell
us about that and tell us about your
commitment to peace and whether or not
you're a pacifist and what you have done
to live out whatever beliefs you have
about peace and peace
yes I am a pacifist that's the short one
I've been a pacifist I think ever since
I can remember so while it is an accord
with my faith it's given birth before I
knew about faith and it was probably
because of the Vietnam War right we grew
up with that you know with the evening
news and the body bags and all of that
and so that was pretty formative to me
and the notion that we were lied into
war became really evident in at a really
young age and so I'm sure that's where a
lot of that comes from for me so to
flash forward in time when I was in
seminary I started seminary in the
summer of 2001 and we were on a break
between summer and fall semesters and on
September 10th 2001 I went with a couple
of friends to New York City we saw a
Broadway play
nobody ever reports this in the news but
there was a deluge that was biblical we
got so wet we literally had to run into
a sporting goods store and buy new
clothes to wear to go to this play
earlier in the day in the late afternoon
we'd gone up atop the World Trade Center
towers and so we were some of the last
people to do that go up and down and
come out alive on September 11th I'm
sitting at my desk doing some work I'd
sent my son an email saying I was kind
of homesick and he called me and said
are you all right I'm like I'm just a
little homesick and he said turn on the
TV and so of course then on September
11th I saw what everybody saw and I
remember my immediate response was we're
gonna go kill a bunch of brown people
and I was in conversation with a lot of
seminary friends and even in the
seminary and I admit I was naive enough
to think that people studying to be
preachers would probably be more moral
than the general public
not true and so one fellow who was
Egyptian had people telling him
Christian telling him Muslim jokes one
fellow who was from India had his car
scratched and defaced with all kinds of
Muslim things a couple of guys wouldn't
serve you french fries and still you
started calling them freedom fries small
potatoes you know it but nasty in a Sikh
Christian kind of a way but so this
whole insanity that was happening where
people where I was new people who had
died right people were going and helping
we were sending food and clothing and
volunteer
course turned out they didn't need it
for blood and so just one step removed
in Princeton New Jersey and realizing
I'd been in that building one day before
or less than a day before made it very
real so a group of us got together and
formed Princeton seminarians for peace
and in one of our meetings I said you
know it because then very quickly of
course attention from the country turned
toward Iraq and Saddam Hussein and so I
said to this group while we were at one
of our meetings if we really believed
this we'd be there meaning in Iraq you
know we would be the human shields and a
friend of mine said it's funny you say
that there's a group that's there right
now one of my friends emails me every
day and so my friend gave me forwarded
me Scott's emails from Iraq where
Christian peacemaker teams was and with
a presence on the eve of war there in
2003 and I just kept following them and
paying attention and learning more about
them it was a group that was born out of
the Mennonite tradition and in the 80s a
Mennonite had given a speech because of
course Mennonites are pacifists in peace
churches and he was challenging them to
get away from the idea of letting the
state protect you and just sitting back
on your laurels and saying if we really
are pacifists and believe in peace as a
way of being we need to be where the
violence is and that spoke to mean like
probably nothing I think I've ever heard
and so that was the foundation of this
group and so they were in Israel
Palestine and still are they were in
Iraq and still are and some other places
so I applied with them and went to
Colombia South America for a two week
stint where they kind of watch you and
evaluate whether they think you'd be
suitable and then I went through their
month-long training in Chicago in the
summer of 2005 and I went on my first
trip to Baghdad the team was in Baghdad
at the time living in what-what American
soldiers called the red zone which meant
everywhere in Iraq except the Green Zone
and we went unarmed and we worked with
Muslim Peace groups in Iraq and others
Human Rights
and so forth one of the things they did
that I think's pretty amazing before I
was ever there was if you'll remember
seymour hersh wrote about Abu Ghraib and
what was going on there my group was
pretty much the last western group to be
there because of the kidnappings that
started happening and we are a violence
reduction group and usually we accompany
people in violent places in in
nonviolent ways so we're not a human
rights group were not Amnesty
International so they didn't have any of
those skill sets but they had
accompanied folks looking for their boys
because boys would disappear to be a boy
in a Muslim country when the Americans
are there is to be suspect of being a
terrorist just to be young and male and
so whenever they'd be out on the streets
our soldiers would arrest him and so
there were thousands and thousands being
detained once they got out their
families started bringing them to our
folks simply because there was no one
else to take them to and they started
telling them their stories about what
had happened to them so these young kids
mostly on the team at that time just
looked up on the internet about how to
take a witness statement and started
compiling all these testimonies and turn
them over to Seymour Hersh and that was
if not the beginning part of the
beginning of the breaking of the Abu
Ghraib story simply because they happen
to be there so this group we would walk
with people to like the school boy bus
Patrol think about it that way but
unarmed and so we would walk people to
the Green Zone the irony for us was that
there was no danger to me to go into the
Green Zone its American soldiers they're
not gonna hurt me but it was very
dangerous for the Iraqis to go there
again male young right they're gonna get
disappeared into custody so we would
accompany them to try to seek redress or
find help or find loved ones who'd been
misplaced lost or killed we accompanied
Palestinian Iraqis who were trying to
leave the country we did a lot of more
documentation work ultimately we had our
own kidnapping and one of our colleagues
was murdered it was a criminal
kidnapping not a religious or a
political one for money and we don't pay
ransoms so one of our number was kid
so we had to leave Baghdad we would have
stayed but our working partners
understandably felt like they couldn't
safely work with us anymore because we
were too high-profile so we went to the
Kurdish north of Iraq and the team is
still there I haven't been back I'm
still in touch with folks and I've done
some other work for them here stateside
but I haven't been back since 2010 but
the same things happening in the Kurdish
north of Iraq now that was happening
back then and our fingerprints are all
over it so remember that Turkey is to
the north of Iraq and Turkey is our NATO
ally
remember that Syria is to the west a
northwest of Iraq and it has Kurds and
right now it's in a civil war and has
been an upheaval for a good long time
Iran is to the northeast for the Kurdish
part of Iraq and Iran is and has been
for a very long time essentially are
undeclared or declared enemy and we call
them a terrorist state so turkey hates
its Kurds and calls them terrorists the
Kurds of Iraq are our allies both in the
war against Iraq and it were in the war
with Syria the Iranian Kurds we consider
freedom fighters because they're trying
to overturn the Iranian central
government so we arm the Iranian Kurds
we mean in the United States of America
foreign policy your tax dollars in my
network we arm the Iranian Kurds as
freedom fighters we named the PKK the
Turkish Kurds a terrorist organization
we called the Iraqi Kurds and Ally and
promised them all kinds of
constitutional rights and and don't
deliver and we are the ones remember who
gave them the no-fly zone except
whenever turkey wants to bomb them
because they say they're Kurds will run
into Iraq and when that happens we pull
back our air support allow Turkey to
come in and bomb and then put our
airport support back in place this is
what we do to our allies it's hard to
figure out whether you'd rather be an
ally or an enemy and this is I
understand it's been going on since you
know 2004 or thereabout
right so it's across Republican and
Democratic administrations yes yes
nobody gets to point the finger at
anybody else here this is all of us
every one of us citizens tax payers
every one of us politicians we are all
in it together we have all done it
together and we've done it eyes wide
shut and we don't care and bless the
Kurds art they keep believing hope
against hope that if we the people only
knew what our government was doing we'd
do something about it well we know the
truth is we don't care because we don't
have to because it's not in our backyard
that's the best explanation I've got for
the indifference that that just murders
people because it can so the work with
peacemaking and in that part of the
world is wonderful and wrenching and
horrible and sometimes it can feel
hopeless and yet the people themselves
who live there and do the work and can't
get away because they don't have a
passport like I do are some of the most
hope filled human beings I've ever met
and it's been a real privilege so so
peacemaking from my point of view is a
calling I went to Iraq because God made
me I didn't want to go and the feeling
just would not leave me and would not
leave me alone and I felt like I had to
and I felt like I had to come home and
tell and I spent a lot of time doing
that it still feels like a big part of
it but for me it felt like the that my
calling was to be here among my own kind
so to speak and to be speaking peace
into these contexts because the change
is going to happen in the world as it is
today from places like this if it's
going to happen at all because we're the
ones who are profiting from you nishan
sales so here's one more story about
that that I just loved to death remember
Iran and Turkey right Iran the freedom
fighters
Turkish Kurds the terrorists so if you
go visit these guys in the mountains
because they're all together PKK and
pJAK PKK as turkey pJAK is Iran if you
visit them in the mountains pJAK the
Iranian guys will have guns in their
hands with made in the US of a stamped
on them words
English written on them and if you come
as a westerner and they see you coming
suddenly the PKK guys will be handing
their guns back to the Iranian guys
because they - although they are
terrorists they have the American guns
because pJAK is sharing them with them
but they're not allowed to have them
because they're terrorists it's
ridiculous just a crazy game and you
know I've met some kurds over the years
you mean i know this but there's a great
kurdish restaurant in Harrisonburg yes
there is Xenia right yeah Xenia call out
to Xenia and people there great and
every Kurt I've ever met just seems to
be amazingly upbeat person considering
the that the Kurdish people have
been going through for the last I don't
know how least 100 years right since the
end of World War one right probably
longer than that yep when the British
promised in their own country they are
the largest ethnic group without its own
country in the world at least so I've
heard that's right
thirty or forty million people and yet
they seem to be so optimistic and full
of loving life you have an insight into
where that comes from
hope perseverance necessity is a
necessity even the author of hope people
don't have hope unless they need hope
hopeful people are the ones who have are
in despair so that's where I think it
comes from yeah it sound like you've had
some real adventures up there you kind
of played it down but you've been in
some pretty tight situations up there as
I understand it well yes and no I mean
when you're in a war zone I think the
most interesting thing to me looking
back on it from a distance
is that how ordinary life is and how
ordinary life just goes on because it
has to you go to the store cuz you got
to have food right and then you know
right behind you maybe a bomb goes off
and that's just the way it is and it
inshallah it didn't hit you today
inshallah meaning God willing it's
amazing how quickly human beings
acclimate to any situation it's not that
it doesn't have a price because it does
Kurds and Arabs are not friends because
of the Saddam years and there was a
group that got a grant from Europe for
Kurdish teenagers they gave him video
cameras that's been about 10 years ago
to go into the refugee camps for the
Arab Iraqis had come from the south to
escape the
violence there and interview them to try
to establish some rapport between the
two groups so the Kurdish kids are
asking the Arab kids what do you do for
fun and the Arab kids said and I quote
what is fun and then they said well do
you have hobbies and they said what is a
hobby so it's not that you can't be a
child in a war zone but boy you sure
lose a lot and you don't even know
you've lost it you know and that's the
same for the adults at least the
appearance of normal life goes on but
there's a there's an enormous enormous
cost of the day-to-day grind of that and
these people have been at war not
largely of their own making for decades
not always I wish all my American
friends would stop saying we can't do
anything the Middle East has been at war
forever no it hasn't
it actually was in a fairly solid state
of peaceful coexistence for a very long
time and then the West couldn't keep
their hands off of resources and went in
and made countries and picked sides and
armed everybody on all sides and the
logical consequences war so there we
have it you've also talked a little bit
about the new modern ways of war were
things like drones or people sitting in
a trailer in Nevada and blow up a bunch
of tents in Syria by remote control
that's only going to get more powerful
as we start even getting autonomous
warfighting vehicles what do you think
of the moral challenges of these new
kinds of killing at a distance I would
say that I think that all it does is
delay the impact on the one doing the
killing that is you may not feel the
impact in the moment but you will feel
the impact so if I understand correctly
after world war two they did some
studies and found out that this huge
percentage over well over seventy five
percent of soldiers in World War two
that most just war in our history we
know about did not fire their weapons at
all or fired high well the military said
quite rightly being an instrument of
killing in war this won't do and so as
the story goes they were one of the
inventors if not the inventor of what we
think of as the modern video game
as a way by repetition and simulation to
strain people to kill to overcome their
resistance to the idea of killing and
they got very successful at it the
second thing I would point out is that
in 1990 percent of the people who died
in war were soldiers or combatants in
2000 ninety percent of the people who
died in war were civilians usually women
and children modern technology has made
it so that the soldier survives but
without any worry or concern to what we
now call because we don't want to call
them people collateral damage so we
didn't reduce the numbers who died
we simply shifted them and that was
pretty intentional because of course you
invest a lot of money time and effort in
a soldier can't have them die even
though they're the ones assuming the
risk so you have in modern warfare the
general doesn't lead you know or the
king or the president from the front
they lead from the rear most soldiers
including I would say generals actually
don't like war and want to avoid it but
civilian leadership in our model is more
and more removed from the realities of
it and so it's easy isn't it for my
liberal friends Barack Obama is the one
who started killing civilians with
drones and using drone warfare to save
the lives of soldiers at the cost of
every civilian in the area always at the
cost part is what we don't seem to want
to ask ourselves so we have this this
shift and then this notion that you
don't think about it when we went to war
against Iraq I can remember remember how
CNN with that first Gulf War became
famous because they were showing the
green streaming lights of the the
missiles anti-aircraft yeah and the
missiles into Baghdad right yeah the
shock at all I think they called it yeah
yeah
flash-forward into the second Iraq war
the one in the 2000s and before we're
going some commentators on a naval ship
with a young kid I bet he was 18
you know who was showing her you know
his console and how he would push a
button and that would lead to a missile
that would lead to you know an attack on
her cook or Baghdad or Naja for wherever
the interviewer asked him you know how
he felt about the fact that he would hit
a button and that would kill people and
he said I'm not killing people I'm just
hitting a button and I never forgot that
but then when I was talking to someone
an old old old retired CIA soldier guy
you know and I'm like so are they really
that detached from it and he said no he
said all that means is you don't think
about it till you get home and so with
the suicide rates we're seeing among
veterans and the homelessness the
homelessness can't just be about not
having enough money and also I'm suspect
has to do with addiction issues and your
life just falling apart
we figured out really well how to train
people how to kill
we have never figured out how to help
them live with it we've trained people
how to leave dead children on the
battlefield at the time but we've never
figured out how to help them live with
it and the the sin and the blood and the
guilt is ours collectively so every
death in Iraq I've done so pacifist or
not I'm a taxpayer I'm the one who's
killed these people as much if not more
than anyone else and so until we can
reckon with the idea of collective
national guilt and Americans hate that
as soon as you start talking about
anything where we've done something
wrong as a nation we go into defensive
mode and start yelling and covering our
ears and doing that childish version of
lalalala and don't want to hear it but
until we can figure out like what the
folks in South Africa worked on figuring
out and the folks in Rwanda worked on
figuring out and all over the world with
Truth and Reconciliation which begins
with acknowledgement of guilt and
responsibility I believe we will be
stuck with these same patterns where in
your lifetime and mine brother Jim I'd
be hard-pressed to name you a day we
weren't a war somewhere in the world
undeclared therefore in my view illegal
and
constitutional but Warren done the same
and what on earth is wrong with us who
does that
I had a an Iraqi man once asked me a
question and I guess maybe that's a good
place to leave that when we think about
the costs of modern warfare he looked at
me and he said who does that what kind
of people are you and I said what do you
mean and he said who sends their
children here to die what kind of a man
would do that I still don't have an
answer for that
our world is in a very strange place
right now and I think this will be our
exit question we're coming up on our
time and I we've had a great
conversation we have a changing world
that's changing so rapidly that we
really have a hard time getting our
hands around it even people you know
like you and me who spent a fair amount
of time trying to think about it and
frankly a lot of our citizens don't
spend that much time trying to think
about it you know at one level we're
racing towards the limits of the
carrying capacity of the earth in fact
there's a good argument that says we're
already past it
population and the earth you know you're
gonna rise to 10 or 11 billion before it
tops out around the 21st century
autonomous warfighting is coming where
you won't even have to press a button to
send the missile the robot will run
around and it'll decide when it wants to
send the missile so even greater
distance will be coming and we have
social media with all of its effects we
have artificial intelligence that looks
some of its overhyped but there will be
a lot of job displacement over the next
30 years many many crises but there's
also probably opportunities here to
develop a new way to live how do you see
this world of ours that seems to be in
crisis and what might the opportunities
be on the other side of that
Wow I wish I knew the answer to that as
a woman of faith
I don't despair too much because I
remember that none of these things are
my god
but I also live in the real world and
the god I worship never promised me an
easy life nor life without pain or
tribulation even of my own making so I
think about I think about change and I
wish I knew more science so this is
where you and I are good conversation
partners and I wonder how we change the
paradigm that we have now that the
paradigm seems to be that if we can do
something we will do something without
even stopping to take a breath really
most of the time to ask ourselves should
we do this can we forego something even
though we can do it because it's not
good for us and I don't know how we
encourage that kind of space
to allow for that kind of time because
the argument always seems to be well if
I don't do it someone else will well
maybe maybe not because there is a lot
of collective group think and herd
behavior in human beings right so I
wonder if we can start thinking about
ethical models where we give ourselves
space for ethical reflection on what we
should do versus what we can do it's not
good enough to say well the only people
who don't use drones are the ones that
don't have them wouldn't it be nice to
be the people who don't use them because
we've decided you know these aren't
these just aren't good and so we're not
going to do it but how to create space
to have those reflective conversations
and and you know come to if not
consensus at least common understanding
or the ability to give ourselves time
that's the second piece of it is the
experience of time because change and
innovations seem to be happening so much
more quickly our experience of time
compresses so that it feels as if we
have to do everything now so literally I
I Drive everybody in my social circle in
my family circle crazy because I do not
have a cell phone I've had cell phones
before but as you know I live in an area
that without a fair amount of effort and
quite a bit of cash I might point out I
can't have one easily and it's not
really usable all that much to me here
nor necessary I've got a landline then
I've got a computer so what but the fact
that I am not available for instant
communication really bothers some people
but then I laugh and I say well if I
call you you don't answer you screen
calls so you don't get instant
communication anyway you get the feeling
of instant communication but this this
notion of time speeding up when time
hasn't really changed to the extent
times the thing at all as opposed to a
construct but our experience of it has
radically changed so how do we give
ourselves permission to slow down when
everything about us and everything about
our world seems to be insisting that we
speed up the third thing I guess is
thoughtfulness and mindfulness I'll
never forget back in the 90s
Ross Perot wasn't he running as an
independent for president yeah
and he was talking about the economy and
I forget what his plans were but he had
some plans for an economy in trouble but
then he said something I've never
forgotten he said you know what the
truth is we don't have to do anything
about this it'll fix itself even if we
do nothing we won't like it but it will
fix itself and so mindfulness ever since
I've heard that has reminded me that a
lot of systems within the earth if not
all of them are self-healing it's
usually pretty violent in the process so
maybe we don't have to do a thing about
climate change I'm pretty sure old
mother earth will take care of it
whether we do or not but it won't be
good for human beings when she does but
how do we be mindful to have a long-term
way of thinking you know the Asian
culture very much has built into it a
long-term way of thinking our culture
doesn't we are very short-term thinkers
and there are things to recommend both I
think you need both and so that I guess
is the other piece is how we move from
competition to cooperation and
understanding that I don't have to see
the other as a threat to my existence
that you actually bring something to the
table that I need that without you I
wouldn't have and I think that's true in
every political debate we're having
right now and in every cultural debate
we're having it's not my way or your way
it's it really does need to be our way
and I'm not talking about compromise I'm
just talking about this goes back to
that notion of communion that if you're
not at the table I don't have Jim's
voice and Jim brings things to the table
that Beth doesn't have and why did was I
allowed to forget that and how do we
reclaim that so I know the questions to
ask I'm not sure how to get to the
answers I think the questions is a good
place to start and it is a difficult
difficult problem because we have been
locked in a game theory competition as
you said well if I don't do it the other
guy will write and then I'll be left
behind and our capitalist economy
reinforces that in spades you know
companies live or die by small margins
if I can produce you know a smart phone
for $20
less than you can you're gonna go out of
business so you have to use child labor
too or you'll you won't be able to
compete so we have some horrible
dynamics built into our system so I
suspect to answer those questions and I
think you did a wonderful job of
summarizing the questions we're gonna
may have to make some very serious
changes in how we organize our society
exactly what they are as you say are a
little unknown but we have some
challenges ahead of us all and I think
I'll wrap up on the fact that you know
you again teed it up perfectly
mother nature bats last right yeah we
don't have to do anything about climate
change if we don't want to but she's
gonna hit us upside the head and she's
gonna hit us upside to hit hard I can
tell you that right so wise up people
don't believe this crap all about there
being no climate problem people who say
that or I presume not intentionally
likely consigning tens or hundreds of
millions of people to ugly deaths so
let's get straight on this and let's get
to work
amen to that thank you very much it was
a great conversation thanks for having
me I really enjoyed it production
services and audio editing by Jared
Jane's consulting music by Tom Muller at
modern space music com