howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
today's guest is Dave Snowden hi Jim be
with you
famous founder and chief scientific
officer of cognitive edge his work is
international in nature and covers
government and industry looking at
complex issues related to strategy
organizational design and decision
making is pioneered a science-based
approach drawing on anthropology
neuroscience and complex adaptive
systems theory he's a popular and
passionate keynote speaker on a range of
subjects this is my favorite part
according to its documentation he's
well-known for his pragmatic cynicism
and I kind of classic style I like that
my assistants once added to the end of
my mini bio and he has a delightful
potty mouth I like people that stand out
a little bit from the drab corporate
norm Dave is also affiliated with the
University of Pretoria Hong Kong
Polytechnic University and the
University of Warwick his various other
awards and publications too numerous to
enumerate you should look him up online
he's probably best known as the inventor
of the conovan framework spelled cyn EFI
ed tyll I did my research for this
podcast I always pronounced that
something like kin ofin Dave how do we
actually say that it's can having its
Welsh in that take but we have a
different alphabet couldn't even I like
it
okay previously you were to IBM doing
knowledge management which I remember
back in the day in the 1990s is a senior
technology executive it was pretty much
an overpriced show sold the dumb
companies by selector consultants what
did you learn from that that led you to
condemn it oh it goes back way way then
I think what you actually saw and it
obviously your experience was people who
focused on technology so there were two
main schools of thought around then one
was it was all about codification and
that means stuff into databases and the
other group which
myself pre-cut pre-second the like
basically argued decision support was a
lot more complex than that you had to
take into account cognitive neuroscience
you had to take into the other way
people made decisions so that was kind
of like where we were and that fairly
soon morphed into work on narrative and
complexity theory and then that got me
heavily involved in DARPA programs
before and after 9/11 looking at weak
signal detection and support and
decision-making in complex policy
environments so I think you may have had
some bad experiences there and you may
be spending too much time with the top
sales consultants rather than people
understand the subject yeah fortunately
I never got gold into doing such
projects but I know lots of my
contemporaries who did and of course you
know the publication's of the year were
full of you know the miracles of
knowledge management now as you say it
was all very naive attempts to over
codify what is nothing like an easily
codified process which actually brings
me to another one of my comments I saw
in your original Harvard Business Review
article you talk about what I've called
naive Newtonian ISM people who never get
beyond the 13 year old nerds belief that
with all of the data about position and
velocity of everything in the universe
we could predict the future I certainly
saw that again and again in corporate
America and a lack of knowledge of even
basic concepts such as deterministic
chaos what's it like out there today in
the world of business and government you
haven't seen much difference some of you
people are still taking a linear
approach to causality and to be honest
lost the systems thinkers guys there as
well so the assumption is you can if you
get the input right you can define the
output or that you should be able to
forecast or back castes to a future
State I think the work we've done which
is primarily based on complexity theory
which is different from deterministic
chaos
yeah complexity theory and human systems
is sometimes known as the science for
sin
uncertainty in which you can understand
the present and you can map the coherent
pathways from the present but you can't
define an outcome indeed you know as a
complexity science guy myself I'm very
very clear about the distinction I
mentioned deterministic chaos because I
call that the baby first step you know
once somebody understands that
deterministic chaos is real they ought
to throw out their naive Newtonian ISM
you know it's amazing today to me that
today people could still hang on to it
in positions of authority yet they
clearly do I think this area is where it
still applies I mean the point about the
can every framework is to say that human
beings have learned for example in
traffic management or operating theaters
to create highly predictable Newtonian
systems and there's nothing wrong with
them provided we don't think they
Universal I think deterministic chaos is
not necessarily the best next step
because it tends people to think that
they can use agent-based models or
simulation or AI and they're really not
dealing with highly interconnected
systems I prefer to get people into a
fundamental distinction between
complicated and complex between systems
where you can define a future States and
systems where you can only understand
the present and then worry about the
other stuff later yeah we'll get to that
in just a minute that's actually gonna
be the heart of what I'm gonna be asking
you about but before we go there
complexity science clearly informs your
work how did you come to get exposed to
the complexity literature and I've seen
references in your essays to Stewart
Kaufman / Eugene who else so was an
influence on you from the complexity
science school Brian Arthur to some
extent people at Ralph Stacy or among
the other he wants to popularize it I'm
Elysia Gerardo in particular and his
sort of work and then a whole range of
material in sort of a say another format
I think the unique thing I did was to
combine it with cognitive neuroscience
and basically say that human beings
aren't ants so I think quite early on
and I remember a big debate with Walter
Freeman as to Katherine and Brian Arthur
over dinner in San Jose many years ago
and I think what all of us were saying
is the study of complexity in human
systems is different from the study of
complexity in termites nests and that
requires us to take a more
transdisciplinary approach so that part
you're talking about people like Freeman
for decision-making you know you talk
about Chalmers there's a whole body of
academic and other influences Chalmers
to me David Chalmers a philosopher
slight confusion and talking about David
Chandler Oh Chandler sorry not Thomas
okay no I am a philosopher so the hard
problem is one that complexity gives us
different insights um it's one Attard
right well nice complexities and as
mutually ontological ontological a
diverse systems to co-exist so there's a
few issues like free will you can deal
with no Chandler's just his latest book
his and on to politics and the
interesting so he's talking about how
the sort of world we now live in is
radically different in terms of the way
we make decisions and he's coming from a
political science background so I've
drawn on near the biological in their
anthropology this is your the trend of
anthropology a whole bunch of cognitive
stuff and context is here very good with
that as a little bit of groundwork in
place maybe you could dig in now and you
know really tell our audience about the
Keynesian can even framework keep in
mind our audience is smart hey you
morons get out of here but most will not
have a background in complexity science
so please take it slowly
okay so conniving is based on a
fundamental divide into three types of
system ordered systems complex systems
and chaotic systems and it comes from a
principle that there's a phase shift
between those types it's not a gradation
is a phase shift and it's important here
that chaos tends to be defined
differently in social science from
physical so I'll run through my
definitions and make sure we're using
the same language so an order system is
one which has a very high level of
constraint to the point where everything
is predictable so in the UK we drive on
the left in the US you drive on the
right
human beings have an ability to use
constraints to produce predictability
and the you know the drive on the left
drive on the right is an example of
watching the conniving is called an
obvious approach toward either
relationship between cause and effect is
self-evident everybody can understand it
everybody buys into it so that's the
domain of best practice as a single
right way of doing things we sense we
categorize respond
we have rigid constraints the other type
of order is complicated and that's where
at for experts it may be obvious but for
the decision maker it isn't so it's not
self-evident so you have to carry out
some sort of investigation bring in
expertise you effectively sense analyze
respond but there is a right answer it
can be discovered but you may discover
the answer within range of possibility
you may not have to be precise which is
why we talk about that as the main of
good practice not best practice so for
example a medical practitioner should be
allowed a degree of flexibility in what
decisions they make about patients they
shouldn't be forced into a single route
and that would be an example of
complicated if you over constrain an
order system and we have a lot of this
in IBM so the expense system was so
ridiculous that people found workarounds
for example claiming for a taxi fare and
using that to cover food for staff
working late at night and that was a
classic classic case so if you over
constrain the system language is
naturally constrain able sooner or later
brake source of fragments into chaos so
that's called a catastrophic fold and
the bottom of Canarian is shown as a fol
that's a reference to Remy Tom so that's
disastrous if you fall into chaos
accidentally then the model is out sense
respond you have to recover very quickly
you see that for example you know when
in old industries collapse almost
overnight because it's what Peyton
Christensen called competence induced
failure they're so good at the old
paradigm they don't see the change
coming so when the change happens is
catastrophic a complex system on the
other hand is one which has what are
called enabling constraints so
everything is tomorrow
they're connected with everything else
but the connections aren't fully known
and one of the concepts I created is
called a dark constraint I'm a reference
to dark energy in cosmology so we can
see the impact of something but we can't
actually see what we have where the
impact is coming from so in a complex
adaptive system the only way to
understand it is to probe it to
experiment in it but critically you have
to experiment in parallel which by the
way gives us a significant conflict
resolution device one of my definitions
of complexity is if the evidence
supports conflicting hypotheses of
action and you can't resolve those
hypotheses within the time frame for
decision on an evidence base then the
situation is complex so we think can
having you don't try and resolve it you
construct a safe to fail micro
experiment around each coherent
hypothesis you run them in parallel that
change the dynamics of the space and
then the solution starts to emerge and
the final domain is the domain of
disorder which is the central space and
that's kinda like the state of not
knowing which of the other systems
you're in then you might enter that
accidently or you might enter it
deliberately but in fact it's a type of
in authenticity so if your natural
tendency is to bureaucracy you're likely
to impose order when it's inappropriate
yeah if your natural tendency is towards
complexity and emergence you may not
impose order when it's appropriate and
so on so the essence of kanavan is to
basically say context is key and it also
comes from one of my drivers had got fed
up with management fads so people sort
of you know business process
reengineering was universal learning
organization was universal none of these
were universal they all work within a
specific context so part of the function
is conniving is to decide what context
you're in before you decide what method
you use and as such has been used to
understand the role of religion in the
Bush White House has been used in
epidemiology is being used for
decision-making in not-for-profits is
being used for decision making in
companies in the police it's taught to
anybody wants to become a colonel
most of the US Armed Forces because that
concept of contextual appropriateness a
decision type is if increasing
importance in an uncertain world so
that's a very high-level summary very
useful let's maybe drill a little bit
into the distinction between just the
complicated and the complex I believe I
read in one of your essays that you
described complicated as something that
could in principle be taken apart and
put back together again
while complex that could never be true
yeah a complicated system is the sum of
its parts so you can solve problems by
breaking things down and solving them
separately in a complex system the
properties of the whole are the result
of interaction between the parts and
their linkages and the constraints in
fact in a complex system how things
connect is more important than what they
are so the properties of that emergent
pattern can never be decomposed to the
original parts gotcha
and because I was thinking about this I
thought of another distinction I thought
I'd run by you and see what you think is
that at least in a purely complicated
system one generally assumes that the
components the complicated system are
not antagonistically adaptive you know
ie one would never have to assume that
your carburetor showing my age there
with that reference isn't going to sort
of perversely develop better and better
ways to keep the engine from running you
can assume that the carburetor is a
relatively static device it's not a
strategic or adaptive element is that a
useful distinction about the complicated
world yeah a car engine is and I mean
complicated systems tend to be
engineered as well these don't tend to
see you so much in nature unless you get
highly static constraint relationships
in a context adapter system something
which was beneficial one day can be
something else
I mean classic examples is symbiosis so
all symbols actually start off as
parasites and then they Co evolved and
Co adapt with their host yeah and the
engine end up is symbiotic and you're
totally to
so the stomach bacteria you rely on to
actually how your digestion actually
killed a lot of your ancestors off
before they actually go home yeah of
course it goes the other way right the
bacteria you can't live without us now
also they've given up a fair big part of
their genetic code so they can't do the
processing of raw material anymore they
have to have our chemicals do it for
them so it's really a mutualism it's
quite interesting that the bowler at the
moment because one of the reasons is so
dangerous is not killing everybody
anymore it's starting to it out ah ha
yeah when it kills everybody it's not
gonna spread right another thought about
complicated and complex which is talked
about in circles of them some of people
I work with is that in general a
complicated system will be embedded in a
complex system you know let's take for
instance a 1950 style command and
control assembly line factory yeah
that's you know a high example of a
complicated artifact and yet for it to
be meaningful it has to be embedded in a
marketplace of suppliers customers
competitors and substitutes all who are
interlocking in a co-evolutionary
network which is certainly complex one
of things I didn't see in your writings
maybe I missed them I will confess to
not have read them all I read a fair
amount was the the concept of
complicatedness embedded in complexity I
think is that if you look at it I would
say it's self evidence but we wouldn't
point it out and any-any highly
structured engineered system works
within human dynamics and human
interaction yeah I think it is actually
possible for it to be the other way
around actually though I think complex
systems can be embedded in complicated
systems you actually see that in
politics one of the dangers of the
growth of populism for example at the
moment is it starts to pray create a
level of constraint which perverts the
system yeah and so you effectively are
micro complex to deal with an
overarching political framework which is
fairly easily managed so I think is
a bit of both to be honest key things to
understand which type of system you're
in I love you for you to drill down a
little bit more into that example on
populism and how it represents a pocket
of complexity with one of the other main
frameworks I invented which is called
apex predator theory it basically says
when when anything gets commoditized you
lose frequent variety in the system the
system becomes perverse and that's where
something new can come into play so for
example I'll give you an industry
example in the political ones so IBM
dominates the early history of computing
because it repurposes particle
technology that's called exaptation in
biology that gives it a first mover
advantage it then doesn't see because it
dominates the industry that hardware is
becoming a commodity and when it finally
realizes is too late so it suffers
almost catastrophic failure because all
hardware is similarly priced it's all
pricing quality it's become a commodity
rather than the nadya VAT and then
Microsoft takes over and that lasts for
a period till software becomes a
commodity well we seem politically is
that neoliberalism effectively
homogenized the left and the right
politically and the a modernization and
the people didn't feel I had a choice
anymore so the energy costs of
extremists for the left and the right
goes radically down and we saw the same
in the Vimal republic if you go back to
the 20s and 30s it scarily similar the
trouble is what then happens is
whichever of the new predators
effectively stabilizes a new ecosystem
they're impossible to disrupt for a
significant period of time and that's
the worry I've got with populism it's
not that we ever lived in a fat free
society it's just we used to delegate
facts to experts and now we kind of like
delegate into populist for a change so
this is the merge between
destabilization and stabilization that
you see in ecosystems
I would point out though that this
breakdown the monoculture neoliberalism
also provides an opportunity for new
inventions to come forth
to my mind it's damn time that that
happens I mean neoliberalism I would
argue is forcing the human race on a
march to the cliff of ecocide right and
we need an alternative and yes well I'll
have some bad things erupt
you know neo-nazis anarchists and Tifa
etc but doesn't the same space provide
room for new theories of social
operating systems I'm going to say
something negative and positive here and
remember I was heavily into the
operation theology in the 70s so I'm
definitely opposed to neoliberalism and
that probably know more about Just War
Theory from that period than most yeah I
think the problem is that it's far easy
for the populace right to control the
system particularly when you have social
media which is what we call a number fed
feedback loop so a friend of mine in the
Mounties in Canada expressed throughout
the world he said it used to be that
every village had an idiot and it didn't
matter because we knew the leaders were
but now the idiots have banded together
on the Internet to legitimize idiocy
under that the president's the United
States that's my addition is original
you know the danger is that that sort of
perverse feedback loop when you can see
it in the manipulation of social media
means that people have very little
freedom so the right will nearly always
win on commoditization if you look at
history no we are not pessimistic on
this if I look at some of the work we're
doing at the moment is for example to
make children there's dog refers to
their own communities at a micro level
so we introduce human agency which is
both horizontally mediated and bottom-up
mediated into social media and we
increase the chances of empathy and
human interaction so I think there's a
lot of things like that we can do but it
won't be done by people gathering
together on you know Hill sizing
California and talking about how life
would be better if only people left each
other it's actually going to be done by
me a low grade low level human
interaction and systems which actually
support that yeah I think that's
absolutely right if there are new
theories on living people have to
actually start applying them not just
talk about
and certainly not just talk about them
on social media it's actually the points
on global we're about to launch should
be website sometime that's week on
looking at making global warming and
micro issue because inter at the moment
people are basically totally disabled by
global warming it's just too big too
problematic we did a big project for
example on plastics this year at
festivals that was one of a series of
projects we did to make people feel they
could take control of their environment
and make a difference and until people
feel they've got controlled with a local
level international initiatives won't
work so I think what we're trying to do
is to use social media but critically
with human mediation not algorithmic
mediation to actually change the nature
of human interaction at a micro
community level and start to get rid of
the services of the grandiose schemes
and grandiose ideas and I think that's
the solution to the growth of populism
but though sometimes the grandiose ideas
work right you know one of the things
I'm following is the extinction
rebellion over in the UK in fact I have
predicted slash suggested that the
extinction rebellion folks adopt the
tactic accept the tactic from Hong Kong
of closing down airports right do that
on a worldwide basis and you'd suddenly
get people's attention in a major way
yeah and I think but you see a myth I
mean we've actually got a project going
with those guys all right there they're
dealing with things at a local level
still alright and they're they're
basically arising if they get too
serious the state will start to move on
the mean Hong Kong is really worrying at
the moment and that the day the Chinese
moved the trip carries over the border
it's all over on one of these days they
may well do that might be over for China
though you know they should as we
both know in a complex system it is very
difficult to project very far out at the
moment China strategy is to control
natural resources and to give him when
they need to give in so I need to be
carefully it was I'm working on some
projects on this and there are directly
is alright I think there are some if you
actually get a history of humanity you
have periods of tyrannical control
before you get liberation the problem is
the planet can't afford a period of
tyrannical control which ignores global
warming we won't come out the other end
this time and so I think we've got to
think about a whole range of things the
extension rebellion is one that we've
got to actually create a lot more things
as well okay let me jump back again I
know because this is perhaps work my
interest in complex systems originated I
just really try to get to engage you on
this is the idea of complicated entities
embedded in complex seas I first
discovered complex systems thinking look
at my Amazon log it appears to be 1996
when I was at Thompson corporation now
Thomson Reuters and I relatively quickly
developed from complexity thinking the
idea of using Co evolutionary Fitness
landscapes and co-evolutionary is the
key for M&A we did like 80 acquisitions
a year mostly tactical ones but
regularly big ones up to you know three
and a half billion dollars and I found
it extraordinarily useful to think of I
didn't have the complicated complex
language at the time but the idea of
entity like Thompson now Thomson Reuters
operating in a sea of complexity which
it had by no means great control but it
did have the ability to start to
understand to some degree the nature of
this complex regime and out-compete its
major peer competitors by understanding
that it was living in a co-evolutionary
Fitness landscape rather than in some
static game which its competitors seemed
to think it was doing and we use Fitness
landscapes extensively but I think the
thing we develop too
I need is to get human metadata on the
raw data rather than just have
algorithmic metadata so for example one
of the projects we did in Pakistan we
pulled in 50,000 self interpreted micro
narratives within a week and from that
we were able to draw Fitness landscapes
which shows underlying cultural
attitudes and beliefs we still do a lot
of that work yeah if we're looking at
merger these days for example we're
often mapping the culture of the two
organizations to see where it's in
common or where it's an overlap and
we're doing a lot of that work in terms
of distributed decision support so you
present a complex in the infographic say
to 3,000 employees they all self
interpret within the same hour and we
draw a fitness landscapes which chose
dominant views but critically shows
outlier views they're from an executive
point of view you go and hunt down the
outliers and because those are the
people who are thinking differently
about the problem so I think you know
Fitness landscapes have come on away we
you know we almost there call them
narrative landscapes yeah and we're
doing a huge amount of work to generate
those in larger and larger volumes with
more and more data and the work we're
doing on children which is the ambition
we'd understand whales Columbia Malmo
Singapore and three or four pilot
projects in the Middle East is I want
every sixteen-year-old in every school
in the world to become a journalist to
their own communities on a weekly or
monthly basis so we create a human
interpretation of people's day-to-day
lives which allows horizontal
integration of ideas now which informs
policy and that to me is key because
we're introducing the human metadata
element into the system run just relying
on algorithms and we've given people
agency in their own conditions very
interesting and that's certainly a
relatively unique approach least I'm not
familiar with other people doing it
anything like the scale that you are
back later I'm gonna drill down into
your sense maker software and methods
where we'll get into that more deeply
but before we go there what about other
tools for exploring the complex realm
you know one that's popular in
complexity science is you mentioned it
earlier
it sounded like with little disdain
agent-based modeling and other forms of
simulation with stochastic
I think they're very useful provided
you've got single agency and you've got
rules the trouble is most human systems
are dealing with multiple identities and
patterns based on rule based decision so
I think simulation is powerful but you
tend to get the confusion of simulation
with prediction like their predecessors
confuse correlation with causation and
some of the AI people are now actually
arguing that correlation is causation
which is deeply worrying yeah so I think
they're useful tools that Murray
gell-mann famously said and it was
interesting I turned up at a European
complexity conference and they said
would I give a keynote on why you
couldn't use agent based model is in
human systems yeah so I agreed to do it
but I didn't know everybody in the
audience just produced agent-based
modeling so it was a bit like Daniel
going into the Lions Den but I got
backed up by the other Kino to his
merrie gilma and then he famously said
that the only valid model of a human
system is a system itself so I think you
can use agent-based modeling to
understand aspects of a system and to
give you insight and clues but it
doesn't provide the sort of predictive
element that people thank for it and
it's quite interesting a lot of the
simulations a very good historically but
they've been very problematic in terms
of foresight and I would strongly agree
with you there and this was something
when I talk to people about agent-based
modeling in social systems is that they
should never take any given trajectory
of the system as an exemplar for
prediction however one of the things
that I do find very interesting is that
the statistics on the ensemble of
trajectories is very interesting right
it tells you whether you're in a
Gaussian space or a fat-tailed space you
know what
Nassim Taleb would call extremists tan
or mediocrity and and their agent based
models can be very very powerful and you
know it's clear that we have to manage
in Gaussian distributed spaces very
differently than we do in fat tail
spaces yeah and I think I mean I use a
Gaussian Pareto distinction in terms of
what we call the trigger from
dissipation anticipatory triggers yeah
so if you're in the pareto will the best
you can do is trigger human beings to a
heightened state of alert yeah when they
need to look at something and that's
what we did on counterterrorism for
DARPA so you can't actually predict or
model a terrorist outrage but you can
use AI tragically human beings to a
heightened state of alert when a
terrorist outrage is more likely and
we're currently moving that technology
across intact to actually create a
trigger when the plausibility of abuse
in an elderly care home with time so
that's called switch to anticipatory
triggers so I think the Prater gaseum I
spend a lot of time trying to explain
that to executives without help by talib
on this by the way
I think Talia does block more people
with more nobel prizes and anybody else
he calls me a idiot
okay yeah I uh nan 'red to be blocked by
talent because he's got this very narrow
perspective in which you know he's
almost like a demonic Old Testament
preacher and he would take a compliment
by the way right I know I'm I don't
because I actually think the world needs
people who are thinking differently to
collaborate and talk with each other and
recognize differences rather than try
and create one one method is unique so
the moment as far as I can tell it is
part of the problem not part of the
solution I mean got people like DDA
University of Zurich are actually much
better in that field so talents got into
the producing a popular book every 18
months Trek and there's too many people
doing that in management science and
even worse actually and I do like some
of his thinking it's very important
particularly from his earliest book
fooled by randomness and his book is
brilliant I tell everyone read that
don't read the rest
worse than become putting out a popular
book every two months he's now a 50
tweets a day Twitter personality and the
attractor for that particular role is
not good
he's also got several same personalities
which jump on you if you dare criticize
him it's quite amusing and he also has
some non fake but sort of pact dog
people would follow him along I like the
fattest Fat Tony that's obviously him
right for instance that's quite
interesting
another item I'd like to hop into on
something that I saw in some of your
writings is the chaotic regime I think
you gave 9/11 as an example briefly and
ok good I think there were an agreement
there because I would say it was very
briefly a chaotic state we learned very
very quickly for instance that we were
not gonna have maybe we quickly learned
that 10,000 terrorists had not missed
our screen right that maybe there was 20
or maybe there was a hundred and so this
was not a existential risk to the
American Way of life despite the fact
that that narrative was sold politically
which took us down a bunch of bad roads
and I think there was some fundamental
mistakes made if you can trust 9/11 I
spend a lot of my time studying this
scene 13 time with Clinton's original
al-qaida team with the DARPA programs
it's kind of like part the problem was
that there was no need to turn all the
aircraft that caused an economic
disaster if you actually look at the
contrast with 7/7 because Britain has
had the Blitz and multiple terrorist
bombings everybody went on the
Underground the next day to make a point
yeah and that that's one of the ways I
mean I've done a lot of work on this and
it's almost like another podcast to talk
about how your reversal is a lot by
using your own population to give you a
symmetric advantage against terrorism
but coming back to the chaos points
I mean chaos was temporarily there and I
think chaos is always temporary and
that's where people get it wrong so it's
the state of the absence of constraints
now ironically in physics that's a low
energy gradient in human systems it's a
high energy gradient because human
systems are open so constraints happen
very quickly and very naturally so some
of the stuff we do onto stupid industry
and support for example is to
deliberately remove constraints but that
takes a lot of energy to do it so that
we can actually get the sort of
statistical framework framing that you
can get with Fitness landscapes for
example yeah so chaos is temporary it's
not permanent you don't want to fall
into it you want to enter it
deliberately most of the time we're
dealing with gradations of complexity
now do you have some guidance so let's
take go back to the night I'll have an
example and there'll be other examples
I suspect for instance that the next big
financial reverse will be bigger than
2008 what's gonna is going to look
chaotic for a while
do you have any guidance for executives
business decision-makers etc for how to
deal with a truly deeply chaotic system
great constraints I mean that that's
what we build in distributed decision
support systems we just run one on
career which I can't talk about too much
right it's where you present an
ambiguous assessment of the situation
literally to five or six thousand people
who interpret it and you look at the
Fitness landscapes within seconds and
you look at dominant patterns of
minority patterns so you can find new
ways of creating constraint for new
forms of exit but that requires
companies to build those systems before
the crisis comes and I say you build
networks for ordinary purpose you can
activate for extraordinary need variant
could you go maybe retrofit that to 911
what could have had in place to deal
with something like 911 well first of
all they could have actually not played
politics I mean there was actually a
presidential that which Gore would
assign possibly to have f-14s in
permanent patrol of proportion to New
York so we can't new the strategy on
line 11 we just in no one but it was
considered democratic paranoia about Al
Qaeda if you go back to the time so I
think one of the issues is we need more
continuity on civil issues and less
political influence on civil issues in
that respect but distributed networks of
people from multiple backgrounds is key
I mean there was a big roundness for the
9/11 report came out I mean I went on
the hill with Dennis and other people
around it and I remember we said the
last thing you should do is to combine
the agencies because it will reduce
cognitive diversity in the system what
you need is the ability to summarize
agency perspectives and non agency
perspectives in real time not through
consultation and that's kind of like
where we're building systems but to do
that you have to power people a bitch
''u 8 into the youth for the system so
when the crisis comes you can get the
fitness
KACE have more that's instantly that's
good you probably know the no free lunch
theorem of day walpert from Santa Fe
Institute basically says there's no
possibility of one best search algorithm
that you always have to understand the
domain you're in to craft a search
algorithm this strikes me is a very good
lesson on how to think about you know a
chaotic regime it does we use multiple
human agents as well as algorithms and
that's key humans and abstractions
computers find that very difficult I
mean art comes before language in human
evolution and we think the evolutionary
function of art was to allow us to see
novel or unexpected connections but also
to assess their relative possibilities
yeah so human beings are actually good
in chaos we've all for it but you have
to Detroit and we evolve the collective
decision-making not for individual
decision making yeah very good that's
very true and still a human superpower
was a very large gap between what a eyes
can do and what humans can do I actually
think it's a permanent and less and yeah
I did a big lecture on this recently I
said the problem is that in Singapore
the problem at the moment is they may
exceed US intelligence because we're
currently working on meeting them
halfway we're reducing human
intelligence the rigid processes and
structured approaches and you know AI
will always be better other than humans
and may no I do a fair amount of work in
the AI space and I do think it's quite
likely they're not certain that
eventually within 50 years they will
have artificial general intelligence
ha's which will have those same broad
integrative capabilities of humans do
and then that's when things get very
interesting yeah and unless you can
build in you got to build in sense and
you go to build an abstraction and I
don't see any sign of that to them not
in the deep learning world this is
something that I come back to again and
again in my talks is that much of
the public has now been convinced that
artificial intelligence basically equals
deep learning and deep learning is
rather just one school of AI currently
the dominant one but there are others
you know symbolic AI still exists for
instance guys like Gary Marcus it's like
been Gertz all Josh Tenenbaum at MIT
there are many people still working on
much more abstract intractable and
transparent approaches they are and I
believe they win the end or likely to go
further than the deep learning guys I
think that go further I think Keon is
some of our work at moment is is
building is actually focusing on
building the training data sense which I
know is the type of deep learning but
it's also things from the symbolic stuff
I think people don't pay enough
attention to that yeah or they work with
limited sets but I think this is a
developing field the silicon ultimately
zinc-carbon when it comes down to it
yeah the other thing of course that my
own actual experimental work is on is
that humans learn way faster than
computers do today right a you know to
learn to play go well took you know
hundreds of billions of games played
you know the very top chess players
probably only played thirty thousand
games in his whole life you can wipe out
the Google goat face simply by changing
the room it would take some going to
accommodate where as a human being would
accommodate instantly you can change the
size of the board right the classically
humans play go on different sized boards
but alphago would had to be trained on
one specific sized board and if you
change the board size even by one at its
capabilities felt way up me I think that
comes back to the fact commands around
the local digital it comes back so that
I mean too few people miss there's three
things that people need at the moment
one is they should be trained in ethics
we shouldn't be allowing anybody to be a
software engineer these days without
basic training and ethics from quite a
young age because they're scary
the other one is aesthetics if you don't
understand
the sentence in human evolution you're
never gonna get an AI a system which
really helps to much aesthetics that's
interesting I have never heard that the
ethics of course lots of this discussion
about how that should become mandatory
more deeply baked in I'd love to hear
you say more about why you think
aesthetics is important because its
essence is about abstractions so yes a
music cannot come before language in
human evolution so human language
evolves from abstractions and the
evolutionary argument for this is it
allows rapid ex active thinking so the
ability to rapidly repurpose things is
actually comes from abstraction so and
it's also a matter of you get higher
empathy in abstraction than you doing
the material things like parable form
stories for example provide better moral
guidance and values or principles and
partly because they define a negative
not the positive so an ability to
understand or appreciate beauty is
actually going to make you a much more
effective decision maker as a human and
then if you just confine yourself to the
material now wonderful FedEx is a subset
of a broader category of abstraction and
metaphor you know as we know from the
work of Lake off and others our language
and our thinking is way more
metaphorical than we often realize it is
and Deakins simple its species finally
kill jumps give you use of language off
thank God one of my favorite books I
love that Deacon's symbolic species not
as well appreciated as it should be
people go out and read that book it's
about the subsequent books where he
partly plagiarized other people's stuff
for it but symbolic species is brilliant
yeah the second but the book after was
unfortunately just not to my taste at
all you can read opt really into other
books I can give you the references
Herman I'm not gonna bother I didn't
even like it in the for in that form
Tiger the truth okay but I think that
that's the important one if you and you
know the other good idea that the modern
finds epigenetics and the way we
describe we now know that the Cain is
Miz right so we know the mechanism for
cultural inheritance within a single
generation yeah
and all of that we need people designing
tools for there's a thing in the
archeology called material engagement
theory which has identified the way in
which tools have actually triggered
significant cognitive and physical
changes in humans the danger is if we
continue down our current route today I
work actually gonna reach use human
intelligence and capability rather than
augmented we probably already are right
in certainly many areas yeah some plague
in the states is a good example of that
yeah as I say you know if I'm being
really satirical on this line though
this is unfair but I'll make the extreme
point most of our modern AI work has
been done by people who live on the west
coast to a misogynist programmers who
take on rounds seriously after puberty
yeah and that's quite scary when you
start thinking and also a
disproportionate number not a majority
but way higher than in the general
population are on the autistic spectrum
as well yeah there and we're increasing
that sometimes when I'm being as cynical
as I can be well not quite as cynical as
I can because I can be very cynical my
description of the West Coast culture
where it's trending to is armies of
autistics led by Psychopaths
yeah that's why you need ascetics as
well as ethics ethics can be hanged
yeah I think yeah it's basics on the
evolutionary biology we should be
teaching engineers yes and I think
fortunately because of the congruence
between deep neural learning Nets and
biology there is actually a significant
increase in learning about biology and
philosophy of mind is coming back
together with cochineal neuroscience but
it's also scary and I would say that
I've been working with one medical group
on epidemiology in the States and I'm
not allowed to mention evolution because
it's a controversial theory oh dear and
there's a very high percentage of young
earth creationists in the IT community
and there's a lot of them actually think
we're in the simulation and they don't
worry about global warming because I
think we can reboot it and I'm not
joking they genuinely think that I
believe there's more simulation as than
there are young earthers
in the technology world this is between
the two to be honest mmm would that be a
whole other podcasts
I'd have to say because I got very
nuanced theories about the simulation
hypothesis in general because I my
metaphysical my minimalist metaphysical
program I reject it however we can't
reject it is logically impossible
unfortunately yeah oh that's neat I mean
as a concerned realist of them because
they kind of alien 12 you against you on
that one
yeah well I'm also that's why I say I'm
a metaphysical minimalist of the naive
realist variety so I think we probably
touch grounds there but on the other
hand I also look at low low low
probabilities and can't quite roll it
out I on the other hand believe you can
rule out
boström etc who say it's almost certain
we're in a simulation right I think
that's total and pernicious horseshit
and as you say leads people to think
about some very bad things we've talked
about some very esoteric things here
this has been a very interesting and
rich discussion I'd like to turn it a
little bit back towards the more
hands-on and practical some of our
audience our managers and executives and
entrepreneurs what could you say about
some takeaways for people who are in
management positions about different
management styles and ways of dealing
with their organization that you're
Kineton oriented approach might suggest
okay two things one is the value of
Kevin is it basically says there isn't
one start of the edition so seven
leadership doesn't work universally
draconian leadership works in some
contexts so you need to be multifaceted
in the way that you lead and you need to
distribute the leadership the other
thing is in attitudes matter more
because attitudes early indicators so
I'll give the example of stuff we're
currently working on cybersecurity where
we're measuring attitudes to
cybersecurity not compliance and we do
that by effectively presented an
infographic of a major cyber security
breach we get everybody in the workforce
to interpret it in real-time including
their own situational assessment and
their own micro story about the future
and from that we draw a fitness
landscape which identifies the attitudes
of your employees to cybersecurity and
allow you to notice the system has
called more stories like this fewer
stories like that in real time so
recognizing and the whole point about
can having is different styles work in
different domains and recognizing the
attitudes whether it's the security to
ethics to customer purchasing behavior
yeah virtually anything is more
important to get the early wheat signals
of a dispositional state an attitudinal
site than it is to try and imply
causality or to try and define an
outcome so basically I expand the search
space first yeah it's interesting I mean
there's forecasting and bad casting so
forecasting predicts projects forward
back casting says what would we like to
get and close the gaps what we do is
call site casting which gives me
wonderful visual metaphors with trout
fishermen yeah you can around in the
present to see what's possible before
you risk the future very interesting
another theme that comes that I could
leave took out of what I read of your
work
is that you certainly encourage dissent
and diversity which I strongly agree
with in fact in corporate America
amazing I could never got thrown out of
there but my role was often bomb-thrower
and protector of the Centers but at the
same time if one's trying to make an
organization work you have to manage the
signal to the noise you know not all
opinions are equal how do you encourage
dissent and diversity without being
overwhelmed by Krang curry I think
that's two or three things so first of
all I say we need to shift from
homogeneity which is associated with
things like learning organization and
most about Joe
I just believe everybody should have the
same values the same girls and the other
objectives because that destroys that
make systems non resilient yeah into
what I call coherent heterogeneity
so you have to have you have to have
differences which can come together in
different ways so for example on Welsh
if you meet anybody from Wales the first
thing I asked it was where you come from
because we have to establish somewhere
which we can have a fight with you yeah
we'll get it down to a valley eventually
yeah and there's asbestos incidentally
who cheated wrote B with the referees
they bribe for him I'm sorry I'm from
Cardiff but when the English come were
Welsh of course right now that's it
that's the example of coherent helps
regionality know what we can do with the
attitude mapping I mentioned earlier is
we can measure the level of cognitive
and behavioral Dover's in your
organization and we can identify outlier
groups who you should pay attention to
rather than getting drowned out by
middle management and that's the key
thing that comes out to the attitudinal
mapping yeah you have to maintain though
versity in the system but you have to
maintain though the city which isn't
freakish I survived an IBM by top cover
when my top cover went it was all over
you actually need to get around those
four the problems by providing the
interactions between dissonant groups
and yet there still has to be some way
to sort out you know what is useful
diversity and what is just crank or your
cupboard nest
that's what we deal with with with the
conflict space so I present a situation
I'll get everybody in the workforce to
interpret it I'll then get dominant
views but I'll get fifteen or sixteen
clusters about live views
I let the clusters run a small safe to
fail experiment and we see what works
and that's the key concert resolution to
us so I have in fact we I do what's
called a shallow dive into chaos I'm
moving to an unconstrained system to
actually statistically map onto a
landscape and I know which ideas are
coherent enough to explore even though
they're different which are actually
nonsense and the test for coherence is
something we do a lot of and that's a
key concept in philosophy of science so
going back to an earlier point of view
we know that most evolutionary theory is
wrong
because we keep discovering new things
but it is coherent to the facts whereas
young Earth Creationism is incoherent to
the facts so it's not worthy of
exploring so a lot of our work has been
to produce objective quantifiable
measures of coherence within an
organization so you know which
dissidents are worth talking to and
which I
so that's how a relatively simple
process I would love to hear more about
that in thinking about operating systems
of the future with some collaborators in
mind some have been on our podcast
recently coherence is a key concept I'd
love to hear what you can tell us about
how to measure coherence okay so let's
take my example of a policy situation so
you're thinking have taken over a
company you're moving into a new area so
you put that together as an infographic
like a facebook news page where you've
got dissenting views common views you
know the sort of thing people are used
to simulating you present that to your
whole workforce in one hour without the
chance for collusion ask them to write a
micro situational assessment then we do
the human metadata which is non-game
herbal human interpretation which gives
us quant data from which we can draw
Fitness landscapes and we finish off
with a micro scenario how do you think
this will develop that means the minute
the hour is over we can present the
executive with a fitness landscape which
shows clusters of effectively coherent
ideas and then we can go to those and
give them some cash to do a small
experiment so that's a few relatively
simple so you can essentially do a
statistical analysis on the cluster
statistics of the narratives and if
there isn't much clustering then you
could say your coherence is low if it's
tightly clutched around a single or
small number of points you can say it's
highly coherent may be overly coherent
it's also very dangerous be sure I'm
going this diversity so we got metrics
on this yeah you want there's a level of
dissent you want to have permanently
present within the organization and
think Buster and I did before he died
was to measure the degree of
inefficiency a system needed in order to
be effective and do you have anything
you can throw explicate on and how one
would think about what's the right
amount of diversity suppose it's up
situationally dependent that links him
with apex predators so if you've got a
stable ecosystem you don't need so much
diversity if the system is telling to
destabilize you need to introduce that
increased diversity very quickly that's
in an evolutionary computation which is
my home academic field that's what we
call the difference between exploitation
and exploration
in stable times you want to do more
exploitation in unstable times you must
do more exploration and then the
secondary work we did which was
originally the counterterrorism work is
when to you and this is where we produce
human mediated training datasets because
we need executive buy-in is you need to
use our to trigger when you need to
switch between the two is by the time
you see it normally it will be too late
because I use a is to determine that
could you say more about that what we do
is we build training data sets based on
for example multiple counter-terrorist
examples in the past using fragmented
observations which are available before
her and we use those to produce similar
things and now happenin you need to pay
attention but because the executives
have been involved in the construction
the training data sets they actually
believe it is not a black box and you
know I million decisions to build all my
life black boxes generally don't work
when there's a lot at risk politically
so traceability and understand there's a
net mechanism the decision-makers one of
the big missing things in our at the
moment and we're doing longer and of
course hopping back to our earlier
discussion that's where symbolic AI has
a very significant advantage over neural
AI right it's not necessarily a black
box the ability to look at whatever
level of detail you want on the
reasoning or even have it generate
scripts that explain its reasoning our
feasible well that's not feasible at
least not yet with respect to neural AI
yeah I think I think you need to
anticipate three triggers I mean I've
had these debates and I have them in
Boston not so long I was learning
Cambridge not so long ago as I still
think we're not the the AI industry is
is trying to remove is trying to reduce
from the increased human agency we think
the really filter thing is to increase
human agency then the AI will get better
could you give an example of that well
that's an example of for example what
I'm just giving you example but we use
our workforce to assess the situation
that creates training data sets that you
can then check enjoy I systems yeah so
that's one way the other is traceability
yeah several things like that okay I'm
gonna hop to another concept that I
believe I took out of your writings
which is it in an unordered system
causality cannot be determined
I'd like to point out there is this
interesting and somewhat slippery
concept of downward causality in complex
systems bring it down to a tangible
example the chemicals in the cells of a
body are highly constrained by the fact
that they are evolved to live in a
tightly coupled package of chemical
homeostasis which has to exist on a
second-by-second bankís and there's
tremendously constrains the degrees of
freedom of those chemicals so it seems
to me that if one thinks about this
concept of downward causality there's a
very large amount of constraint that one
couldn't basically extract about any
given entity within the complex system
that was the problem making nearly a my
point about populous and the danger
about pocket is amiss increases it
downwards constraints and reduces
freedom of action until it breaks
catastrophic so that that means in fact
if the system has become ordered not
complex because the constraint level is
so high and this also the problem is
granularity you can't go from a chemical
reaction to a human system because a
human system is is an order of magnitude
greater of several dozen magnitude
greater in terms of uncertainty linkages
constraints and everything else
yes related multiple levels of emergence
between chemicals and human body but
nonetheless the behavior of those
chemicals is very highly constrained by
being part of this real time chemical
homeostasis which is used to support the
entity itself and the result is actually
quite powerful I mean the chemicals
restrict the way we can make decisions
in the brain individually but you can't
take an aggregate approach to this but
it's how you reach a human system you've
got so many micro constraints yeah and
macro enabling constraints that the
system is actually as much higher level
of in predictability than the low level
stuff yep that's good I like that
next topic you've suggested multi
hypotheses I didn't see any reference to
the limited amount of data
I read about red team's episode my
favorite management techniques
does that fit into your methods at all
yeah a sembly way we did in Singapore is
to create an alternative to red teams by
the problem with red the red teams are
truly independent they work yeah if they
came from the same cultural background
it can be problematic so we have a
technique called ritual descent in which
we'll fragment into multiple small micro
red teams looking at decision-making but
overall being red teams had a lot of
value you can't do it say just with an
s2 challenge in military terms because
that's who's being fasted construction
that plan you have always thought there
ought to be a consulting firm that all
they do is do red teams for companies
but such a thing exists there's quite a
few we work with a couple and I'm doing
a project this week where we I can't say
who width right that we're actually
going to affect to the red team a
corporate purpose statement by finding
multiple ways to destroy it the way it
can be perverted in practice I'm gonna
really enjoy doing that you know once I
conceptualize the concept of a red team
consulting for our my said damn I wish
I'd taken that road in life that might
have been a shitload of fun the other
thing is I mean what we're doing there
is I'm working with native experts so if
you understand the way narrative is
constructed it's fairly easy to
introduce retroviruses into narrative by
which people's stories destroy
themselves yeah that gives me to my next
topic actually narrative narrative
appears to be central to at least your
later work right could you talked about
what you mean by narrative and what is
its position in your work Palani said we
always know more than we can say and I
extended that said we can always say
more than we can write them so if you
look at narrative in humans right if you
if you want to look at what's really
going on
what you want is the watercooler stories
the stories of the school gate the
stories of the checkout queue in the
supermarket because those actually
determine people's attitudes rather than
responses in focus groups to
questionnaires or imposing yeah where
you're asking explicit questions so the
work we do is to actually gather those
day-to-day micro narratives but
critically we give people the power to
to put their own narratives rather than
have interpreted by tech search by
algorithm or by experts which means we
can scale to very high volume very
quickly so the concepts ourself
interpreted we tend to use the words
observations as punish these days micro
observations micro narratives we try and
avoid the story would the key thing
about narrative is it carries ambiguity
with it
it's halfway house between say the black
cab driver in London who just knows
where to drive it has spent two and a
half years learning every route and the
map user so the map user has got
explicit data but they can't out-compete
with a taxi driver but narrative sort of
sits halfway out and the halfway house
between it so for example some of the
work we did in the US was on narrative
enhanced doctrine if you put HTML links
to real stories into best practice
documents people actually have a richer
context they know more how to interpret
the data and actually narrative based
search will give you better access to
documents and so on so that's kind of
like a work is micro narrative micro
scenarios mapping narratives to
understand culture but critically self
interpretation of all that narrative not
machine or expert interpretation as I
was doing my research I dug into your
sense maker software platform I gotta
tell you your website sucks and
describing it you know there was
essentially nothing that gave me much of
an idea what it was but fortunately
being a good Googler I did find some
great resources written elsewhere one
called making sense of complexity using
sense maker as a research tool by Dave
Snowden's and some others I don't think
it's been published yet but it's a draft
vailable on the internet I'd recommend
that the people want to know about sense
maker and also a company called Vico ve
Co inclusive business scan product
actually had some pretty nice
descriptions from a practical
perspective of how one might use sense
maker and it describes it well and in a
less academic way than making sense of
complexity paper so with all that said
is pretty
tell us about sense maker okay we now we
need to improve the website by the way
we just created a new website with what
we call pulses so that's sort of easy
entry into the field so that's looking
at cyber security culture well being
agile as very rapid sort of uses a sense
make advances and attitudes in that
domain the best way I've explained is to
think about an employee satisfaction
survey so we used to get these all the
time in IBM and you get this question
which says does your manager consult you
on a regular basis scale of 0 not at all
10 all the time and you knew exactly
what answer they wanted yeah and it was
a big annual thing people wrote reports
consultants analyzed it nobody want to
do we take a very different approach
we'll go to say 10% of the workforce
every month and we'll ask a non
hypothesis question so for example what
story would you tell your best friend if
they were off the job in your workplace
and then the individual having either
spoken that story taking a picture or
typed or some combination then self
interprets a story on to a series of
triangles and one of the triangles for
example as in this story that managed
the behavior was altruistic assertive
analytical so we're balancing off three
positive qualities
now we wired people up for this what it
does is it triggers a shift come what's
got a little autonomic to novelty
receptive processing what Carmen called
from thinking faster thinking slow so
you don't know what answers expected
obvious who force you to think more
deeply about the subject in a few
position dots on six triangles you've
added 18 metadata points to the original
narrative and that's what we analyzed
and then the original narrative gets
carried with the statistical data to
effectively provide an explanation of
what the statistical patterns mean and
yeah it is heart that's what says
speaker does yeah I loved it I could
spend about three hours digging into it
and particularly the Triads what you
described as two triangles I think they
are actually called triads and the oft
where and we're not talking about
Chinese organized crime here people
we're talking about kind of a three
dimensional way of positioning your view
about something in a constrained three
space struck me as extraordinarily
useful and might even be a
transformational tool in many domains
you know one that came to mind is it
could actually be a great replacement
for political polling yeah we need to be
careful we talk about you but we've
actually done some work on that we may
even create a new company for it is you
need to keep that separate I was
thinking of one which to wanted to
create a de novo political party which
somebody ought to do doing a lot of work
with something like sense maker might be
a very interesting way to find out what
shared values there really are in our
society if somebody wants to approach us
we're already doing projects on that and
we're very keen to extend that work so
we're trying to find this is the
extinction about another stuff so what
are people got in common yeah you need
surface presentation and that's what
sense make it pulls out so certainly in
political use it can be used by for
example field workers to gather stories
from people and then people self
interpret their own stories so you not
reliant on interpretation what we've
done in social work for example is
social workers you know capture stories
before and after a visit but then the
people who are their clients can tell
and interpret their own story so they're
not reliant on the experts to mediate it
and that was the point I was making
earlier on the children's stuff that
sense makers serve 16 year olds actors
ethnographers to their community we
gather quantity large volume very
quickly which is almost impossible for
people to manipulate but they can
manipulate Facebook and Twitter and the
other thing that I believe I read in
some of the materials if not it comes
you know by extrapolation is that if you
use self-scoring the turnaround can be
very rapid you know going back to you
know your description of those goddamn
corporate surveys right everybody wastes
two hours filling the damn things out
then the stupid-ass company that the
company you work for hired to do
it spends three or four months
tabulating the data and running some
bogus statistics and management doesn't
even hear about it for six months while
presumably using fence maker and
self-scoring you could have the results
in hours you can have the results
instantly actually I mean another
example is his 360 360 is a major gained
issue every year yeah it value as if I'm
I said of a website and IBM where you
could nominate to be somebody's third
quartile responder which Shh I've got
pissed off with me over we do something
different so you're a leader you
nominate X number of people every time
they interact with you they record the
interaction they index it onto six
trials which have all positive
leadership qualities and then you see
how they see you and that's a real-time
mechanism and it's descriptive not
evaluative so you can sit down with you
guys and say look an old altruist an old
analytical assertive very little
altruism how do I get more of this
rather than the sort of evaluative thing
at the end of every year great and I
ain't gotta say people I endorsed at
least in principle sense maker based on
what I could extract out of it and I am
pretty good at understanding these kinds
of complex tools and I would love to get
my hands on it at some point use it on a
real project give me the compass that
the postage makes are designed to make
it really easy step three J
pre-configure just go run them that
would be cool so we talked about what I
know so far about your work up till now
what if I miss let's start with that
I think the work is about how do people
make better decisions like where I came
from that was my original thesis four
years back yeah the big stuff we're now
doing like the children the world
project they talked about the work we're
about to start on global warming to
understand how we can make people aware
of the issue at a local level we've got
a big project running on understanding
abuse in partnerships and then using the
narrative as a therapeutic device to
hook people at the narcissistic control
so my own direction now is focused on
democracy on education here on how do we
create a more humane society and the
conditions of control restraint that
means that a lot of the cognitive side
of this is coming forward and we just
did this big retreat in Whistler last
year we created a
new approach design thinking based on
complexity which is about to launch that
was in over three retreats this year
we're working at decisions and
perception that will come out in May the
year after that we're looking at meaning
and identity so what I'm really doing is
to take a natural science approach to
social systems rather than the case
based inductive approach and for me
that's critical my originally degree
with physics and philosophy that we've
taught we'd have a contempt for social
science from to completely different
disciplines and I'm really shaking it
off since you know so using natural
science to inform human polity is kinda
like where we are sounds like you're
moving away from the focus on corporate
America and our world corporations and
moving more into the social and
political spheres it's a nice to meet
our cognitive edge we just got new
investors and so the commercial side of
that is building yeah and that's a big
element to what goes on and I inform
that I'm the R&D hub for that now rather
than the execution but you actually find
the R&D and the big social projects has
commissioned application I mean the
stuff we did on counterterrorism has
huge commercial application you know but
I'm more interested in creating it when
I used to say for my grandchildren I
thought my children though I think I
maybe hope to create a safer space for
me isn't that ridiculous I mean I used
to there's a 1% chance of a social
collapse in my lifetime when I was 30
right now I'm 65 and I it's 20% and
instead of having an expected life
expectancy of 65 years I have a life
expectancy of 25 years what is wrong
with this story right we're not on the
same ways and with the same age pretty
much now sort of between the two between
you know de novo work on social systems
and say corporate work there's the world
of existing social science
have you found interest in practicing
social scientists say in the university
context in your approach
there's thousands of switch alright so
complexities was kind of like ignored I
think the problem you got with social
science is a lot of them is that they're
in very tight sort of debates say
between modernism and post-modernism
between social because
vism and critical realism and to my mind
there's there's debates a fairly
meaningless
I called them horseshit yeah well I
think there's some interesting things in
them but you've got to be careful I
think and I was it a cultural evolution
society thing you know Danbury recently
yeah and I raised some research outside
the field of the people there yeah I
said you know Andy Clark work on
extending cognition bye-bye bang and and
as the lecturer said yes I know about
that but if it's true it invalidates 50
years of experimental psychology so I'm
not taking it seriously but I think
Matt's a troubled social science has
become highly self referential and
highly focused on postal production
because you've got to produce X papers
per year to get keep Tonia and so the
chance to own your ideas you really have
to do that inside of academic life for
the man or have tenure yeah even in
Tonia there's still the huge pressure on
that yeah and then at you you didn't
quite say it but I'll say it altogether
too much of social science today is
politics by other means
yeah and I think yeah I wrote a blog
post on this I said you know natural
science gives us explanation and
prediction social science can give us
explanation but not prediction if you
actually say your social science gives
you a predictive capacity which is
almost management sciences then you're a
pseudoscience and then there's a fourth
alternative which is what we do is use
natural science as a constraint on what
you can do in social systems well that's
that's very interesting actually could
you elaborate on that a little bit let's
let's bring it back to the more mundane
exactly running a company I teach this
to senior executives there are some
basic facts we know so we know for
example inattentional blindness right so
if you give a bunch of radiologists
about your x-rays on one of the x-rays
you put your picture of a gorilla which
is 48 times the size of a cancer module
then 83% of radiologists wouldn't see it
even though their eyes scan it so a
natural science approach says right
that's the case so we've got to find the
17% we can't train people not to do that
we need to create systems which find the
17% before they talk to the 83% and
that's what we do when I mentioned it
earlier about math sense yeah
paying something out the whole workforce
to you find out a lot of communities we
go talk with them so that's anything
right we know they're complex adaptive
system you haven't got linear causality
therefore you stop talking about the
future and you focus on mapping the
present so what natural size gives you
is his tight focus on what's actually
possible as opposed to what most
management science has been doing for
the past 40 years which is a series of
fads each of which claims to have found
the solution to the problem but like the
universe and everything each of which
the last three or four years then dies
yeah because there's no scientific base
to any of them they're all fictional
constructs and indeed if you go back at
backtest them you find most of them
don't back down at all and people love
it it's like I mean myers-briggs for
example is using all corporate monitors
being proved to be a pseudoscience more
times than I care to imagine but it will
carry on using it not so profitable for
the consultant right you know that's
that's the driver to my mind of most of
this management faddish 'no SPECT i
generally tell people when they ask me
what do i read i say almost anything
except books about management right
right I saw a Forbes article earlier on
today about dodging agile was the future
of everything and I based the other two
coming to it said I could have written
exactly the same thing about every other
management movement the last 20 years
and the author actually wrote some of
them so why should we believe this is
another fad is not based in anything we
know from science I mean each of these
fads had some applicability I mean they
are definitely some situations where
right sizing was a very valid strategy
but it's you know no free lunch theory
so there's nothing wrong with business
process reengineering till it became Six
Sigma exactly right that's the that's
the no free lunch theorem there is no
one answer to every problem you have to
understand your domain first I mean I
did a program in IBM which actually it
was a three month experiment we proved
astrology was more accurate than
myers-briggs in predicting team behavior
and for some reason they got upset with
me and the point I made is if you get
people to think about themselves as
different it has utility so you might as
well use astrology because then nobody
will take it seriously but they'll use
it properly but either way that didn't
go down well you get four twelve tribes
for free right you did maybe that's all
that matters that you have twelve tribes
not what
maybe scary as well alright if you go to
core astrology then there goes work very
well as deputies for Aries Victorians
don't it has been true all my life I'm
really scared by them I love it the
total horseshit but sometimes right you
know broken clock is Right twice a day
right then this is sixty coincidences
indeed indeed well David Dave I should
say this has been a wonderfully
informative and interesting and
stimulating and fun conversation glad
you could come on the gym rut show and
I'd love to have you back on again
sometime in the future we always have to
come production services and audio
editing by Stanton media lab music by
Tom Muller at modern space music calm
[Music]
you