via cafe takes place the same time every
week Tuesday at 11:30 Pacific Standard
Time today's question is what is
preventing me from making the transition
now we Co crafted this question last
week at the end of our last conversation
was it kind of went into it nicely so
the I the idea cafe everyone takes has a
chance to take five and up to five
minutes to share you don't need to use
the whole five minutes that's just the
limit you can also pass and just be part
of the discussion at the end
David's here but the Vice is still
getting situated welcome David and I
guess I'll each take our a chance to
share what is preventing me from making
the transition now I must reduce the
time to three minutes instead of five
minutes but I think if somebody wants to
take five minutes that is there welcome
to and otherwise most of us end up
taking less than it for game B it seems
because we want to get to the discussion
piece so I'm also just gonna wait for a
raise of hands instead of muting and
unmuting everyone once one first person
then I'll unmute everybody at the end so
who would like to start I'm always
willing to start if nobody else is real
simple I'm just a narcissist and I I
tried it I know rule Omega and I love it
but I I never actually do it I'm too
tied up in my own thoughts Thank You
Anthony would anyone like to go next
it's not I will go eric is also joined
so their first time with unlimited six
I don't know Eric also I feel like you
might be um echo Mina as well because I
could hear me once you came on and I
have headphones on so it's not mine but
um I'm gonna in yes I will share now as
no one else but up there hand in this
moment we won't throw
Eric in right as soon as he starts I
don't even know what's preventing me
from transitioning now I feel like I'm
simultaneously doing everything I can
possibly be doing within my own capacity
to create my version of the of the the
transition which is also like my
personal for like like practicing rule
Omega doing the meditation doing and
also trying to figure out how this big
project and they keep evolving where
they will eventually meet and I know
that that is the case but allowing the
process and having faith in the process
that even if I don't quite see how they
meet yet they are as they they reach out
and closer to each other I know what's
what's stopping me it's my communication
style is not having other people to work
with and somewhat not figuring out the
pieces in me that stopped me from
working with other people on my project
and inviting other people and truly
bringing it back to Ground Zero and
rebuilding it it together but what that
looks like what is it I'm trying to
build and even being able to communicate
that is is a difficult piece for me but
it's I think a lot of what stops
everyone the resources not having the
money not having the time not having the
people not having a lot of the resources
that are needed to create a project from
from the base and I think that we can
find Omni wind solutions to that and
that is what I am currently working on
is how do we not just create our own
individual projects but how do we create
a meta project that helps all of our
individual projects what does that look
like and what does what can it offer us
as individuals what can it offer our
projects and what can we offer the
greater the greater peace in creating
the the software that helps us
facilitate that which is what the idea
cafe was supposed to meld into but now
truly figuring out how to bring it back
to zero and how did it start co-creating
what are the values you want to create
together what is the features we want in
a collaboration platform and and that is
what is stopping me is everything and
nothing because it is happening into its
own in its own way in time so
I'm done who else would like to go David
only coast a bed was half a second
before breath okay so I'd say that the
and you think I'm you saying I'm upside
down okay okay I think I'm the only
upside down to you I'm not sure what
anyway
I'll say that the I would I would argue
that many of the people that I see on
this call and many of the people that I
see on the game B discussion board are
actually in transition the game B we're
already in it so so there's something of
the question I'll modify the question of
what stops me from going all-in and what
stops me from going all-in is the
thought that right now if I go all-in
and fail that's it I have my one shot
and I don't hit have confidence that I
have a way to go all-in in a way that
allows that shot to count and the way
that I would want it to I'm starting to
get a better sense that that's that's
that's possible but I'm not yet seeing
enough congruent to do that
I don't need 100% safety I don't need a
safety net that will guarantee that I
don't fail I need a safety net that
allows me to to live again you know give
me three lives to jump all in and figure
out does that can I get something going
or vote on some you know working with
somebody else on getting that going I
see a lot of congroo D and the kinds of
things that people are doing I was
really pleased print to see yours your
your site and I hadn't seen that before
but some of the conversations that come
out Eric I'm loving what you're putting
out there in terms of your
interpretation of game B I'm also
thinking a little bit more but then I'm
talking a little a little bit more with
Jordan Hall and I'm talking with a
filmmaker who's working on a documentary
that he's calling Renaissance 3.0 which
is effectively the game Speas met a
modern space so he's looking at doing
everyday what is what is this space and
what are we doing so I'm excited that
there's stuff out there I'm starting to
see that there are ways that technology
are going to have to be integrated and
in
figuring out what we do including I
think blockchain and AI and possibly
virtual reality because those are very
powerful technologies that will my my
conception is and this is new this is
like coming at me today is that our
cognitive development as a species has
been so produced in such a short period
of time that were effectively
invertebrate we're effectively cognitive
in vertebrates we don't have enough
cognitive structure bone structure and
muscle structure structure in order to
be able to work together as an or as an
effective collective organism and that I
think that technology can move in that
direction but I don't think it's going
to be a simple thing to get that up and
running I do think that we have some
places where experimental efforts in
that direction will show good results
and I think as long as we learn from
each other and and see amplify the
successes and compost the failures as I
like to say that would be good so that's
really what what has stopped me is
really feeling like can I can I give
myself fully to that without just having
my one shot be wasted and I feel like
I'm close to I've been unemployed for a
year and a half working on this
exclusively I see a lot of it and doing
a lot of work on that and that thing so
it's like okay I'm starting to feel like
I could put together a team of people
that I would want to work with and
figure out what the next steps are so
close that's it for me my turn um I
think we can split the question into mmm
you know what is stopping me from
achieving game B or transitioning and
what is stopping us mm-hmm I don't mean
us six I mean us as a wider society
because there's so many progressive
movements and causes and stuff and some
of them conflict and intersect in
various ways and you know when a wet
weather comes to you know spiritual or
you know kind of transformations to do
with capitalism there's just so much
friction
conflict and special interests and path
dependence right that makes it difficult
so so the question is it's got to be
twofold like what's stopping me it's a
personal question what's stopping us
what are order the you know modes of
communication and you know things that
come up in in this group anyways mm-hm
what are the financial relationships
between us social status stuff like that
I think arguably this is more important
like what stops us from transitioning
because what stops me you know I've been
to some extent I feel like you know
advocating a better world my whole life
right as a kid and as a student thinking
critically about the world you encounter
all sorts of resistance different forms
of resistance right and so I mean we you
know we have our personal limitations
but we can't downplay the resistance of
the the system itself the structure
itself and it's you know as much as we
might try to deny it it it sucks us back
in and our behavior is reinforced like
if you you know if you if you spend
money and you kind of participate in the
system you know if you watched watch a
movie or what or whatever you're getting
sucked back into that system so mmm
the question should be I think just
flipped in that sense like what what are
what are the points of resistance that
stop us from achieving this systems
change because arguably lots of people
have kind of arty me made the transition
they're a good person on a personal
level they are a good person on a kind
of social level with the impact they
make in the world but the system itself
still hasn't changed I'll leave it there
I keep that immunity myself and just
talking Eric when she liked our next er
Kira I am Maya just unpause there okay
it's me okay um I mean there's nothing
preventing me I mean I I kind of did
before I even had heard of game bi I
sort of kind of made the leap even
before I even before I'd heard of game B
so I sold up I left my job I sold up the
equity I had in my house has brought me
a place in Spain and I have a little
slush fund to see me through emergencies
and you know my way to see myself
because I don't know I was a teacher oh
so it's not like I have a huge amount of
money so my way of seeing myself through
is to reduce my expenditure right and so
that's that's kind of what I'm working
on and in doing so you also at the same
time massively reduce your impact on the
world you know I don't have a car
anymore for example I eat the majority
of my own fruit and veg I eat my own
eggs you know this but I say my own eggs
of course mine mine you know what I mean
but yeah so that's kind of thing so as I
said I've kind of done all of that bit
anyway what holds me back is not any
material thing time money anything like
that you know indeed to go to a job even
kids I mean I think kids is a massive
reason that people can't really throw
themselves as if you've got
responsibilities to a household I think
that that's a huge thing to hold you
back but for me personally what holds me
back is my own my own right my own
laziness I mean I've got unmet needs
coming out of my ass you know so you
know it's working on that stuff it's the
it's the it's the personal inner stuff
in order to try and prepare myself and
make myself fit for the humility and
openness and vulnerability and so on
that's going to be required in the
formulation of whatever game B is going
to be so that's that's that's what holds
me back is my own is my own plain
and simple
thanks Eric and no oh don't let a man
meet you I think I heard doing the
simultaneous all right Richard okay it's
interesting I have been you know as
everyone's been sharing been thinking
about what my answer to this is and my
experience has been over the last five
years is that I think what's stopping me
right now is not being clear on what
question it is that I'm trying to answer
and usually once I get clear on what it
is what question it is that I'm trying
to answer I move forward and I might've
been the I'm kind of of the perspective
that everything is exactly the way it's
supposed to be in this moment and it
can't stay that way and so it's you know
I'm exactly where I'm supposed to be in
the transition because I can't be
anywhere else and so just kind of
resting into the emotions that come up
that that are saying I'm supposed to be
somewhere else I'm supposed to be in
this different place I'm supposed to
have a better idea of what the hell it
is that I'm doing and and another piece
I think that doesn't slow me down but is
a part of the process is
I am very I'm I love to research and so
I'm very familiar with all the game B
stuff I have a family and they are not
quite as excited about it or as
interested in it as I am and so I have
to go at their pace in to a certain
extent and luckily I have a husband who
like I show him the John for baekje
videos and Nokia and he'll and he'll go
down that path with me but it's you know
I can only go you know kind of as fast
as the people around me are go you know
are going in certain respects and so I
get to you know and of course that
brings up all of my all of my
impatience
all of my oh my god I don't know how to
explain to you this thing that I'm
really passionate about and how do I
slow my mind down enough and put it into
words that you're gonna understand so
that I can so that we can be on the same
page and move something forward and so
that's you know ultimately it's my
communication my patience my patience
was myself and and being able to just
try it is about trusting the process
that there it you know it's I always
want to be at the end that somehow you
know there's that that feeling of if I
get to the end then it'll all of this
will feel better well it's learning to
be okay with where things are and the
other piece that I think is that I'm
just starting to get into is connecting
with other people and reaching out and
joining things like this and getting
into the convert you know getting into
and trusting my own voice in the
conversation so
thank you thank you unmute everybody now
be for all well if no one else minds
I've written a few things down that have
come up while other people have been
talking if no one else minds
particularly you care a couple of things
came up in your so I'll do that because
that's the most fresh in everyone's
minds right so yeah I mean you you
talked about this sense of you know if
only I can get to the end and everything
will be alright are you familiar they'll
and what's he does a talk on exactly
this it's great and you know that it's
that whole thing of the carrot being
dangled right in front of you all the
way through your life right and you
spend your whole life thinking that
you're gonna get somewhere and if you
just realize that there is actually not
a destination right there is only you
journey there's not a destination that
that that so yeah that but the other
thing was the trusting your own voice
thing that's been a really big thing for
me as well I think I think I've just
recently figured out what my role is in
all of this if you know what I mean
because I'm not nearly as smart as some
of these guys you know what I mean I
can't contribute at that level I just I
don't have the breadth of reading I
don't have the intellect you know what I
mean but what I what I am good at I
think is translating what they are doing
down to a level where you know maybe
other people can understand it a little
bit more clearly so I that'sthat's what
I'm going to try and focus on now in
this media I really appreciate that and
there was what came to mind as you were
sharing that was something that Jordan
talked about in the conversation that he
had with John for Becky on rebel wisdom
a couple weeks ago and he talked about
that you know people being open to you
know maybe it's a seven-year-old girl in
Peru who has the answer you know is that
it is going at the the right vibrational
level for whatever that answer is needed
and so for me it's getting over the idea
that I'm supposed to that I'm supposed
to be as smart as the people who are you
know because I have that staying
that same parasitic thinking that says
I'm supposed to be that smart to
participate in the conversation and not
trusting that I have something to some I
love that you're you're getting to that
place of feeling like you have like you
know what your what your role is and
that's I think you know asking what is
the question I'm trying to answer I
don't know what my role is yet I'd
looked at and say cure that the thing
that you said that was really
interesting is to meet a common thing
that caught my attention the most is
things are exactly how they need to be
and they can't stay this way there's
something really beautiful in that and
there's something too in the in the
hearing that as the parasitic processing
right this is something that when when
John Vicki talks about the parasite
processing in the way that we're wired
right now it's beneficial to think that
not all parasites are bad right we've
got parasites in her system parasites
are serving the function an important
function of the world there is a
stabilizing force that parasites now
which is counterintuitive to what we
think we think we want to get rid of all
of the bugs and all of the things that
are wrong and the Ruth the root of that
is no we can't we're actually doing this
part of my sense of this and this really
started to become clear and Eric I like
what you said as well about being a
communicator you know I know people I've
tried to point people to John for Vicki
and Jordan Hall and Daniels might Berger
and those guys and people look at me and
say I don't know what they're talking
about I don't know why it matters you
don't get it but I'm noticing I had a
discussion last week with a friend who
who also doesn't get that she's never
gonna watch that stuff but she cares a
lot about the climate she wants to make
a change and we got into a pretty heated
discussion about what the next steps are
I kept saying everything you're
discussing and proposing is effectively
the same same as changing your
lightbulbs or not flushing I mean it's
not it's great it's necessary it's just
beautiful it
not sufficient it's it's maybe half of a
percent of the solution if that even the
most radical things you're thinking of
maybe the most radical things that all
of us think of if we all agreed right
now to do things that we can think of
with our game a minds we'd probably do
five percent of what's necessary to
transition so there's something in this
that's really recognizing what does it
take to really fully transition into
that I'll give you a example of some a
couple of things that help me think
about this and then I think are we
useful for other people as well this is
kind of a long the idea of how to
communicate this to other people one is
two examples of riding a bicycle
noticing from verve a Keyes perspective
that propositional no-dick knowing and
participatory knowing are so different
right I can understand I can read about
somebody could tell me about riding a
bicycle but like feeling that bicycle
and learn how to do it myself I don't
have it down now after I've done that
there are a couple of examples that I
and that I have that really show me that
even though I have the basest don't I
don't have it down in a way that I can
put me in a different environment one of
these was as a child riding with two
people on the same bicycle trying to
steer at the same time I noticed there's
something odd and if anybody else has
done is where people are going to ride
this a bicycle when you go around the
corner there's a place where you fight
each other and it's like we know we're
going the same direction in there and
yet the dissonance between our direction
has to do with our propositional
annoying I know where we're going and my
participatory knowing wait a minute I'm
steering according to my center of
gravity this is a habitual response of
how much leaning turning there is in the
system and because our combined center
of gravity is different in opposite
directions for each of us it makes it so
that that that that sense of how what
I'm supposed to do in this moment is
different
are you completely responding how I
bitterly respond are different in that
in that system in such a way that it
feels like we're fighting each other
when we when we know what a
propositional Evolet we're agreeing the
other example of this is thinking of a
bicycle where that and there's a video
online where somebody has switched the
steering wheel so it goes the opposite
direction learning how to ride a bicycle
where it steers in the opposite
direction is incredibly difficult
the guy who was doing the video took six
months of an hour of more our port per
day practicing to do that and finally
was able to do it and once he was able
to do it it was like oh that's cool now
can I go back and write an old bicycle
and he couldn't he but it took him 20
minutes of trying per ride but the old
sabbatical for it and a rework and in
that moment his whole system flipped so
it's showing how dissonance between our
habits and what we know we want to do
are so out of a lion trying to do
something as radically different as we
are where our bodies respond in a
habitual way to social dynamics to our
own habits and to a whole new
environment where thing is diverse from
what it used to be is is something
that's going to require a degree of
practice that isn't even hinted at and
what John for fake is talking about in
this ecology of practices this is going
to be an immense amount of practice so
it's in some sense it's more than just
oh you know so when I say I'm afraid I'm
going to fail I know I'm going to fail
I'm gonna pull off that by six thousand
times right it's going to be it's going
to be a terrible frustrating time to go
through that and if I'm going through a
terrible frustrating time where other
people are yelling at me to because
they're frustrated we've got to find a
way to overcome that level of
frustration I wanted David when you
shared in the beginning and you had said
that what's stopping you from doing the
transition is that safety and being all
in you don't need it to be safe safe we
need to be safe enough and I was
wondering just what you meant by all in
like what what is it that's at risk
there for you that you aren't all in
with that you would be in that sense
well so that example that I just said is
a is a good one if I said I'm all in on
the you know so think about the person
who rode tried to spend six months
learning how to ride the bicycle was
opposite if that was his only mode of
transportation oh my god I mean I can't
go anywhere for six months until I get
this thing where I can ride it
it can't be more than a hobby until I
can until I can ride the thing
and that's what I mean by all-in can I
actually make the living doing that when
I don't know how to I don't know how
about operates and all of us have
propositional ways of proposing that
this couldn't work there I believe
absolutely because what you were saying
about the bike right like if that was
his only mode of transportation that
would be ridiculous he would have had he
would have learned it faster but he
would have been reliant on it much you
know whereas that's not what he did he
spent an hour a day playing practicing
on this new form well I'm guessing
walking driving writing not writing his
old bike because he's trying to learn
this new one but let the old bike go and
still have his other forms of
transportation so in a way he was all in
because he committed that hour a day but
in another way he's not all-in right
he's not gonna like sit there and only
be on that bike and so finding ways for
each of us that feels safe enough to try
so that we cuz for me I know that our
propositional no mean like I
propositional II know how we saved the
entire world but it's not but then when
i participate with other people I'm like
oh now are you goes I don't want my
money here but that's part of it is like
being all in in that like being all in
in the participatory knowing that you
know what we're gonna fail we're all
gonna fall off the bike repeatedly or
just have the same mission of eventually
being able to ride this thing and we
don't need to go all in this is our only
mode of transportation doing it in those
ways that is like an hour here just the
bike just pick the bike right let the
rest go came to mind as you were
describing the people driving one far
sorry if I'm causing you I mean two
people driving the same bike and it's
the hesitation when going around a turn
it's interesting cuz my husband and I
were just my husband's working for a
company that that does the data for
self-driving cars so he's doing a lot of
data for self-driving cars and one of
the things that self-driving car is
notoriously have a problem with is
taking left terms they will hesitate and
they will stutter because they're there
issues with that you know different
different cameras different pieces of
data and being unsure and reconciling
that information and then what I thought
of when you tied tying that back to I'm
curious the friend that you were having
the heated discussion with last week
what was the heated aspect of the
discussion about so it was really just
whether when I would say that's not
enough she said you're saying that we
shouldn't do that like plant trees
you're saying when I would say it's just
a string it's not gonna solve the
problem she goes but you're saying we
shouldn't plant trees and say no
absolutely plant trees but don't give
anybody the illusion that that's going
to be enough the the interesting thing
that came up as you were saying that was
I do I'm gonna make a generalization
because I work with a lot of women and
generally women have this deep sense of
I am NOT enough and wondering if in that
conversation what was coming up was not
about the environment but any sense of
that she wasn't enough in that process
and how do you you know when when you
come into those ego conversations and
recognizing okay this probably has
nothing to do with the conversation that
we're having at this moment and probably
has way more to do with some core belief
this person has about themselves and
that's what they're coming up against
being unable to hear them and and one of
the things that in the conversation I
had with Jordan Paul on Friday one of
the things he said is how do you invite
someone to listen how do you invite
someone to want to grow up and and like
in that it's I have to like figuring out
how do I work through my that
prevents me from listening but because
obviously when somebody like my
experience is usually when somebody is
like really fighting on and stuck on a
particular issue it's something that
it's more of a core idea about them yeah
it's often a more core idea about
themselves that they're stuck with that
they're trying to work through then the
actual like topic at hand
and and how do you and and one of I
think one
questions I'm trying to answer is how do
you help someone through that transition
when they go into that place of fighting
on that because they're trying to
protect themselves and how do you how do
you make space for them to move through
that piece without losing sight of the
bigger part of the conversation just be
folks no Anthony go ahead so you have a
say you go ahead might you go ahead I
was just listening to Jim and Nora
Bateson and Jim asked her the first
question I asked everyone is how do you
see reality do you believe there's an
objective reality or is it all you know
just in your mind and they decided it
was both because Jim loved her book
which was like we have a window on
reality but the window was also part of
reality and so are we but something Eric
said about Ellen wants I'd follow down a
lot for like 50 years
and if you asked Allen Watts he's going
to tell you you are never going to get
rid of gamei you haven't no possibility
of having game be without having game a
so we have to like triage the PTSD
people from game a forever because
they're not going away
well you might sense the center of
gravity I listened to that and it
reminded me of something about the late
1970s I was a distance runner and I was
coaching at a camp for young Olympians
and I had to race with them and I was
like 40 years old at the time so there
was this huge steep hill in Slippery
Rock where we were and I they were all
ahead of me like 100 yards ahead of me
and when we hit the that hill it was
like almost half a mile straight out I
passed all of them on the way up and
they said how did you do that and I said
you lean into the hill so your center of
gravity pulls you up the hill up there
you know in that year almost all of our
kids wanted their ski
because they figured out how to how to
do that that's a that's a hilarious
anecdote and I want to use it to to
segue to make to make a terrible segue
joke - uh - the fact that Bernie Sanders
is also a distance runner it's a lot of
object and what you're saying Anthony
and you know it's funny the idea of just
leaning in letting gravity do the work
but but it also connects with what
you're saying care with with the
self-driving cars algorithms and they're
you know having trouble turning left
I think that's indicative of our
political moment - or having trouble
turning left and we need to turn that
[Music]
into the oncoming traffic centrist and
turn left through that yeah just like
when you first start to drive a car you
try to figure out I still kind of do
this sometimes how to like go left by
baking a series of Rights so it's
interesting I would say I would say
print it's lovely
and I would say it's not that we need to
turn left it's that we need to turn up
we need to turn to a new center that
isn't on the plane that we're used to
operating on it really is learning to
operate in another dimension that we've
never it's not native to any of us and
anything that feels like it is familiar
is by necessity game a right it's off
the track and just recognize that and
feel the frustration of it and here I
love what you said as well that my
friend and I did get to the point of
recognize that and then and it's
something that I've mentioned in other
talks that I have a circling practice
I'm sorting is a relational practice
that really is good about feeling into
that vulnerable space of Am I
enough while still staying on track
staying with myself and staying with you
through that and it's a it's a
challenging practice to learn but it's
something that I think is a key skill
can I just add one thing to that am i
enough feeling because as you were
telling the story about the argument
between you and your friend a similar
but slightly different feeling came up
for me that isn't necessarily female
related or personal inadequate personnel
inadequacy relates bit more a sense of
helplessness right there but hang on but
but but planting trees is something I
can get involved in and do you know what
I mean you're telling me that's not
gonna make any difference and so it's a
bit but I don't think that's a male or a
female thing I think I think this is a
deep sense of helplessness and despair
that resides at a just below the level
of consciousness kind of place you know
what I mean and I think it feeds into a
lot of what's going on in people's minds
and so that that reaction to you know
planting trees not going to make a
difference not you know turning this
half off when I close my when I brush my
teeth you know what I mean it's it these
are things that people could actually do
and to feel like they're meaningless is
taking something really important away
from because they already feel really
 helpless right she's saying that
you know even this is pointless so I
think I think that that is part of it
also listen to both Kure listen to both
of the sessions he had with Jordan and
it was really great I'm sorry I can't
remember any question about it but it
was really helpful yeah I was grateful
for his time because it did help a lot
he as as you guys were Eric as you were
talking there was something that was
coming up
a point of mine that actually somebody
posted in the game bSpace Filipe luís
somebody posted a conversation with him
he does a lot of writing about moral
framework because he's in very much in
the hippie you know new agey space where
there's a lot of people who you know
come out things in absolutes and people
needing to cling to the thing that gives
them meaning and Eric so the thing that
you said of like if you take away that
this planting trees isn't doesn't really
you know mean it's something but it's
not even scratching the surface it's
like there's that sense of despair that
comes up that's like why do I even like
I don't you know there are there are
moments you know where I might be in
that space and where somebody says
something I'm like why am I even trying
you know and and you know and I've had
to I had to do an extensive amount of
personal work around you know like my
default is either all or nothing and if
if it's not perfect then I might as well
just give up you know if it's not the
perfect answer I might as well just not
do any of it at all and what trend you
know that transition from you know
because ultimately all of this is about
a maturation process it's helping people
grow through whatever emotional place
they got stuck he and his child and
childhood because we all got stuck
somewhere and and how do you grow
through that piece especially when you
don't know that like okay one of the
common places people get stuck is in a
black-and-white thinking that if you
know which is usually about three years
old and it's all you know it's an
all-or-nothing if and and how do you
help somebody transition through that
like that's because and and and when
somebody is goes to that place of
absolute despair how to meet them where
they are so that they're you know it's
like so what people don't want to give
up
well if you felt it yourself then you
should be able to make some reasonable
attempts if you wish to do so at meeting
them there right if you experience there
feeling yourself and it's not that hard
right yeah and I think I would imagine
we've all experienced her at some point
so it occurs to me as you say that that
we're really trying it is very akin to
trying to convince a three-year-old a
five-year-old that they can do without
their favorite stuffed animal or at all
it's the thing that gives them comfort
and so there's something about the
comfort that we think we get from the
habit of the way that we are it's a
familiarity and and so even if I can
reason with them even if I can empathize
with them getting them to empathize with
themselves as they're giving it up
finding a way to lean into that hill
yeah that center of gravity so they can
do it so they can find a way to do that
in there is a real is it's a it's a big
challenge I don't think it's I don't
want to undermine that and I don't think
it's just empathy that that gets us
there but I think I think that that
gives me a good sense the challenge
before us something John Parvati said
about acting out when my daughter was
three years old she liked all the
laughter that she got before she was too
but you know making up words or
misunderstanding words like I'd say well
for the time being we can't do that and
should say well where do these time
beans come from but once he by the age
of two she learned how she learned the
whole language so she couldn't fool
anybody anymore but she was still trying
so what we did was we did what John
lavake said we worked out she had a four
year old cousin a boy and she was three
and then we worked out a playing out the
advertisements TV advertisements at the
time were really funny and her
grandmother my mother my wife's mother
had been traumatized in childhood by the
death of
father she I never saw her even small
once until we did those skits and she
actually laughed out loud for the first
time I think in her old life so there's
something I don't I don't know how to
tie that into things but just being able
to like John said to you you have to be
able to master and be willing to master
every possible thing like hit me own
like he said he was talking about mixed
martial arts you can't just do one thing
and expect to understand all the other
things from that one thing something
David that you said and Anthony I can
get caught isin there's a there's a post
or a something that's been going around
that it's a woman who's basically
attacking a transgender woman for her
daughter wanting to use like a binding
device and the transgender I think that
it's a transgender model or something
like that
and the person who is transgender like
did an amazing job
like using the Aikido way of like I see
that I see how much you deeply care
about your daughter and I know that you
would care about her and here's why you
you want to actually get her this this
particular tool because if you don't she
might actually use things that will harm
her and like just using a meter so it
was a masterful conversation that I saw
because she this woman was able to tap
into and really acknowledge the woman's
deep fear and care for her daughter and
bring her along in the conversation and
like I read that and I'm like god I want
to get there that's where I want to get
it to is being able to really deeply be
able to go into those conversations and
you know when somebody's getting all
pissed off first be able to manage my
own emotions when somebody else is
pissed off and then
you know have that conversation it's it
takes massive amounts of skill you know
that it also comes to mind I know that
I'm part of the one of the conversations
in the game be discussion group was
about various you know ways that we can
do things better and I recommended that
people if people haven't watched the
Bill Gates special on Netflix the inside
dils brain I recommend it for two
reasons one it's inspirational to see
how much he's thinking too it's clear
that he's still thinking of treating
symptoms and he's not really thinking
about how to really get underneath the
cause he's and there's a way in which
money interests have the habit of
leaning in in a specific way to solve
the problems and it's a way that is
habitual that's not going to serve us
well and it's interesting to think about
what would what does it take for I think
that there's a lot of opportunity one of
the things that I think is a lot of
there's a lot of opportunity here's for
noting the way that we're addicted to
certain kinds of behavior I think about
that in addition to alcohol sex whatever
kinds of things work
coping mechanisms that we have for
dealing with their own trauma
recognizing that we're all dealing with
some level of trauma from having a nor
to a body effectively and as we come
into resonance an awakening to how much
we've put off there is a kind of a
backlash of brief that comes up with
that and being able to lean into that
into that grief and the processing in a
healthy way and recognizing that's
necessary rather than trying to medicate
it cope with it or make it go away
really be treated as a part of the
process I think is something that is a
powerful a powerful thing to do and to
recognize that billionaires are addicted
to addicted to kind of thinking of a
certain way it may install things and
it's like this isn't this is a place
where I love that Bill Gates is using
his money in the way that he is but it's
but it's it's an addictive process it's
still feeding the old the old habits I
I really appreciate that I got to
participate in this guys I have to run
but I will hopefully see you guys next
week
thank you so much all right I'll get her
vote later we'll probably start wrapping
up in above 5 5 to 7 minutes because it
takes us about 10 minutes to go through
that final thoughts and then we can pick
the question for next week which will be
the last idea cafe for the year I just
want to jump off David's point about
Bill Gates because Bill Gates obviously
is you don't give him more than anybody
but you know he doesn't handle critique
well he doesn't kind of think about the
bigger big-picture right and you know an
unsecured artist who's a very very uh
out there and popular in the past year
and a half to tears with his critique of
corporate philanthropy a lot of these
big philanthropists like Bill Gates they
kind of just dismiss his critique right
and I think Anand and this approach to
you know realism about philanthropy is
is 10 times more a game bead and Bill
Gates or you know whoever could dream of
with with their endeavors right because
it's about leverage and and the this
inordinate amounts of philanthropy in
effect uh it is just you know you know
band-aid solutions to two gaping wounds
that need to be true to treat it at the
wreath at the root level and and so that
this is the kind of threshold we're at
right where where big money doesn't know
what to do this often ironically Bill
Gates is someone who does want to be
taxed higher and you know to have more
of his money kind of in the people's
hands but but they don't have the
language to to phrase or to facilitate
that transition of giving giving people
back the power
now as we're kind of comin coming up to
the the end of this what I'd that
thinking about the overall question and
what stops me the more that I talk about
this in the kind of that as I'm framing
it the recognition is that what stops me
is the magnitude of the problem like um
it's I've also often thought it's
interesting I've often thought that oh
there's something that people who are in
12-step programs gain from being in the
12-step program that I don't have it I'd
like there to be a 12-step program for
normal people like I think we have an
opportunity right and 12-step doesn't
quite do it either 12-step only is
effective than what 10 to 15 percent of
the people who do that are able to
actually manage their abuse and
addiction is that way so we need to do
what six times better than been the best
then one of the best methods out there
and it's for everybody so there's
something in this that really I'm
actually excited to buy it it's still
nervous by thinking what do I need to do
to really lean into the challenge of
jumping in I think I know listen to
Karen Brewer on what's the lesson be a
ra d Karen okay are en she is a
physicist and she said we can't be in a
waveform and a particle state at the
same time but we can be in one or the
other I think this is good you know
sound crazy but we have to learn how to
be in the waveform the people who
experience near-death experiences
I absolutely believe they're in the
waveform they notice themselves they're
the observer of themselves that puts
them collapses their waveform and put
some back into the particle state if we
don't learn that how to change from one
to the other
I don't think we're going to make it out
of anything into anything else form is
that what the liminal be comparative to
the wave form do you think was that
i I don't really understand the
difference between subliminal and
luminal I I just
think there's one way of knowing and you
can control it all by yourself just by
observing yourself I would I would say
the liminal is the in-between state like
I would say liminal is something like if
you're it's something like lucid
dreaming right it's the it's the oh I'm
aware now now what do I do with this
awareness it's um it's kind of the
starting point of that but it doesn't I
think sati I think that sovereign real
sovereignty practice is learning to
practice heavily while in that liminal
state that's such an important point
David because lucid dreaming is actually
quite hard it rarely happens by accident
and it takes a lot of practice and the
more you practice and more it happens
that's kind of the formula to it and I
think that is a good analogy to carry
over into this conversation because it
takes constant practice and and the
question is like you just said once you
have that state what do you do with it
any menu also kind of are aware that
it's fleeting you know like you have to
seize it because you might wake up from
that state and end your and that that
Lippman all in sight mm-hm or you might
kind of lapse back into into a sleep
without drinking right and we won't we
want to avoid both of those in this
context we want to stay on point stay in
the liminal and crystallize this turn I
don't know if you can stay in that state
yes what I mean I mean like to honor
that our brains do need to go through
all of those states constantly you never
it like I know enlightenment a thing
we're supposed to be able to achieve but
I don't even know if there it's actually
a real thing because my my course
towards that seems to look completely
different than like I'm not getting more
Zen I'm not getting more it's like oh
I'm getting angrier I swear more this is
like not the normal edit a mountaintop
look
I just read an article that your brain
doesn't store memories it is memories
what you're doing everything you do in
life is constructing that memory and
keeping that memory by yourself for
yourself and Brett what you said about
taking control in your dream you don't
have to be loosened you can be still in
your sleeping dream you come to the
point in that dream where you're not
stuck
you actually can move around in your
dream when you're sleeping that's the
point when you start preparing your
tomorrow for tomorrow but tomorrow is
actually 30 days in the past I've tested
that myself on a poster that everywhere
and nobody pays attention to it but the
brain actually takes 30 earth days to
film the memory of the exact moment of
that we're talking right now sorry say
that need to say that again it takes 30
days to complete the memory of something
that happens so well I don't have a full
memory of what well here's what the
experiment that I did it was in future
memory by a PMH Atwater and it was James
my neighbor he's experiment you practice
knowing things don't give yourself any
limits just keep practicing this little
stupid exercise and I did it for about a
week and then the exercise ended and I
drew a picture in pencil on an 8 8 and a
half by 11 translucent typewriter paper
that picture showed up 30 days later at
a Verizon meeting on the Internet this
was like 1995 or something but it was a
mirror image exact mirror image that I
drew 30 days beyond because the earth
took the earth is a time well it slows
down time like Einstein said it takes 30
days for the earth to go 50 million
miles through space it is very different
you know the settings but light even in
our cosmos
travels at the speed of light that I
sign said but if there's also a
multiverse where there's no speed limit
so everything that we experience happens
instantly but it takes us our brain 30
days to make a movie to show us all the
details of it because it's a like John
Burke you said it's incredibly
complicated to look at just one scene
this conversation now happened 30 days
ago is what you're saying and I'm just
putting it together in my mind now is
that is that we were saying no my brain
is too stupid to know that it's
happening right now it it happened 30
days ago I'm just putting it I'm just
I'm just finishing the Edit now kind of
thing yeah your brain is yeah the brain
is your movie constructor director
producer and hope it I've never heard
that one before that that that's that's
quite fun what's really indeed it was
scary as hell I never did it again I was
gay I would say it reminds me of Rupert
Sheldrake in the more frenetic field and
that it's that it has like our there's a
way of knowing that's deeper than us
thinking we understand something and
there is something like the more these
conversations I have the easier it is to
have these conversations with people who
haven't heard of a verb a key and
finding that there are people like oh
you know when I first started watching
for Vicki I couldn't have a conversation
with a single person and as we started
watch parties and started discussing it
and broadening it now I start something
with somebody goes oh yeah I've been
thinking about the same thing it's like
where have you studied any of this no
it's just like coming to me so there is
something like the 100th monkey I don't
know you know it's fight that if you
will you know say that's whoo whoo but
there's something in the turning point
you know why it is that only 10% of the
population needs to really flip my my
thought is I really want to have some
sort of wisdom cultivation laboratories
you know this is in a lot of what
everybody's putting together is is that
it's like okay how do we do deep
practice in a way that supports each
other
allows us to not ourselves and
deepen the practice to make it easier
for other people and I think that
Anthony what you're saying is that the
more we do that the easy
accountant yeah well I just accepted it
like I said it's scary as no I never did
it again but I'd never questioned that
either
we're at the really at the ends of the
conversations you're gonna need to wrap
it up which is always hard for us I know
so if anyone would like to give some
closing closing thoughts Eric can do his
closing thoughts later my closing
thoughts I don't think that there's a
whole lot more than I did I have to say
I'm really excited about it right now I
think that I feel like I'm every day
leaning into leaning into the uphill of
the game be more so I'll use the
metaphor to say that doing so feels more
like an enjoyable practice rather than a
terrible chore all right thank you
but else fun do their closing thoughts
just very very quickly I thought Brent's
modification of the question to sort of
break it into two parts you know what's
holding me back what's holding us
collectively back is a very useful
distinction and as he was talking about
that the idea of the Nash equilibrium
popped into my mind you know what I mean
that however good the alternative is
until until there are enough people
willing to step over the line and be
seen to step over the line by everybody
else then nobody steps over the line you
know and so I think that's a huge thing
of what holds us back that men tell you
know that sort of herd mentality a lack
of individual sovereignty and a lack of
individuals willing to take that step on
their own you know what I mean I and
thereby show the way I think that could
be could be a something yeah that whole
that whole topics I just mentioned about
time it's a it's a topic on the game be
Facebook group so you can everything
that I know about it is there so I
really don't have anything to add to it
thank you right gonna give some a
closing statement
oh sure I'll just say let's keep working
on those left turns David's right of
course
sense that you know you don't regardless
of what happens there's there's parallel
movements that are post political and we
need to focus on those but I do think a
very strongly that a lot of our ideas
and our movement dovetails with current
vanguard Left movements and thinkers and
policies that are going to enable what
we're talking about it's going to make
it a lot easier you know do you know
what what kind of leadership do you want
to pursue these things under what type
of people do you want to work with right
because you know by and large the
emergent new left is is leading the way
you know things like the green New Deal
are you know they're criticized for many
angles but when you really get into the
weeds it's quite substantive and it
addresses a lot of these systemic of
blocks that prevent us from working
together on these big issues right
thanks Brent I don't know if any closing
thoughts per se except that they're
talking about dreams and dream states of
this personal I've always been good at
lucid dreaming I don't know if you can
be good at it I've always been able to
access lucid dreaming but I've lost the
ability to control my dreams mid
childhood where I can't fly because I
know it's not possible and so I can't
control it I can't be aware I'm dreaming
and do that at the same time and at the
same time now that I'm in adults and I'm
at the process where I might be able to
get some of that back some of the
control of the dream I'm mature enough
to want it to be what it is to be like
if you're teaching me if you're here to
teach me what my day was supposed to
teach me then why would I control it
when it's supposed to be like I'm
supposed to be part of that movie and
I'm learning from it and that is for me
a very what game B and this whole thing
is is what Karen said before in the
beginning of like it's exactly where
it's supposed to be and it can't stay
the same and that same like now that I'm
ready for the process and enjoy the
process it's happening all much more
rapidly all right goodbye YouTube