[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time I tramped it
to draw together all the other theories
and and I don't mean just the
psychological theories although their
most salient right now but also the
philosophical theories into an account
of wisdom I presented a model to you a
theory of wisdom developed by myself and
Leo Ferraro from 2013 in which we are
enhancing inferential processing through
active open mindedness enhancing
insightful processing through
mindfulness and we're enhancing of the
capacity for internalization by
internalizing the sage and cultivating
softer Sun by salience of our salient
landscape naturally organizes away from
self-deception and tempts us towards the
truth or at least what's true good and
perhaps beautiful that's perhaps a
better way of putting it and that that
coordinates the propositional knowing
associated with the in inference the
procedural knowing associated with
insight the perspectival knowing
associated with internalization together
and that that as I said that is directed
towards realizing sovereign and that
that can help cultivate a more moral
existence the connection to virtue
mastery in the sense of coping and
caring and meaning in life but of course
one of the criticisms I made was that
the notion of meaning in life there was
too simplistic and it needs to be
integrated which I'm with with a much
more developed account that's already in
the literature and I'm contributing to
that by work I'm doing with others on
meaning in life I pointed out that the
verb akin for our model is missing
participatory knowing it's missing the
relationship between or at least I think
it misrepresents miss aligns the
relationship between the kinds of
knowing understanding is missing
transformational experience is
transformative experiences
missing aspiration is missing gnosis is
missing so all of these things need to
be deeply integrated together I tried to
give you an account of what I think
sorry that's too that's too grandiose I
tried to suggest the beginnings of an
account of how we turn basic
understanding which is to grasp the
relevance of our knowledge into profound
understanding by integrating the account
of understanding with the account of
possibilities so that profound
understanding is the generation of
plausibility by having convergence onto
a contextually sensitive optimal grip
that is transformative ly transferable
in a highly effective manner in problem
finding in many different problem
finding formulating and solving in many
different domains
I also brought out the idea that in
addition to inspiration this is a term
I'm giving for sudden more sudden
insight insight Laden transformative
experience you can have asked what
Callard calls aspiration that's more
it's more incremental it still can't be
solved in an inferential decision
theoretic fashion she agrees with Paul
on that she does argue though and I
agree with this argument that aspiration
must be considered a form of rationality
which he calls proleptic rationality
because you're going to get a you're
going to get into a performative
contradiction if I if my aspiration for
rationality and my love of wisdom are
not themselves rational processes I'm
kind of in in in trouble in my model of
rationality then given all of that
philosophy what's missing as I argued is
an extensive psychology of aspiration
and I know one of my colleagues Jenson
Kim is working on exactly that problem
and he's of course doing it in
connection with a psychology of wisdom I
did suggest to you that we could see one
of coloureds ideas of how we do this by
right we create something that's
double-faced or I argued ultimately
symbolic having aspects of gnosis in it
that allows us to
make the the jump the leap even if it's
an incremental one right from who we are
now and what we value now to the place
where I've acquired some new thing that
I value for its own sake we use the
example of music appreciation or etc
alright
but unlike colored I see that as
inherently relying on our symbolic
capacity or capacity for enacted
symbolic behavior what I call gnosis
serious play and because I mean in
serious play it's always like when I'm
playing with something I'm treating it
as for example a sword but it's actually
a piece of plastic that that kind of
serious play that symbolic ability
especially the enacted one that gives me
an agave and analodjica that's really
important I would also argue for
aspiration at least for the placeholders
that do important work within aspiration
I also argued that aspiration also
probably has an affective component to
it and I suggested that wonder and we
saw how central wonder is to the
cultivation of wisdom that wonder is the
is the is the affective state that's
most conducive to aspirational progress
because of the way it opens up right
entity in our world triggers the
transgender relationship and puts it
into right that participatory knowing
puts it into a developmental trajectory
so all of that needs to be integrated
together into an account of wisdom and
then I suggested to you drawing it all
together is that wisdom is an ecology of
psycho technologies slash cognitive
styles right that dynamically and that
means recipient recipient reciprocal
reciprocal optimization that dynamically
enhances the relevance realization
that's central to inference to insight
and intuition to internalizing
especially internalizing this age to
understanding and gnosis and related to
gnosis to the relevance realization at
work within transformative within
transformative experience and aspiration
and then I already noted to you that
that enhancement that way in which I'm
talking about Wisman though that dynamic
system that ecology is already
overlapping and as it should right as it
should it is overlapping with the
account we gave of enlightenment where
in light crucial element of
enlightenment was to create a
counteractive dynamical system that
counteracts parasitic processing and I'm
showing you that I think of wisdom I'm
arguing that wisdom is a kind of
dynamical system that is counteractive
for overcoming self-deception and
therefore would be counteractive for
overcoming parasitic processing and
foolishness this is a processing account
you can see I think given what I've just
said how it would ameliorate foolishness
we've already talked about how it might
enhance flourishing by and we did that
were in connection with Sternberg how
it's going to help you be better
connected to yourself to other people
and to the world but I would argue that
especially where it's overlapping with
enlightenment that what wisdom is doing
in order to enhance meaning in life is
it's enhancing religio so we've got
wisdom here right and I'm sort of saying
there's a significant overlap with
enlightenment and one of the things that
wisdom is doing that's also really
important right is it's enhancing
religio that's a way in which it can
powerfully and we saw already the
connection remember our delt the
connection to agape right it's enhancing
religion and I would say that the the
enhancement of religio is already and we
and remember the the role of wonder
potentially even ah here it's taking us
into sacredness the notion of sacredness
that I already have argued and
articulated for
and so given this connection all right
so this is how its enhancing meaning in
life and of course this is also an
enhancement these are all connected is
what I'm saying
it's enhancing sacredness I think it's
plausible therefore to argue not to
conclude decisively but to argue that
I've shown i've explicate it and
explained the deep connections between
wisdom enlightenment the enhancement of
religio and thereby the relationship to
sacredness I want to draw that
altogether right in this notion of the
wise cultivation of enlightenment the
wise cultivation of enlightenment what
that carries with it of course the
enhancement of religio the encountering
with the sacred the enhancement of
meaning in life etc the wise cultivation
of enlightenment I think if the wise
cultivation of enlightenment is situated
within two things right if it's situated
within a worldview that affords world
view attunement if it's situated within
a world and I've tried to do that but
throughout consistently I believe at
least making this account consistent
with a scientific worldview by running
it all off the machinery a relevance
realization that can ultimately be given
a naturalistic explanation right so and
we've already argued how for cognitive
science third-generation cognitive
science can give us this worldview and
and notice how much the discussion of
wisdom was invoking a lot of the
the theoretical machinery that we got
from third generation for a cognitive
science was all through it okay so that
is situated into a basically an enabling
and encouraging worldview and that it is
also situated within some of the things
I suggested where we have a co-opt
network of communities of practice let
me
and I already talked about what that is
and that that is in a reflective
equilibrium a dynamic ongoing one with a
wisdom wiki and this has both a top-down
like there's researchers like the
researchers on wisdom that I've talked
about here and then drawn from here of
course is right we want to talk about
the practitioners
all right people are practicing and of
course this is a bottom-up top-down
relationship so we have the
practitioners we have the researchers
top-down bottom-up relationship and they
are in that fashion contributing to the
wisdom wiki the wisdom wiki is acting as
a it's taking on a creedal function
right but it's always in service of
religio and therefore it's being created
in a large part by these communities of
practice now I think if you put this all
together here it is this is how I think
we can awaken from the meeting crisis I
think that we can draw all of the
machinery together for overcoming the
perennial problems dealing with the
historical issues how to connect right
how to connect wisdom and enlightenment
together in a comprehensive fashion and
to connect that with enhancing and
meaning in life and overcoming
self-deception etc all of that machinery
and then situating it within this kind
of socio-cultural framework I think
that's how we can individually and
collectively awaken from the meeting
crisis and why I want to one more time
and that's what part of this emphasized
that all of this has been explained and
can be engineered from within a secular
scientific worldview it's not a view
that is in any way I think hostile to
religion try am genuinely and sincerely
respectful throughout but it is a way
that is not dependent on religion nor is
it dependent on a political ideology
a lot of this this part of it is already
nascent it's already coming into
existence we have some existing examples
of this that are being developed we can
apply it right I've tried to give you an
account of this and I've tried to give
you an account of how the cognitive
science resituated a scientific
worldview what I now want to do is to
put this into I hope a constructive
dialogue with other responders to the
meeting crisis I would even call them
prophets in the but in the Old Testament
sense of people that were telling forth
the meaning crisis trying to awaken us
to it and trying to galvanize us in
response to it so what I want to do is
take everything that I've done it's
summarized by this schema all right I
hope it's not oversimplified by the
schema its summarized and I want to put
this into dialogue I hope like I said
constructive dialogue with some of the
central prophets of the meaning crisis
especially in the 20th and 21st century
now inevitably I cannot do everybody and
write your favorite philosopher might
not make it here I both for lack of time
and lack of expertise I'm not going to
talk for example very much about Vic and
Stein although I think he's important
I've taken a lot I've taken a lot of
undergraduate courses graduate courses
read a lot on Vic and Stein Dickinson
has deeply influenced me the notion of a
cultural cognitive grammar is vacant in
Ian through and through in important
ways but trying to connect Vic and Stein
to the meaning crisis it is not
something that I feel I have the
requisite expertise Whitehead is a
philosopher I am currently again trying
to understand he is somebody who's
wrestling very deeply with the meeting
crisis and trying to come up with a way
of resituated us within a scientific
worldview I've read quite a bit I'm
reading quite a bit I'm not confident
about that whitehead of course has been
terrifically relevant to process
theology and some of the new theological
innovations in the 20th century and part
of that could be I'd seen I could are I
could argue I'd say many people could
argue is a way of that theological
innovation is is designed to respond to
the meeting crisis there's other people
those are just two clear examples it's
the but what I'm want to offer is
instead I've chosen two people have
chosen for two reasons I've chosen them
because I think I have some relevant
knowledge relevant expertise to bring to
bear and secondly because they're they
form a network there they're the I don't
want I don't need to present them sort
of in a piecemeal fashion they have
relations of contrast connection causal
influence with each other so there's a
network of people I want to talk about
their dinners are in a sense harbingers
of the meaning crisis but again in that
prophetic sense they're trying to awaken
us and arouse us to respond so what I
want to do is first of all put up what
that network is going to look like to
give you an overarching roadmap of where
we're going an overarching roadmap of
where we're going and then what I'm
going to be doing throughout is
presenting that material and then as I
said trying to put it into constructive
dialogue with the argument I have made
my attempt is not to sort of say that
they are all the my account is better or
they're all just saying what I was
saying but what I want to show is that
the account I've made can be I can argue
that it is deeply responsive and
responsible to the work of these
prophets of the meaning crisis so the
figure that it's and he is a
controversial figure and I think it's
fair to say my philosophical attitude
towards him is one of ambivalence but
sort of a pivotal figure in this
is Heidegger so I want to take a look at
Heidegger right now I'm not going into
discussing these people I want to draw
out some important connections we'll
have to go behind Heidegger a little bit
and talk about hosts role and
phenomenology and that's important
Heidegger is I would argue also deeply
influenced by sort of the the the gnosis
underground running through Germany
especially in the 20th century and
especially like between the wars and
that comes through at least explicitly
and you can see this in John Caputo's
book on the mystical element and
Heidegger thought this comes through the
Rhineland mystic of meister eckhart has
a huge impact on on Heidegger so so
those are definitely important aspects
important influences another of course
titanically important because he just
influences everybody is caught and
behind count of course is Descartes so
many of these people I'm not going to
have to I'm not going to talk about at
length because I've already talked but
I'm trying to map this out because I'm
trying to show you what I'm going to
invoke and then what I'm going to
discuss in order to try and draw this
all together so another really important
figure and you've heard me mention him
several times and he directly gets into
that connection with theology but he is
one of the I think one of the great
writers about the meaning crisis is of
course Paul Tillich and his masterpiece
the courage to be is all about you know
a prophetic announcement of the meaning
crisis and an attempt to seriously
revise you know theology to take that
into account and there's also and it's I
think both this way and it's not clear
if it's also independently but there are
Gnostic element deeply Gnostic elements
so I'll put that is sort of a dotted
line
in Tillich Tillich famously argues that
we need to get to the God beyond the God
of theism which is about a gnostic a
statement as you could possibly make
so Heidegger also has a lot of influence
on somebody you've heard me mention
especially with ideas of trans jacked it
but he has a lot to say about symbolism
and the meeting crisis and this is
Corbin and so I'm gonna have to talk a
lot about Corbin because I haven't
discussed him at length but his work is
again very pivotal in trying to respond
to the meeting crisis and the work that
Chatham has done at trying in his
trilogy of books or maybe there's four
books maybe but I've read three I've
read two and I'm currently reading the
third books on Corbin really helped to
make a good case for how important it is
many people don't know about for example
the deep connections between somebody
else that we're going to talk about
Corbin and Yonge and of course Jung is
directly influenced by the Gnostics and
directly influenced by Conte
this allows me to bring out another
important connection which is the work
of Dooley because what he does which is
really impressive right is he shows the
deep similarities between Tillich and
Jung no doubt because of their sharing
well I'm arguing the sharing of the
gnosis background I would also argue
that both Tillich and Jung are an
important sense non theists and we'll
talk about what non-theism is as we get
into that but the one of the core shared
idea and this is actually the title of
one under Lee's book is the psyche as
sacrament both Tillich and Jung view the
psyche in a sacramental fashion and that
is part of the way in which they attempt
to respond to the meaning crisis both of
them have profound things to say
about about symbols and the relationship
to the spiritual life broadly construed
so we're going to talk about young now
somebody that's also here directly
influenced by gnosis influenced by
caught through the romantics which we've
talked about at least the early German
romantics people like Slagel for example
and therefore through Coolridge right
and the person I'm drawing in here this
is going to be Barfield and you've heard
me mention him a couple times and bar
fields notions of participation have a
lot to say so you can see how they're
there there's sort of a network here and
then there's there's another one that of
course we need to talk about and this is
the connection between Heidegger and
what's been sort of I don't like this
term but and and people abuse it those
post-modernism as if everybody who's a
post modernist were saying the same
thing we should more carefully look at
individual thinkers and their individual
arguments one potential connection here
is we'll take a look at it Derrida
now whether or not we should call the
these these two other people postmodern
it is not clear they're they're deeply
responding to post-modernism and that's
grand Parman and the terrific work
timothy Morton are also doing and this
is what's known as speculative realism
it's also knowing a Hartman's particular
version of it is known as triple o this
stands for object-oriented ontology this
is the attempt to deeply bring back a
profound kind of realism and contact
with reality another person that's
influenced by is Han the current
philosopher and cultural critic will
talk a little bit about I can't give all
of these people equal work I'm gonna
talk about Barfield young Corvin until
ik and Heidegger but extensively
Hartmann not as much Han not as much
Derrida not as much but I'll at least
touch upon them okay because I want to
do this as a way of trying to connect
the meaning crisis to what's been called
post modernity broadly very broadly
construed and offer an alternative
response to post-modernism to to both
sort of wholesale adoption of it or the
the wholesale demonization of it I think
these are both over reactions that we
should have a much more nuanced and
careful response to now Heidegger has a
huge influence in an area many people
don't know about and part of this
influences also James and part of this
influence is also Buddhism and you've
heard me mention this and this is the
kyoto school and they are deeply about
responding to the meeting crisis and
especially the work of Nishida who
really is the pivotal figure in founding
this and then the person who I think
wrote one of the masterpieces on
responding to the meeting crisis and
this is nishitani his book religion and
nothingness I've read that book twice I
would put that book in the top five
books of responding to the meeting
crisis it is not an easy book that's why
I have not yet put it into
the Twitter record book recommendations
I've recommended the kyouda school and
some of Robert Carter's excellent work
introducing you to these people directly
reading nishitani is very difficult you
need to know
Heidegger well James well Buddhism well
alright and then the Kyoto School people
and I won't talk about like Maserati
they they put this into dialogue with
people like Tillich and Whitehead so
this is what I want to try and address
again I will be giving some of these
people much more priority I only have
four four lectures left after this so
right four hours so I'll be giving some
people much more priority than others
obviously Heidegger is taking a a
central role here but we'll we will be
spending quite a bit of time with
Barfield young Corvin and Tillich and
with nishitani okay so those are the
ones that I'm gonna give priority to
these other people I'll try to do my
best to represent them but I will have
to prioritize I want to keep my
commitment to you that I finished this
in the 50 episodes I also do not want to
drag my video crew through some kind of
video version of a death march until
they are exhausted beyond all
recognition so where to start on here
well I'm going to start at the the
center so this is very complicated and
this is not meant to be an explanatory
schema this is meant to be a road map to
show you where I'm going how are things
connected you can take this down and
like I said then you can use this to
retrace the connections as I try to
explicate and explain them
all right so before we get to Heidegger
we have to talk about I don't have to
talk about Eckhart and the rhineland
mystics because I've already done that
or gnosis because I've already done that
quite extensively right or caught
because I've done that but when a person
that I haven't discussed but it has
Titanic influence on Heidegger is
Husserl Edmund Husserl and who's well of
course is famous for founding a whole
philosophical movement called
phenomenology existentialism comes out
of phenomenology via Heidegger by the
way that's when you get existentialism
Heidegger does something to
phenomenology and it leads to
existentialism but it also leads to
deconstructionism post-modernism bla bla
bla bla I've already pointed out now
again you need an entire course to get
clear about what phenomenology is I
really recommend the introduction to
phenomenology by Sokolowski Sokolowski
and the book experimental phenomenology
by Don ID this is sort of gives you an
idea right of what phenomenology is a
very good very clear-eyed and this gives
you sort of ways of practicing some
phenomenological techniques to get a
more inside feel of what phenomenology
is like now phenomenology and hustled
even writes a book where he invokes the
word crisis of crisis and European
sciences right phenomenology was host
Earl's attempt to try and I would argue
the following thing the it's an attempt
to try and get us back to a contact
epistemology and that's why you can see
people who are deeply influenced by the
phenomenological tradition like Dreyfus
and Taylor talking about the loss of a
contact epistemology because they're
aware of the idea of a contact
epistemology I would argue from their
phenomenological heritage what's real
famously argued about getting back to
the
back to things getting back to the
things that we had gettin so abstracted
and removed we had lost contact with the
world we were out of touch in a profound
way and that's why phenomenology has had
such a big influence on those aspects of
cognitive science that are trying to
show how deeply embedded embodied and
connected we are to the world so the
attempt to get get back contact
epistemology was really central and one
way of understanding that contact and to
put it into dialogue with the language
we've been using in this course right is
that you get this contact by the
phenomenology shouldn't be confused with
merely introspecting that's that's the
everyday or common sense stance the
phenomenological attitude is not the
same thing as your common sensical
everyday introspection right instead
phenomenology is a much more disciplined
practice in which you're trying to pay
reflective and following ID kind of an
experimental attention this probative
attention to the way in in which we are
in contact with the world so let's say
that what I'm doing in phenomenology is
I'm playing this reflective experimental
exploratory probative attention
attention to contact and then how can we
understand contact well what his role
emphasized emphasized intentionality
right that's one pole of this relation
okay now I've got to explain this
normally when we use this word it's it's
correct but it's a species of the
broader sense of intentionality when we
say you do something intentionally it
means you're doing it on purpose
intentionality here in phenomenology and
philosophy in general is much more
broader it means any mental directedness
any mental directedness so when my
perceptions are are of the bottle or my
actions are towards the book right or
I'm thinking about Paris those are all
intentionality in that I have a mental
directedness so there's the
intentionality and it's in this
reciprocal relationship with the way in
which a world is disclosed we're a world
doesn't mean a planet it means something
that we've been talking about throughout
right it means a meaningfully structured
environment a meaningfully structured
environment what I've tried to often
capture by this notion of an arena this
is kind of a core kind of agency this is
at least mental agency this mental
directedness so and this is important
this is how did you use the word noesis
here for this and the new EEMA is here
and there's of course all kinds of
debates about what this does this refer
to just something in my consciousness or
something in the world that we're going
to come back to some of this we're gonna
come back to it when in order to get to
Harman and we are going to look at
Sparrows critique of phenomenology
because he's going to argue that the
very goal of phenomenology which was to
get back into contact with reality
and therefore to be a kind of realism is
forted by this this set up so he's gonna
argue that phenomenology ultimately
fails as a form of realism and that it's
ultimately a kind of idealism and
therefore doesn't give us what it
purported to do we'll come back to that
that's just some forewarning
what I would argue using this is what
phenomenology using what I mean by this
is the language and some of the
conceptual vocabulary in theoretical
grammar we've developed together using
that I would describe phenomenology as
this reflective experimental exploratory
probe rhetoric probative attention on
right the trans jet and the fact that
he's invoking this term remember noesis
right
this is prospective unknowing so putting
it together it's this reflective meaning
all of these it's this reflective
attention paid to your prospective of
knowing of the transgenerational and in
that sense it's deeply consonant with
and that's no coincidences has had a
huge influence on me and my thinking and
many of the people in third generation
cogs i4ii cognitive science have been
deeply influenced by this because
they're trying to understand meaning in
this transactive way making sense now as
I said we're going to come back to
criticize that but right now in order to
make the bridge to Harman but what I
want to do now into speculative realism
what I want to do now is what did
Heidegger do with this what did
Heidegger do with this well
my way of putting this that I think
draws together two of its criticisms is
to well know maybe a better way let's do
the two criticism then draw them
together one of heidegger's main
criticism is that hugs will work and
that this is going to be developed by
Sparrow and the speculative realists is
that hustlers work had not really given
us contact now one way I would put it is
because it had not really developed an
account of participatory knowing it had
not really developed an account of how
the agent and the arena were
fundamentally related together so that
this perspectival relationship could
unfold now I don't think that's the case
for all of phenomenology I would make
the case that Marlowe pontes I and we
talked about this Marlowe Aponte's ideas
about embodiment and embeddedness are
trying to get at the connection between
the perspective of knowing of her Elian
phenomenology and the participatory
knowing nevertheless what Heidegger was
innovating and this is how he was
bringing in an existential aspect he he
was trying to bring he was trying to
point out that the modal relationship
between the agent in the arena using our
terms was not properly accounted for
within the historian framework so
participatory knowing was deeply missing
and that's right that's sort of our
fundamental way in which we're connected
in contact with being and then in
connection with that that that
participatory knowing had not been set
within an ontology that this right this
needed to be set within participatory
knowing existential modes right
existentialism comes out of Heidegger
and that in turn needed to be set into a
proper ontology and a proper account of
the structure of being to use our
language how does the translation ship
sit within an overall overall account of
the structure of being itself when and
we don't have that then we don't have a
 we have not really got contact back
because we're still out of touch with
our being and through our being of being
itself we're out of touch with our being
and through our being of being itself
this is Heidegger's main criticism a
related criticism that is pervasive
although for a long time
implicit and and i don't like the way
Heidegger of course eventually turned on
host well for despicable reasons but one
of the criticisms hydrators making as
Heidegger Husserl was still trapped
within the Cartesian cultural cognitive
grammar HUS role is deeply Cartesian he
entitles one of his books Cartesian
meditations so in that sense
Heidegger feels that puss roll is still
bound within the Cartesian grammar and
he sees that that Cartesian cultural
cognitive grammar for ways we've
articulated radically cuts us off from
the world and this is of course a way of
saying that we're still sort of trapped
within our subjectivity and in that
sense we'll we'll see what sterile means
by Hosur Elia and phenomenology is maybe
still understandable as a kind of
idealism which doesn't get us back to
realism as much as the phenomenologist
claim and wanted it to do so
so how do we get to this deeper contact
in an organized fashion how do we do
those two things how do we open up
participatory knowing situated within an
ontology and break free from the
Cartesian ultimately he would say
platonic I think that's incorrect
maybe Aristotelian but how do we how do
we escape the strictures the
restrictions of the Cartesian cultural
cognitive grammar that keep us out of
contact with reality so what we need to
do is phenomenologically not just
theoretically but phenomenologically
right within participatory knowing by
transforming it in a reflective
experimental exploratory probit or way
our attention right by directing our
attention in this fashion and opening up
our perspective on knowing so we're
going to phenomenologically realize but
we're gonna direct that phenomenological
realization towards something important
we're gonna direct it towards our being
who and what we are that's how we're
going to connect to the participatory
knowing what's that going to do well
we're going to have a phenomenological
realization which of course is then
going to become an existential
realization that we are the beings who
beat whose being is in question
we are the beings whose being is in
question now if you heard the weird
being and you you think well that were
this you're a homo sapiens and you've
got DNA that's not what's being meant
here okay it's not what's being meant
here so be patient because it's what's
grounding this that is our being now
talking about a biological phenomena at
least in any direct sense although I
think it's ultimately grounded
biologically right we're talking about
what
owns this historian framework in a
participatory knowing what does it mean
to say we are the being whose being is
in question well you can even get a
sense of this from the term
existentialism remember we talked about
this that existentialism says human
beings don't have an essence like other
creatures other things so you know a
gazelle is born it is a gazelle its
identity is set it's gonna develop into
a gazelle right but for us at least
insofar I would argue as we are persons
are who and what we are whether or not
it means sense to call it our essence
because essence should be a widely
shared property but our being then maybe
that's a better word to use right now
who and what I am as the person genre
vague that has been in question I
existed before right before who and what
I am has come into being and in fact
it's still unclear to me who and what I
am and that's also the case but you are
in question you exist before you have an
essence before you have who and what you
are that's what existentialism
ultimately points to that your existence
precedes your essence that's that's one
of the things existentialism takes out
of Heidegger but the key idea is that
you are this thing's being is not in
question to it or even ultimately to us
I mean we can sort of do philosophy on
it but there's from within phenomenology
from within a front of a nomological
perspective I'm sorry phenomenological
stance is perhaps a better word we are
in questioned to ourselves who right Who
am I what am i what is it to be a person
what kind of person am I
and these get and you see you see why
this is relevant this question goes
fundamentally it's bound up with this
question what is the meaning of my life
in this right not in the sense of
destiny but like how is my life
meaningful what makes it meaningful what
makes it meaningful to me
what is its meeting now notice and we've
already talked about hydrators
connection to this Heidegger is trying
to get you into something like an aporia
and he's trying to get you to remember
the being mode the mode in which you're
not trying to manipulate even yourself
and solve problems
you're stepping back and confronting
mystery because you're invent you're
engaged not with control controlling
things and satisfying you're having
needs you're engaged within a process of
development of becoming and so you're
confronting mystery because you're going
through transformative experience you
are the being who's being is in question
and he's trying to wake you up not
theoretically phenomenologically he's
getting wanting to get you to
phenomenologically realize that you are
the being who's being is in question
that's what we all are so instead of
referring to us as persons or human
beings or things like that he crashed
this new word Heidegger is famous for
neologisms and and part of what he's
trying to do with the neologisms is
break us out of the familiar terms and
thereby break us out of the Cartesian
grammar he comes up with this word
design which means being there it has to
do with you know I I exist being there
being there I'm sort of throwing into
the world throwing into existence and my
being is in question that design being
there so what's interesting is my my
participatory knowing right the way in
which I try to connect to how I'm
situated in being
has an operatic element to it aporia
right in which I realize that central to
me according to Heidegger is that my
being is in question
now if my being that's my participatory
knowing my groundedness and being is in
question that is how I can link
participatory knowing to ontology itself
do you see because and this is why it's
participatory knowing myself knowledge
will also get me into my knowledge of
ontology because by knowing myself as
the being who's being in question I can
put ontology itself into question I can
put sorry I mean no I'm sorry I can
frame an ontological question of putting
being itself into question I know myself
as a being whose being is in question
and knowing myself that way is also to
put being into question right and so
I've got this deep participation in the
mystic the Co determining mysteries of
who I am and what being is so by Phenom
illogically exploring that being the
being of design we can simultaneously
come into contact with our mortal
existence we can remember the being mode
we can be opened up to the wonder of our
own being that we are ultimately self
defining at least in some important
aspect were ultimately self defining
self making things but of course we
don't do that
egotistical Eeyore egocentric Lee
because we're bound to the world for
freeze ins I've already given you
multiple times
so by phenomenologically exploring the
being of design we can simultaneously
come into contact with our own modal
existence and the mystery of being
itself so this is starting to take us
right into the core of how Heidegger is
trying to deepen what he thinks was
missing the ultimately the contact with
ourselves right but not with our
autobiographical ego but with our being
the contact our participatory knowing of
our self though the connectedness to
being
and he's found this I mean it's that's
why he's Heidegger there's brilliant
insight that because we are the being
whose beings in question we can deepen
the contact by phenomenologically
exploring this so that's really central
to what Heidegger is trying to do
reading Heidegger is very hard because
it's filled with all this neologisms
it's filled with all of this constant
right qualifying with this constant
self-criticism which of course is good
this constant refinement but also this
this constant acknowledgment statement
that it's not quite getting it we're not
getting the answer so it there's it's
it's it's it's like going on the walk
through a really gnarled forest with
somebody if this is a metaphor that
Heidegger himself would use and you get
a sense of progress but it's not clear
if you're actually making progress you
you come into clearings and you you get
openings an insight but then there's
also but yet we haven't arrived we
haven't arrived until you go on again
and so there's this long process so what
I want to do instead with you is instead
of trying to do something audacious to
try to summer I want to try and go in
and get some I'm going to do some
exposition with you I want to read some
key quotes from Heidegger and what I
then want to do is try and unpack them
following this idea of how he's trying
to deepen contact trying to put into
dialogue with the very tremendous help
of Dreyfuss with the machinery the
theoretical machinery we have developed
and also along and that will also afford
me a critical response to Heidegger I'm
not going to start those quotes now
because we're almost out of time what I
want to do is just foreshadow what
Heidegger is going to argue how did
there is going to argue that the history
of metaphysics
there what that whole philosophical
history coming out of the axial
revolution is actually the history of
nihilism this is why he is a prophet of
the meaning crisis that that whole
historical development though that that
that that framework that cognitive that
cultural cognitive grammar right that
we've inherited from the actual
revolution that whole metaphysical
framework has developed inexorably
towards nihilism it has driven us into
the meaning crisis and of course that's
already deeply resonant with the
historical analysis that we pursued in
the first half of this course so if we
can understand that cultural cognitive
grammar of metaphysics that's a
pejorative term for Heidegger we can
link it to this project of the
phenomenological investigation of design
and break free from that grammar and
deeply reestablish and this is not just
theoretically this is phenomenologically
existentially our contact with being and
that deep participatory knowing and
remembering of being and the realization
of being and how it's not a being not a
particular being and our status with
respect to being that's the response
Heidegger is recommending to the meaning
crisis and what next time what I would
like to do with you is explore what his
thinking is by going through the quotes
unpack it more what link it to the
argument that the history of metaphysics
is the history of nihilism see what we
can glean in a cooperative dialogue
between this course and Heidegger about
responding to the meeting crisis and and
draw what important or at least relevant
conclusions we can from that
thank you very much for your time and
attention
[Music]
you
you
you