howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
this is the gym rut show and I'm your
host Jim rut
today's guest is jordan hall a good
friend as well as one of the broadest
and deepest thinkers around about the
future of society economics politics and
more things in that's very nice to be
here great to have you prior to setting
out to save the world from itself Jordan
was a successful tech exec and tech
investor usually I spend about ten hours
preparing for each guest and carefully
craft a set of topics to keep the
conversation moving but tonight at
Jordans request we're gonna do something
different in this episode he and I are
going to interact in a pretty freeform
fashion Jordan has a concept of thinking
versus simulated thinking and we're
committed tonight to try and do thinking
Jordan why do you start off by telling
the audience about the difference
between thinking and simulated thinking
interesting okay so I guess to begin we
can maybe make the distinction that I
think it's pretty common in the
literature between something that I've
called habit mode and maybe something
you might call contemplation that are
seeking mode the notion here is that the
way that the human mind brain works
there's a portion of your awareness that
is very sort of open and exploring and
endeavouring to bias in the direction of
perception and there's a portion of the
way that your brain works that when
particular behaviors or functions have
been pretty well understood or reduced
to habits and therefore extremely
efficient so kind of the classic example
is that as you become quite skillful at
driving you can find yourself doing the
very complicated function of driving and
doing many of the things of the same
time certainly having a conversation of
course with your Millennial you're
probably texting to the first is just to
recognize that having both of those
modes is part of just being a healthy
personality mind and that each one has
different strengths and weaknesses of
your different to do your accounting
move to the time you're actually trying
to do some function of habit mode to
just doing the raw math for example you
don't want to be contemplating deep with
a very nature number and in that context
by contrast for example if you are
hunting not particularly if you're
hunting on the move if you're tracking a
large portion of your awareness will
actually have to be pretty wide open
sensitive to signals that may not be
obvious signals this is even more so the
case if you're not just hunting but are
in say a combat environment where the
opponent is as adept at simulating
and/or obfuscating signal as you are
trying to tease it out
so the concept of simulated thinking
then what it does is it takes this
notion of saying have in mind and
notices that a large portion of the
culture that we've been raised in and
this is going on for hundreds of years
is well frankly quite artificial and
quite optimized so we go to school and
we very quickly you know somewhere
around third or fourth grade learn that
understanding what's being taught is not
really the nature of the game but rather
being able to repeat back the correct
answers with precision and speed is the
nature of the game and so we begin to
actually use more and more of a habbit
mind light approach to cover more and
more aspects of what thinking might be
and so there's a proposition that I'm
making when I make this distinction
there's a threshold where habbit mind
actually begins to take itself as the
whole of thinking we have so many
different schema that have been loaded
into our brain on how to respond to
different conversational gambits or
events in our environment then we are in
fact almost exclusively acting out of
habit and almost not at all actually
using the part of mind to truly deeply
contemplate what's happening in front of
us and the proposition is that that's a
trap that we would find ourselves in
simulated thinking it can be very very
effective in circumstances that are
what's called ordinary like say you're
in school it could be extremely
ineffective when you're actually in a
novel environment much worse than just a
regular old habit mind because at least
have it mind is more fluidly related to
sinking mud
yeah what you call simulated thinking
screams at me about much not all of my
experience in big corporate America you
know unlike you I actually did work for
big companies for quite a number of
years and the number of conversations
that could only be called simulated
thinking actually dominates I would say
most of the interactions in large
corporations and
why they fairly often get caught with
their pants down you know you look at
the example I like to give is in my
hometown of Washington DC we had a
pretty big pretty strong regional home
improvements Shane called Hechinger they
had 120 stores over three or four states
and you know they saw Home Depot and
Lowe's coming for 20 years right and one
of the last places Home Depot and Lowe's
showed up was in the DC area because
they figured Hechinger z-- was a pretty
strong entrenched incumbent but the
truth was Hechinger had not improved
their game in those 20 years and within
a year of Home Depot showing up
Hechinger was bankrupt the only thing I
can assume is that for 20 years they
were doing simulated thinking because
they could have responded the home depot
mix was a little smarter a little better
than Hechinger z-- but not by light
years but I can just see it now they
were involved in you know basically
jerking each other off in the
conventional fashion for 20 years hoping
nothing would happen or at least that
their pensions would vest and then when
the opponent actually showed up they
collapsed this happens again and again
and again in fact in a part of my role
in corporate American probably the only
reason I was tolerated in corporate
America not thrown out on my ass was I
think I had a skill for crafting spaces
where people could engage in thinking
right and that's why they put up with my
obnoxiousness and bomb-throwing because
they knew at some higher level that
thinking was what's gonna save them
particularly during that big year of
transition I worked good part of my
career in the publishing industry as we
transition from CD ROMs and even books
to proprietary online and then the
internet if you didn't have somebody
thinking you were gonna lose that race
and there's a classic example of work if
you're not fluid if you're just hitting
the ping-pong ball back and forth like
so many banal conversations in corporate
America you're not gonna make the change
fast enough and you're gonna be
Hechinger it's not Home Depot but yeah I
think that's a wonderful construction
and I've been taken to stealing it and
using it with credit where appropriate
because it really does say something
about what seriously wrong about our
society today particularly in this CPAC
of exponential change which I think
brings us to the next topic one that I
you want to talk about which is you know
Jordan is pretty well known for saying
the end is near in the current game in
the status quo
whether it's echo side where we kill our
environment or a financial collapse plus
a civil war throw in an epidemic or two
maybe mass insanity brought on by the
internet anyway the game we are
currently playing Jordan says will end
soon he calls the current game game a
want you to tell us about what is game a
and why you think it's getting near the
end of its time okay I think that the
opening with simulated thinking actually
provides a nice context for walking into
the broader notion of game a because the
two are I think meaningfully related if
you think about the kind of
circumstances that tend to give rise to
simulated thinking and maybe just sort
of generalize them think about the
various kind predominantly when one
finds oneself was called relatively far
from nature relatively far from the
uncertain or from the wall from
complexity quite precisely simulated
thinking can tend to settle in so when
you're to use the Game of Thrones
metaphor when you're in King's Landing
simulated thinking actually tends to be
a very good strategy when you're in the
north winter or more specifically nature
will kill you if you're simulated
thinking so there's kind of a pressure
there okay so the jury to formulating
game a has frankly been quite long it
began with just taking a look at very
concrete things like the financial
crisis of 2008 and why exactly even as
early as 2008 it was immediately evident
that political systems in the West were
beginning the process of some quite
significant breakdown and for me the
journey was one of just trying to look
more and more deeply at what let's say
fundamental is there anything
fundamental about this because if we
want to figure out how to solve the
problem we'd like to figure out how to
actually get down to the roots of the
problem and tear it out from the roots
and most endeavors thus far at least to
solve the problem have from my
perspective been budgets that in patches
they've been modifications and additions
to some sort of more bay
architecture and have it therefore going
all the way down so I've spent quite
some time and differing to go down and
the way that I tell the story most often
and I think in affection at least is the
most understandable is somewhat
historical so can I go in that direction
does that seem to make sense
absolutely well we're thinking here
we're not simulated thinking so you
think is useful all right so here's the
story that seems to me to work pretty
well and just as a caveat to everybody
out there I will take full
responsibility for what I'm about to say
and recognizing that we are definitely
in thinking space meaning it's quite
likely the most of what I'm saying is at
best rough and a sizeable fraction was
just flat out wrong so this is an effort
to do something novel and I'll put my
neck on the line there are many other
people have been thinking about this
sort of thing and maybe I'll reference
very specific contributions that they've
made that are substantially more
rigorous than I'm about to say so the
proposition is that we we have
essentially so far in the arc of human
history three basic serious moves almost
like three points on a line the first we
could just sort of broadly point to as
the emergence of Homo sapiens sapiens
whatever it is the transition humans
from being more or less like chimpanzees
to being more or less like modern humans
the second youth is the one that I've
want to point sometime out right now
which is seems to be in the order of
about seventy five thousand years ago
and grabs we may even just call it the
upper paleolithic transition and so
something happened in that time frame
that can brought a look at is being
significant and the proposition that I
would put forward is that this is the
point at which Homo sapiens sapiens was
able to perfect a particular or alchol a
collective intelligence toolkit a way of
unleashing a particular capacity that
was sort of Layton or ambient in social
animals and in increasingly tribal and
increasingly pro-social animals as you
kind of move through the evolutionary
tree until finally humble sapiens
sapiens had the right stuff and by the
way under the right circumstances to
have to find in the fitness landscape or
location of this particular collective
intelligence capacity and I'll just name
that tribal coherence so this is a way
that a group of people can come together
and in this case it's almost strictly
lineage bow so this group of people is
all which are Jeanette
related first second third generation
and all of whom have always lived in
exactly the same culture as everyone
else so it's a very tightly bound group
and nonetheless has been able to achieve
a particular capacity to work together
they gave rise to this unique human
ability to engage in nice transition at
the ability to not be bound to a
particular biological ecosystem we're
moving from one needs to another Nisha
is extraordinarily unlikely to be
successful because you're just going to
have to evolve and good old-fashioned
biological time but actually being able
to use cultural evolution to move from
the coastline to across out of Africa
and then down and through all the
various niches of the entire world and
relatively rapid with like an order of
two or three generations become a peak
predator by developing cultural
artifacts that enable that for survival
and thriving in a particular niche and
so that's the first major move the
development of tribal coherence and the
explosion of this novel human capacity
using tribal coherence to engage in in
each transition question for you Jordan
at this point is it actually try bowlers
it's still at the hunter-gatherer band
level to be very precise it's the
hunter-gatherer bands level and in fact
specifically somewhere within the notion
of Dunbar so for people who don't know
about the Dunbar number this is
something that Jordan and I have used in
our thinking for a long time what was
his name Robin Dunbar yeah Robin Dunbar
yeah Robin Dunbar did lots of research
and found that for current humans we
typically have no more than 150 real
friends and any wimpy little
anthropological literature and he found
that in modern hunter-gatherer bands or
recent almost modern ones that almost
survived to the present
it was extremely uncommon to have a band
one of these extended lineages not all
necessarily related they always took
people in and people left very unusual
for them to be bigger than 150 as they
approach 150 they tended to fraction
eight into two units and new people go
armed on till they got the 150 and it
happened again and again so it's one to
make that clear that we're talking not
tribal here which is the next step but
hunter-gatherer yeah yeah right in fact
if one is familiar with the distinction
that band is exactly right I tend to use
tribal because almost nobody's from
there with the distinction but thank you
in fact are you actually pulling to the
next stage so more or less would have
it could fast-forward we see this the
opera of humanity operating at this band
level in these relatively small
tight-knit groups and as the population
increases beyond a certain threshold the
groups separate and move and so this
drives the spread and over a period of
30 or so thousand years managed to cover
the entire globe and here then begins
the pressure of the next stage which may
in fact be at the neolithic transition
but in any event something begins to
happen where the primary pressure in the
niche that you're in is no longer nature
it's actually other people where the
ability to just move to a new location
that is now empty and open even maybe a
relatively rough location like say
moving from a nice grassland into the
desert because the grassland is now full
but we can build a technology to allow
surviving the desert even the deserts
are relatively full of people enough
right they're not full of people that
moving into these locations is now no
longer easy this for now the pressure
begins to build and this pressure I
imagine for a very long period of time
thousands of years tens of thousands of
years different solutions to the
pressure would pop up as we look at the
anthropological story we see tribal
structures pop up tribal in the more
formal sense that a larger in scale and
actually do show a capacity to do things
like gather and concentrate wealth and
we'll see grave sites that would appear
to be aristocratic like individuals who
have concentrations of wealth well in
advance of Bronze Age civilization for
example and there's an exploration and
exploration classic evolutionary first
function looking for something that is
more stable and more complete until
eventually there is a discovery and as
we now know will invest seven distinct
locations around the world but in the
Fertile Crescent once maybe three times
of this thing that I would now call game
a which is a new collective intelligence
tool kit that includes what John Bebek
you would call psycho technologies a set
of psycho technologies that give rise to
a unique capacity and particularly an
unique capacity in the context of the
band level of collective intelligence it
can beat man
categorically game a fundamentally is
about being able to solve ultimately
three primary problems it still has to
be able to solve the problem of how you
survive in nature so it still has to be
able to gather people together such that
they can extract resources from nature
so as to provide for the well-being of
the group now though it has to be able
to survive competition with other human
groups and ideally to be victorious in
competition with other human groups and
as we will discover as a third piece it
has to actually be able to survive
internal defection as the population
begins to grow well beyond the Dunbar
number so game a is a collection of
psycho technologies it is a collective
intelligence toolkit that is the
solution to the question of how does one
go about satisfying those three problems
and of course it's continually been
developing over time as initially the
first order game a civilizations were
quite successful in being able to expand
and absorb their nearest neighbors and
we have now pretty strong evidence of
what looks like quite a catastrophe in
the y-chromosome
lineage somewhere around this time
forever somewhere on the neolithic
transition where something on the order
of like 90 percent of all male lines
were extinguished and i would propose
that that's the story of the story of
game a wherever it was discovered the
neighbors got more or less slaughtered
the women became part of the game a
structure the civilization began to
expand and then the neighbors either had
to run away found themselves part of the
emerging civilization or had to up their
game and become a new game a player
right so the relationship for example
between Samaria and the Acadians is an
example of that last piece so it seems
like a good place to pause there and see
where we are in the story okay it's just
a question about the technology do you
see this transition happening around the
time of the development of agriculture
and larger settlements or is this a
little earlier than that my sense is
that it's right up at this threshold of
and the development of agriculture is
part of the tool
probably a little bit later than its
beginning so as you begin to have
success in game a one of the first
problems you run into is you're
beginning to have a population base that
is larger they can be reasonably handled
by hunting and gathering particularly
because the other technologies of game a
tend to be not as easily mobile so you
have to be a little bit more sedentary
which then leads to a recursive search
on how do we begin to use what was in
fact a relatively robust agricultural
toolkit that had already been developed
in for a period of time how do we use
these now with a little bit more urgency
and you kind of pop through the
agricultural revolution in that
timeframe so just to hold that for a
second if you run all the way back to
the story of the emergence of Homo
sapiens sapiens you actually see a very
analogous search function where you
needed to be able to for example figure
out and I mean this I'm obviously anti
polarizing all of these functions but
figure out the problems say
grandmother's and you had to figure out
the problem
of radically increasing both the
possibility and the survivability of
increased male attention in parenting
and you had to figure out how to
increase or really quite significantly
change the gestation and early childhood
learning because of course as humans
were beginning to grow larger and larger
crania the physical capacity of women to
give birth was limited and so you had
these extremely oddness children which
required grandmothers and required more
male resources to support right see all
of these different problems has to be
solved and any one of which is just a
complete waste of time and so it's this
really challenging issue of getting a
multivariate complex system to actually
get kind of nudging each one of these
different pieces almost randomly but
just enough to create enough possibility
to move the whole thing closer and
closer to this basin of Attraction and
once it hits the basin there's a pop and
suddenly okay we now have enough of the
pieces and plates that a whole new theme
kicks off called humanity and we move
forward same thing happening here where
you've got everything from moving in to
writing the presencing of symbolic
language on the top of orality and you
have the capacity to begin really
expanding technology and agriculture
which included things like the ability
to do astronomy modeling time and being
able to actually use constructs of time
to be able to notice when seasons are
going to
yo and when rivers were going to flood
ik cetera et cetera raises a whole bunch
of different things to have to come
together know one of which is enough to
cause enough density and stability to
land but once the complex hits BAM you
have this new sin and it begins to
expand in the world because now can was
notably it can scale it can actually
grow the number of human beings that are
participating in a pro-social in-group
vastly beyond the Dunbar limit I like to
make a couple comments about that if we
think about this yes it makes the
transition but unfortunately it's a
one-way transition right the densities
get way higher than could support
foragers so once the society makes the
transition to settled agriculture and
such it cannot peacefully go back to
being a forager society we know some
cases where they've collapsed and been
big die outs and they've gone back to
being foragers but essentially in a
positive mode it's a one-way ratchet the
other part as you probably know there
are many people who believe the
invention of this settled agriculture
game a complex was actually a great
tragedy at some level because the band
level had developed a very interesting
adaptation against hierarchy I don't
know if you've read Chris Bohm's book
hierarchy in the forest yeah wonderful
if you want to think about humanity and
organization and all this read Chris
poems hierarchy and a jungle really
should be titled non hierarchy in the
jungle cuz his thesis based on a lot
work is that the band level Homo sapiens
no Dunbar number and below had developed
essentially everywhere on Earth a
allergy to hierarchy to bosses to big
shots and this is somewhat in opposition
to our genetic heritage chimps are very
hierarchical animals and probably band
level humans had the genetic tendency
towards relatively rigid hierarchy but
Chris suggests it was a development of
weaponry that allowed two betas to kill
an alpha which allowed the band to
essentially develop an ethos against
hierarchy and when the game a complex
came into being and the way it
transitioned above the
our numbers was to develop hierarchical
technology-mediated with essentially
Praetorian guards or a small military
caste that was very loyal to the leaders
that could finally break out of the anti
hierarchical operating system that we
had at the band level yeah that's right
that is definitely my perspective and I
think more abstractly what I would say
is that the band level we actually have
a where maybe a call echo formal closure
over defection at least beyond a level
it would be catastrophic to the group so
hierarchical defection is one example
you also have laziness defection is
another example and band level groups
are extraordinarily like extraordinarily
effective at policing defection inside
the group and I mean defection here in
the classic sort of game theoretic sense
Free Riders as we know every system of
cooperation is subject to erosion vyak
Free Riders yeah and my proposition is
that in many ways we're looking at in
the Dunbar complex and here I'm going to
use the phrase number limit at the
Dunbar complex the set of would appears
to be even the neurological capacity is
to engage in really robust modeling if
every other member and all of the
complex of relationships between the
members I would propose this in fact
evolution being sensitive to the
catastrophic effects of defection in
cooperation environments and so
essentially every human group that
couldn't police that level detection
well enough would eventually find itself
beginning some kind of degradation of
collective intelligence it was
essentially catastrophic to collective
intelligence and therefore be selected
against and so over a long enough period
of time
this is Dunbar complex emerge that
enabled the band level to adorn against
defection from individual members wasn't
this come up as a primary problem with
game it interesting I've long thought
that homo sapiens sapiens even probably
started at less than 150 and as we had
this increased neocortex that was the
apparatus that allowed us to essentially
do the combinatorics to get up to around
150 and while we didn't have hierarchy
in the jungle we certainly had a band
level rating and warfare
often to the point of extinction right
and so you know a band that could have
coherence at 150 had a very substantial
advantage over a band that could only
have coherence at 80 and so there was a
group selection advantage yeah I realize
group selection is very controversial
but I'm gonna assume that it occurs and
that you know hence there was a ratchet
for more neocortex until the limit of
the pelvic girdle and the human female
was reached and that basically was how
we converge to the Dunbar number of 150
yeah I think we're more or less in
agreement around that story all right so
we're up to Jericho ten thousand years
ago approximately right take the story
forward so now what we look at is we
have the story of history essentially
now so the story of Game a is the story
of history and it appears that there's
roughly well called three plus one and
we can say for but you'll see why I'm
calling it three plus one failure
conditions that seem to just constantly
show up in the constructive game a so
one is the one we've actually been
spending some time on which is detection
so the band level doesn't go away
it just gets subsumed in a larger
construct and we see this for example in
say how family groups might have a group
selection advantage inside a society
bushes and Clinton's being American
examples but of course history is right
for this fact I think from the warring
States period in China sits like a
hundred Chinese families represent like
eighty percent of the population the
Mafia is another great example where you
can actually have inside a relatively
large game a society and I guess in a
moment I'll have to kind of be a bit
more detailed but what that looks like
what it means you will still have all of
these band level constructs going on and
one of the problems that you run into is
policing defection and it appears that
for very specific reasons having to do
with the relationship between the
complicated in the complex which are
going to into a moment game a is
fundamentally vulnerable to defection
such that no game a construct will ever
long endure it will always eventually
collapse either as a result of defection
or as a result of the mechanisms that
are used to police defection so
to zoom in on that piece we can say that
some primary characteristics of the game
a toolkit or what I would call society
and identity and the notion here what I
mean by the concept of society is formal
as opposed to organic relationship the
trashman
is an example of society the server of
McDonald's is an example of society
where there's a formal relationship that
has a bunch of social mechanisms that
enables a human being to interact with
another human being to accomplish a
particular objective without having any
human relation ality any sort of dunbar
level relation of an individual and
that's the whole essence of society is
that capacity able to scale
yeah social roles right in a hundred
gather band everybody's a generalist
right they may have some special skills
I'm a little bit better at flint
knapping than you are but we can all
knock Flint a little bit we can all hunt
we can all gather fruit when that's in
season the first sign of the more
advanced societies is specialization and
essentially the ammunition frankly of
the richness of the individual and we
should be very precise also the notion
of formal specialization which is that
the great distinct from the kinds of
specialization that you were mentioning
the specialization that you see at the
band level is a very fluid meritocratic
specialization oh they're better at
flint knapping so you'll focus on that
and I'll focus on something else and to
the degree to which you know maybe
something happens where your flint
knapping either isn't up to par
something shifted will just move it's
not locked into anything is there's
nothing to lock it into when suddenly
you get the construct where the formal
role is a priest or King exists then you
get this really interesting possibility
on occasion I'll use game of thrones' in
metaphor assuming one day ubiquitous
understanding of game it's rooms by
every human being on the planet and to
that it's a useful metaphor you get
Joffrey when you get shitheads as kings
the meritocratic capacity is actually
now blunted by the presencing or the
existence of a formal structure that can
take precedence over the quality of the
individuals to actually do the world or
in this by the way will show up as being
quite catastrophic in the second
category but it's helpful to just notice
that the society has that yeah think
about the most degenerate examples where
societies become caste societies like
Indian northern India and Japan where
some lineages are said to be
hereditary slaughterhouse people miss
other lineage is the hereditary trash
people right we all know there's mostly
large amounts of genetic variation even
within relatively small population so
the idea that a lineage is optimized for
being slaughterhouse workers over a
thousand years is utterly insane right
one a lot of them aren't gonna be good
slaughterhouse workers and a whole bunch
of other ones would be really good at
other things like science or business or
warfare or something so the caste system
societies are probably the most
degenerate example of social roles being
reified to the point they're
unbelievably rigid yep and so a
fundamental characteristic of game is
this notion of society which is a matrix
of social roles that are formal in
nature and then of course the set of
architectures and mechanisms for a
creating the social roles for
apportioning individuals - social roles
- the degree to which one needs to move
somebody from a social role that exists
as well and then bringing those rules
into relationship and of course you've
got many many many different variations
of that over time so feudalism
capitalism and say classical slavery are
all variations on that theme they all
satisfy those core functions using
different techniques but the core
functions are the same core functions
and then the universe of that or so the
other element is this mission of
identity that you have the group which
is now manifesting as society and you're
the individual which is now manifesting
as identity and as it's also intrinsic
to Game a where there's an over coding
or an additional element that is added
to a human that is more than who they
are as a human in kind of the way that
said the bands really just absolutely
fundamentally knew each individual as a
singular event in the universe there's
no two of that person as is the case of
every person another is actually an
identity which has a relatively generic
content and by the way a relatively
finite content so I am a Mason I am the
son of the king where I fill in the
blank any sort of finite semantic
articulation is the content
identity and identity in society plug
into each other and it's a key element
of gaming is identity anything more than
the label of the cells in society not
really you can see them going in both
directions so on the one hand the
identity side of the pole is the degree
to which game a is territorial izing or
ingesting the band level human from the
bottom so the role of father as opposed
to just merely being a father is an
example at that level so it may not be
that there's an encoded structure like a
document somewhere that really says
fatherhood contains these elements it
may be actually coming from the bottom
up and for a long time that may actually
still mostly be role is very natural and
not normal society is more coming from
the top down coming from the direction
of we actually we in some sense can
articulate and collectively point to a
set of very fundamental categories that
dynamic of the relationship between
society and identity we'll begin the
process of robusta find the number of
labels that exist in society and
expanding the content of what can be an
identity I like that can I play that
back to you and tell me if you think I
got it
yeah which is society ramifies over time
every society cell every role a person
can play in society is at least one to
one correspondent
however identity is broader because
there can also be identities that aren't
necessarily yet been refined down to
square pegs in society so identity is a
broader set of roles many of which are
in society and I will add as a
hypothetical footnote perhaps over time
the ratio of identities that correspond
to society increases yeah that seems
right but certainly we're speaking about
the same thing so by this point frankly
in modern American society particularly
for people who follow their nose through
life essentially a one-to-one
correspondence between identity and
society damn close something like that
yeah because societies become
extraordinarily complicated yeah anyway
continue with your story okay so now
given these concepts of society and
identity and you've used a lot of good
terms like boxes and pegs and labels the
digital image to make this easy it might
be an X Y Z cube with some number of
relatively small cell
in it but it's finite and it's somewhat
regular just to simplify and the point
is that it's complicated in the Dave
Snowden sense I'm just gonna make the
distinction approaching the complicated
in the complex the complicated is a
phenomenon that is finite and bounded in
world and if you've contemplated for a
moment it one hundred percent of
complicated systems are human generated
sentient generated so an example might
be say a Boeing 777 or a sailing vessel
where there is in fact existent and
actual Compendium that includes
all of the components of a Boeing 777
its vast and in fact all of their
specific relationships in appropriate
operating parameters so to the degree to
which the Boeing 777 is functional it is
what it is supposed to be it is an
extremely complicated system but in
principle you could actually map all of
it in a large enough database and you
would be able to actually have a phase
space that would include their totality
I like Dave's examples I thought brought
to life the nature of complicated for me
at least very vividly which is
complicated is something that at least
in principle could be taken apart and
put back together again that's very nice
yeah like that a lot yeah I stole that
from Dave so thanks Dave yeah that's
really nice and then you crossed over to
the other side of it and you have the
complex which as you say could not be
taken apart and put back together again
and one of the characteristics of it is
that the phase space is the very least
unbounded which in principle of course
means that in the fullness of time it is
also at least in principle infinite
depending on your relationship to how
time itself is bounded but in
relationship to human beings the complex
will have the characteristic of no
particular finite database is for sure
always going to be able to hold the
phase space that describes the dynamics
of that particular system and the
classic difference here might be see a
hummingbird where there's things that
are going on in the hummingbird that are
fundamentally in relationship with the
micro scale and the macro scale with the
whole vat ecosystem there's an intrinsic
connection between these two and the
relationship like the causal movement
from the micro
the matter of the cosmos or the macro
down has a lot of stuff going on in the
complex system dynamics small changes in
subtle elements may actually do very
significant changes in the larger system
that are just extremely difficult but
actually epistemological be impossible
to predict and conversely a hummingbird
is vastly more stable in a 777 right a
lot of things can actually go wrong in a
hummingbird that's actually alive and
the complex top-down causality and
multi-level loops can actually let the
hummingbird fly even if it's got a
broken wing right won't fly well but
I'll figure out how to fly off of time
exactly so to that exact point society
is fragile just like a Boeing 777 one of
the problems that you run into an
identity areas as well is that in game a
no matter what you do your society is
going to be a complicated system and
therefore it is fragile and the
sensitive just described it is
vulnerable to breaking apart as a result
of changes in the physical environment
your society as an adaptive to what's
happening in the world around it for
example but is also global to breaking
apart due to corruption from the
interior the difficulty of actually say
for example policing defection behavior
you create a society you create formal
rules you've got to say for example the
police and the police are a complicated
structure endeavoring at the end of the
day to manage the complex reality of
human beings in the wild or human beings
and their band level capacities and in
the feedback link between those two as
you endeavor to make a complicated
system able to manage a complex system
what you'll ultimately find is that as
the complex system just mutates and
changes and new possibilities emerge the
complicated system actually has to
become more complicated and in the
software where we know this as a kludge
the ability to go back in and do a
completely architecture of a society in
media stressed like while it's in
existence is essentially non-existent
and so it ends up happening is you just
kind of add more things to and you have
more and more things to it and as you do
this what ends up happening is you start
getting gaps and fissures in the closure
of the society and these of course are
exploited by the
sort of fungus or the mersa of human
social dynamics at the band level scale
you're familiar with the problem of
fungus on the the ISS no apparently they
have an extremely resilient fungus now
in the space station and they just can't
fucking do anything about it because in
the intensely complicated unnatural
environment of a space station once the
fungus mutated to the point where the
kinds of things that they were able to
use to kill it didn't work anymore
they're kind of screwed and it can hide
in the crevices and in the cracks and in
places that are very hard to get to and
eventually as our good friend the guy
from Jurassic Park life will find a way
no matter how much work you put into
policing humanity's capacity to try to
figure out how to get an edge for their
family eventually somebody somewhere
will find a way and then the gaps begin
to emerge in this society and this
begins a downward spiral which many
different people have actually studied I
actually first came across it in the
context of a historian named carroll
quigley most recently in the context of
a philosopher named Jean Baudrillard
he talks about in terms these four
stages of simulation but more or less
the first catastrophe or the first kind
of problem that game a runs into is the
inability of society to fundamentally
police defection from the bottom up in
the context of actual complex human
behavior over a long period of time so
you will eventually get King's Landing
you will eventually get some level of
group selection here I mean actually
quite formally I think it's the cultural
evolution level group selection is going
to turn out to be the thin some level of
group selection begins to emerge and you
get this interesting transition and if
we can kind of zoom in at the historical
level we see this happening all the time
where for some period of time let's just
take say for example Roman history or
American history for that matter there's
a sense of there being a called a
well-functioning society where the
individuals and the families and the
band level groups more or less all
participate in the Commonwealth in the
common weal and defection is a one not a
particularly significant problem
and also to is actually police to
normatively I think you and I talked
about this a long time ago somebody who
is shitty is just identified as shitty
and is shunned normatively impossibly
policed harshly because the cultural
memory of how imported is to maintain
the integrity of society is strong and
we talked about Peter Turchin and it is
a Subbiah concept of societies that have
very high coherence and you know that
anyone who's a defector is very clearly
the factor and is dealt with accordingly
yep and if you use that game of thrones
story if you remember in the north the
king of the north that was a lesson like
it's a very first scene or so he
enforced his own moral system and the
young wolf did the same thing right he
was true to the virtue you violated the
rules I chop off your head
and who chops off the head the King does
yeah and that's the big difference
between the North and Kings Landing
right there is no headsman the king
himself takes the heads and that's that
I think is a great allegory of the
general story of how this art goes the
farther away you are the more you are in
society and the less you are in nature
the more you will see the presence of
this feedback loop between defection
behavior and the capacity of society to
police defection behavior so King's
Landing is far from the north it is
purely in society and so you begin to
see the niche actions is just the niche
of defection begin to emerge and of
course what's the story that poker game
if you don't know that a sucker is it's
you yes one of my favorite sayings if
you're sitting at a poker table if you
don't know the sucker is it's used same
is true apparently in a commodities
trading ecosystem so if you're trading
next year's corn you don't know who the
sucker is it's you yeah and there you go
now this is probably not the case in the
SEAL team right if you're in a SEAL team
you're looking right you don't know who
the sucker is you're not even thinking
rightly about the being in a SEAL team
it should probably reconsider your
vocation and that's the difference right
the difference is that in a context
where the consequences of your actions
are able to benefit you while generating
externalities out into the environment
they can't actually be brought back to
you you can actually open loops and
Korean externalities in your social
environment the benefit you and harm
essentially other people by definition
if
can't be policed then BAM game theory
pops into a somebody's a sucker and the
question is who and then start it's a
head cut off and the downward spiral
begins for some period of time the
pressure of nature and the original
founding of the civilization has an
inertia that endures but the inability
to ultimately generate a hermetically
sealed society a complicated system that
can actually ultimately manage a complex
system means that at some point there
will be a mutation or discover an
innovation in complexity that is able to
begin the process of gaming the interior
or 'ti of the society to the
differential advantage of those mutants
who have found that particular day and
they will begin to have group selection
advantage in the context of the society
that they're in which will inevitably
lead to some balkanization interior and
finally the vaporization of collapses
the society can certainly see that in
the history of the late Roman Republic
until finally Julius Caesar and then
Octavian brought it down once and for
all
yeah and you can see what happened there
was a massive system upgrade and
seclusion the Republic they actually had
to do a sort of a hard reboot and
launched an entirely new society
structure or fundamentally new society
structures the history of China is even
more clear maybe take a look at the
story of each of the dynasties it's
actually really rather astounding how
cleanly they follow this track where for
three or four generations after the
founding of a dynasty you have a period
of kind of optimizing the social toolkit
the psycho technology that that
particular society has founded upon
generally some variation on the
Confucianists toolkit some new approach
to how to do the Mandarin 8 and the
bureaucracy and whatnot and then after
about three or four generations you
begin to see this group selection
function and the emergence of new
innovative capacities to get in between
the cracks and that new social
technology and begin to get selective
advantage for whoever it happens to be
maybe it's the eunuchs right maybe the
eunuchs actually discovered there's a
way for them to actually gain the system
there's an alliance between the eunuchs
and Queens to the generates a new group
that's able to actually get selected
manage in the context of the dynasty and
then the degradation the decadence
begins and then it collapse and then
some period of dark ages and then a
reboot of the new social structure while
we move on with our story now we're
still a ways from the present why don't
we move forward from the transition from
Rome from the late Republic to the
Empire and the cycles of the Chinese
dynasties okay so so move nuts is the
second major problem that always faces
gamei and then we'll have most of what
we need and then the third we can do
pretty quickly and it'll get us to the
present is that good that sounds great
let's do it the second is our good
friend Joseph Tainter and the stuff that
he pointed out in his book the collapse
of complex societies and rebranded the
collapse of complicated societies you
more that's happened which is that
there's an expansion of technologies
capacities social tool kits that allow a
given group of people to be able to meet
their needs they can get food they can
get water they can do whatever it
happens to be and what happens is is
that again there's a relationship
between society and identity the process
of articulating these technologies has a
certain carrying cost complicatedness is
complicated so somebody fucking needs to
know how to actually build and maintain
a Boeing 777 in fact a whole lot of
somebodies to be able to get that out
there and as the technical
infrastructure becomes more
sophisticated it actually becomes
broader right initially if we wanted to
get oil out of the ground in
Pennsylvania in the late 19th century it
may have just required a shovel and a
bucket by the time it gets to the
deepwater horizon the complicatedness of
that technical infrastructure to become
extraordinarily vast and it has an
entropy but it actually requires a
substantial amount of total carrying
cost or resource just to maintain the
physical infrastructure which by the way
is increasingly fragile as we saw and
the impact of that fragility goes up so
that's on one side and then on the
individual side of the identity side the
necessity of being able to load the
information to be able to be in a
relationship to manage the complicated
system requires an increasing degree of
specialization in the individuals which
means of course an increasing lack of
capacity
to move sideways or down and over if
there needs to be a change and so if you
just spent the last thirty years
becoming very very skilled at managing
say the bling was the current one that
became a clusterfuck for 737 max right
if that's sort of what you've invested
your time and energy in you're kind of
screwed right now because you have to go
way back on your arc learn a whole new
set of skills maybe it didn't depends on
how bad it is but certainly if we were
going to have a the classic problem of
an assembly line worker who if car
manufacturing shifts entirely to a
totally new technical base assembly line
workers all the skills that they built
to be able to participate in that level
of technical society they're obsolete
and very very difficult to retrain
winter passes certain developmental
stage so what ends up happening is that
these two courses get locked into a
feedback loop very similar by the way to
the basic innovators dilemma inside a
corporation I think there as far as I'm
concerned isomorphic and so what happens
is the society becomes addicted to it
certain tools that initially they're
really fucking useful and for a little
while they actually go up that s-curve
where they're kicking ass and society is
actually getting this huge boom of
surplus capacity and energy that allows
the society to grow a lot of different
ways
most notably in population but then the
society finds itself addicted to its
tools it's too over its skis it's got so
many different constructs you've got to
think about like oil in the world right
now and you have pipelines all over the
place and you've got giant tankers that
move back and forth you have a
military-industrial complex that
maintains this integrity of the Saudi
regime and you've got the petro dollar I
mean just think about the amount of shit
that's in place to maintain the
integrity of the oil function in global
society and just run the clock back to
the modest days more or less about a
century and a half ago of shovels and
buckets of dirt and you can apply that
to any society you can take the Mayans
you could take the Chinese you can take
the Romans it doesn't matter sort of has
the same dynamic and then overlay all of
this all these dynamics on top of the
fact that the underlying resource that
your technology is optimized to extract
is generally going to be either finite
in quantity or finite in rate let's say
solar power as an example in the future
there is a finite flux of solar energy
that hits the earth it's big but it's
finite right the ocean
or finite the amount of oil in the
ground is finite and so there is some
point at which you have a pick the lower
hanging fruit
so as you pick the low-hanging fruit you
have to actually upgrade your technical
infrastructure to be able to continue to
maintain just the same amount of supply
and as your society has actually
expanded that its ability to take
advantage of this boon is gener going to
actually need an increase in supply so
you have to upgrade your technical
infrastructure again and will end up
happening and everybody has changer
points out is that you get an s-curve
happen at the level of innovation at a
certain point it takes more energy per
unit innovation and then that gives you
an s-curve in just the actual throughput
of your technical infrastructure and as
you have them burned through the
low-hanging fruit you end up getting
this increasingly fragile relationship
between the way that your society goes
about meeting its needs and its
relationship with the resources that
happen to be in the ground and this then
leads to generally speaking a collapse
and then a reboot of an endeavor to be
wiser next time with a more flexible
social infrastructure so we could say
for example the collapse of room you see
both the corruption in the interior now
I'm in the Imperial Rome called 300 400
AD with the constant turmoil of who
wants to be Caesar in the generals
period you have the fragility of the
underlying infrastructure with the
capacity to maintain the roads and the
aqueducts and you fill in the blank the
whole system becoming harder and harder
and harder as more and more the easy
stuff in the environment goes away and
as the carrying cost of the
infrastructure gets heavier and heavier
and of course these two forces feedback
on each other when you've got really
kick-ass totally well-functioning
bureaucracy it can manage a complicated
technical infrastructure as the
technical infrastructure gets heavier
and heavier and as if your accuracy
becomes more and more corrupt and
incompetent you get a real problem go to
visit Heathrow and you'll get a good
sense of that you know I've done some a
lot of reading on you know the late
Empire and the collapse and you know
fits right into your story which is the
governance hierarchy became more and
more corrupt and less and less efficient
and taxes got larger and
and larger until a lot of the commerce
particularly in the economically wealthy
eastern half of the Empire just
shriveled under the impact of being
looted by the local taxing authorities
often sold the rights the so called tax
farmers right low-level band level quasi
criminals were operating in the name of
the state to extract so much from the
business community that it couldn't
function yeah exactly and you can see
how there's this really cool feedback
loop where it really was in fact that
complicated a bureaucracy that it kind
of just developed over time and the
ability to come back and edit and keep
it well fit and well tailored and
functioning is intrinsically hard and
then just add in a little bit of
corruption you get a really nice dynamic
of what kind of hollows gamej out from
the inside and then you've got the third
which is the world is not empty there's
other people out there who were doing
stuff and so the Germans are kind of
like sitting on the border you know
eventually able to have enough capacity
on their own to hold back the expansion
the roman empire and then for six
generations kind of watching stealing
the best by the way cuz stealing tech is
much easier than innovating it and
maintaining it stealing the best tech
from the roman empire being much further
or earlier in the curve of corruption so
still to pay a high as to be a level
very high level of policing detection
while Rome is becoming hollowed out
within and so the bubble pops from the
outside in this case and the barbarians
come rushing in and so of course we see
that as a third movement in history is
that to the degree to which your
civilization your gaming structure is
able to maintain its capacity to feed
itself but it's not having a Tainter
currently to collapse along some
relationship with nature and to the
degree to which it's able to maintain
its integrity and its interior and isn't
being torn apart by corruption it's also
having to go toe to toe with its
neighbors who were trying to figure out
how to steal the best from it and grow
their own innovation and of course at
some point perhaps that's what causes
your gaming civilization to collapse and
if you take a closer look at the Bronze
Age collapse the current thinking is
this more or less all three you had real
maturity of the total construct the
medicines ation included the Hittites
and the Egyptians and they cans and
whatnot
you had corruption that had gotten to
rice levels across all of these
different city-states you had real
significant in
mental problems happening everywhere and
you then have the migrations of these
various barbarians and see people and
the bubble pops and the whole thing
collapses and so more or less game a
seems to have evolved through collapse
it's pressure innovation some expansion
of some novel new approach that reaches
a certain level then it collapses but a
lot of the innovations are living in the
information domain and then it'll go
away completely I mean even the Dark
Ages in Western Europe which was really
bad ultimately much of Roman
civilization was able to come back
because it had been preserved at least
adequately in the periphery and as the
West got to a level or two begin to
absorb it it came back out right so
you've got this sort of ratchet it's a
long long time little longer than the
Western Roman Empire existed we didn't
recover the level of the Roman Empire
probably at old 1750 or there abouts is
amazing amazing yeah and yet at the end
of the day so far at least we have so
that's where we are is this thing where
game a proceeds through this I mean it's
it's a kind of evolution right it goes
until it can't and then it collapses as
low as it needs to go until there's
enough stability that something new can
begin to surprise that sometimes at the
band level again and some meaningful
portion of what was actually innovated
in that previous structure isn't lost
and so it gets brought back in hooked up
into a new system in the new system
enters back out into the world I want
you to bring us up to date when did the
current instantiation of game B get
rolling and where are we on this curve
game a I should say I get the sense that
we have maybe two major points because
it's obviously a lot of different pieces
that are going on they're interrelated
one major point is 1776
you've got the transition out of
feudalism in the West at least the
launching of all the consequences of the
Enlightenment into a civilization
construct and you guys capitalism built
into that contract
you've got liberalism democracy built
into that construct and then that
construct which of course had its
mutation factors as it moved around the
world began to move around the world
and you had an extension to read a
British Empire and then the collapse of
the British Empire and what I called the
Victorian consensus around World War one
and interacted like a period of
accountancy and exploration World War
two and then pop finally the 1950s
post-war consensus where as we know a
very large number of entirely new
institutions in classic collapse rebuild
showed up that were the most robust
version of that particular instantiation
game a toolkit so the Enlightenment
toolkit at its most robust level
probably around 1977 actually as I think
we're maybe hit its peak but starting in
the nineteen or probably right in the
middle of World War two and extending to
the late 50s was when it was in the
process of settling evident engine
expansion phase and my current
hypothesis is that by the late 70s it
had begun the process of both the
Tainter and the corruption process of
moving from an acceleration to a
velocity meaning that the rate of
advance was continuing it was continued
to advance but the rate advance was
beginning to slow down and by the time
he reached the fall of the Berlin Wall
and the transition of China out of
communism you now have simultaneously in
this Israeli paradoxical and we had the
same thing happen with Rome right where
the flourishing of the early empire was
also the death knell of the entire arc
of the Roman story by the late 80s and
when George Herbert Walker Bush called
the new world order new world order 1991
or thereabout was the point at which you
have simultaneous to be actual final
flourishing of the success of this
post-war toolkit at this last age of
game a and the beginning of the process
of its moving into decelerating velocity
from my perspective and we also I would
add if we seem to be getting close to
the end of this epoch of game a we're
also confronted with some unique
phenomena which is a very historically
unusual exponential increase in
capability including the ability to
destroy ourselves and we're getting to
the point where the cost of an
individual to become super empowered in
Thomas L Friedman sense keeps getting
cheaper and civilizations have run into
their local ecological limits before
Easter Island the famous case the
Vikings on Greenland etc we appear to be
about to reach or maybe already have
reached an overshot the worldwide
ecological ability to support the style
of life we have times eight billion
people soon to be 11 yeah so the process
of gaming evolved in three collapse has
kind of reached a point where that's not
a very good way of going forward if you
look at even say the rumen collapse at
the end of the day in the bigger scheme
of things even just in the bigger scheme
of human things wasn't that big a deal
China was more or less doing fine during
the Helen teary 'add even in the area
just on the exterior periphery of Roman
lake the arthéon's were there more or
less happy because he was doing that of
course the barbarians are doing their
thing so at a population level the
impact wasn't that big at a civilization
level certainly that region had a hard
hit but at the level of humanity no big
deal
now for the very first time we have
something which is global fully global
like every square inch of the planet is
entrained as you say we now have access
to a capacity to destroy it is orders
and orders of magnitude greater like
back in the class of the Roman Empire
your capacity to kill people sort of
ended at the tip of your Gladius I
suppose you could throw your javelin but
the metaphor is funnier if it's a
Gradius nowadays of course some
variation between nuclear holocaust and
CRISPR seems to be where we are now but
as you say exponential change is a big
deal and so the capacity of smaller and
smaller groups so more and more people
and being able to do more and more
damage to an increasingly fragile social
system it's a real problem the situation
we're in in the context of game a is
unique in the history of gaming and as
far as I can tell unique in the history
of the world although maybe we can look
at various serious epochs of say the
transition from anaerobic aerobic
bacteria may have been somewhat similar
but the fact that we're in a situation
where the fragility of the overall
system is high and at the ecological
level at the social level we'll get to
that and second the technical capacity
is astounding and proliferating and the
whole
wasn't trained means that proceeding
forward by ordinary gaming rules seems
like a really bad idea and using the
concepts that we put in place we can now
begin to do some real diagnostics of
what the flux actually going on and say
oh oh I see we're just at the end of a
game a story a particular game a story
and perhaps the whole game a story it's
actually I'm one thing I'd add is the
structures we built are historically
unprecedented eat all you think about
the internet running on five billion
transistors per chip fiber optics
worldwide networks consuming vast
amounts of power etc these are layers
and layers and layers and layers of
Technology you know if this thing starts
to fall it could fall a long way it's
not like the Roman Empire or you can
still go about farming if you're a
farmer there's an awful lot of things
that we currently do that if we fell
very far you couldn't do it all yeah
that's right I think it's crucial I
remember reading unwell of the Londe I
think it was called a thousand years of
nonlinear history and he did this exact
point out that the structures that we've
built are extraordinarily tall and
therefore even a small amount of fall
has this capacity to fall a very long
way and that could have make it very
concrete you could just think about the
fact that there's a lot of people if
there's eight billion people sitting on
top of these very tall structures and
the amount of pre industrial farming it
was just gonna fall that far which isn't
that far like it's only a century we're
not talking about something which is
absurd if we were to fall just about a
century and a half to pre-industrial
farming the amount of agricultural yield
that we could produce would probably
only be about a billion people because
by the way we've paved over a very large
fraction of the arable land and sucked
out a lot of the water that we would
otherwise be using and who knows what
the quality of the soil is without
fertilizers so that's seven billion
people who don't have food in that
context and we should be quite clear
that the seven billion people probably
aren't all going to sort of voluntarily
walk into the Hereafter they may in fact
struggle mightily over which get to be
the one that makes it and many of them
will have access to advanced
technologies and as we saw in World War
two just think about this in terms of
exponential technology take a look at
18:38 level of military capacity and
compare that to 1945 level of military
capacity I think more or less any one of
the nations that fought in World War two
at 1945 level of Technology could have
taken on all over the rest of the world
in 1938 level technology it just really
went fast when the ship was hitting the
fan like when all the marbles were being
played before we can move the ball
forward pretty quickly and to the degree
to which we find ourselves in a
circumstance where more and more people
begin to be aware of the degree to which
all the marbles are being played for we
may actually see ourselves in an
acceleration of capacity to fight that
makes the relatively rapid pace of the
past twenty years of peaceful capitalism
look like nothing happened but I would
turn that around cuz you're absolutely
right World War two is a wonderful
example of both wonderful and horrible
example but wonderful in the level of
the human capability grew in that 6-year
period like it has never grown before
including since then and is it possible
is it possible the techno utopians are
right that if we just keep pushing ahead
faster and faster with our technological
evolution that the techno evolution will
get us through this coming crisis
without a collapse is that possible not
in the context of the story of gaming
that I've told so there's every reason
to believe that we have the capacity as
humans to be able to for example manage
the global ecosystem sustainably for
everybody there's every reason to
believe that that technical capacity is
out there already present or not too far
away the problem as I think is so funny
how these things have happened the story
that I'm telling is the same story I've
been telling now for about 15 years but
now with say for example the Trump
administration and as everybody well
knows I don't sort of on my finger at
the Trump administration at the the
breakdown of collective sense making
that is present everywhere certainly in
the West until we actually get to a
point that we can resolve the intrinsic
problems of the relationship between the
complicated the complex and the nature
of game theory in group selection bigger
tools aren't the things that are going
to help us I'll give you an example I
think with me even have talked about
this on Facebook I've started me talking
about this with other people
we to which the notion that climate
change is either a not real be not a
problem
see not a problem the human beings have
any need to take any particular role in
ordi in fact a malicious intentional
effort to manipulate people the degree
which that category that cluster of
ideas is propagating out into the global
population into people who five years
ago either thought nothing or thought
the opposite it's actually rather
astounding insignificant and they by the
way I can't blame them because we live
in a world right now where those are all
perfectly plausible because our capacity
to engage in collaborative sense-making
is collapsing and it's part of the same
story remember this the story of the
first thing that falls to game a is
society begins to become rife with
defection and collaborative sense making
is part of collective intelligence and
so it's a resource essential and one of
the first things that you're going to do
if you are in the process of trying to
engage in group selection inside the
larger society is take advantage of the
gaps in social level collective sense
making and defect using those techniques
otherwise known is marketing and
propaganda and spin and fun very true
armies right and I remember I think
actually as a kid I remember this
feeling that happened in societies
somewhere in the 1970s where early in
the 1970s where it became more and more
permissible to lie in public I had this
feeling of like a commercial on
television was telling me a lie and then
the very next scene was like Richard
Nixon telling me a lie and the adults
around me were kind of like okay with
that and so the notion that in society
lying was a thing that was done
relatively commonly that was the
beginning of a process of feral ization
of culture and that's just part of the
whole story that's just the same thing
as what's going on in where the Mafia
tries to take advantage of its
advantages use of the old-fashioned
policing so in some sense yes the
technical utopians are vaguely pointing
in the right direction but we need to be
very clear that it's not going to be an
extension of the 1950s version of
technology it ate Mars that's for sure
it's more like the Titan
colleges of civilization itself we
actually have to have a level up of the
toolbox of civilization from the one
that we've now been sitting on for
twenty five thousand years or so the
game a toolbox we've been talking about
into some new really radically different
fundamentally different approach to how
we go about doing this civilization
thing altogether
John Verve a key came at it from the
angle of what he's calling the meaning
crisis and I think everything he's
talking about is 100% true and it's just
under the piece from my perspective of
the same story and he talks about it as
the necessity to construct a new set of
psycho technologies that are clearly
novel like as novel as the ones that
we've developed in the past so we're now
up to the present day where the game a
system in your model in your view has
become mature and corruption has
flourished you know and I remember we
first met I member mentioning that when
I first got in the business world 1975
most of the people at least I dealt with
were relatively honorable and honest and
there were things that were profitable
to do that they didn't do because they
were wrong and you said as I recall that
you'd entered the business world about
1994 maybe something like that and by
that point that concept was ERISA bull
the ethos of businesses if it was
arguably legal and profitable not only
should you do it but you must do it and
you know we've now reached them even
more degenerate state where is it
profitable it may not even be arguably
legal but the penalties for getting
caught are less than the profit I mean
the recent five billion dollar hand slap
of Facebook's a perfect example of that
right we're in the late stages where the
corrupt gangs are running rampant you
know the other one you and I have
certainly talked about plenty is in the
2007 time frame finance
broadly construed was consuming 41% of
the corporate profits in the whole US
economy you know here's essentially a
ministerial function that is supposed to
be a helper to the real economy is now
eating 41% of
the whole economy and even worse is
sucking the best and brightest into
doing that when I see really smart
people getting sucked into finance it
just strikes me as a horrendous loss and
it strikes me that's another symptom of
your hypothesis that the fungus has run
amok at this stage in our cycle
absolutely and you can even just kind of
see it in the tenor of the the
aesthetics of the sensibility of when
that was happening is the feeling of
local group selection like yeah I can
get mine and I'm gonna get mine and by
the way we're gonna get mine into
fashion which is simultaneously
maximizing my local advantage and damn
the externalities one from Wall Street
tells that story quite nicely and that's
just good old-fashioned affection on the
larger social field it's not now that
I've got this destructor to talk about
imma get yeah that's it and that's what
you would expect to see in our Western
that's called the Democratic liberal
model it always strikes me as the
hopeful alternative in theory our
political sphere is supposed to deal
with these kinds of large-scale
corruptions you have the idea of finance
reading the system for their own benefit
manufacturing opacity to enrich
themselves etc but of course in our late
stage game a we have our politics has
been essentially co-opted by money in
politics and or big media in politics so
that the corrective mechanism that could
be there isn't there anymore yeah so I
think we can kind of come to a pretty
fine point because it looks like from my
perspective at least the way that I've
myself been modeling this and taking a
look at the larger global system it
seems for example that say China will
have maybe like the last gasp game a and
it's actually pretty funny if they've
selected Social Credit is their
variation because then in the language
of complexity and complication it is
exactly a perfect effort to maximize
complication in the effort to manage
complexity yes you can have a large
number of highly police social cells and
a large number of rigorously defined
social identities that are not only
defined subjectively but soon
quantitatively yeah and we can now run
it in a computational substrate using
larger and larger degrees of increasing
sophisticated AI to endeavor
to manage the human choice making the
human beings and so you're gonna get a
proliferation and we would call like
social granularity there will probably
be many orders of magnitude it even like
five or six orders of magnitude larger
than what we've seen in early 21st
century America but if my model of game
a is correct then it's going to collapse
and by the way if we're looking at what
happens in an exponential change our it
will actually collapse in a relatively
brief time frame I personally give them
about seven years that ain't very long
for the Z dynasty in the context of the
previous Chinese dynasty so the story
that I'm noticing is that we have kind
of uh I've always been thinking there's
almost like a bridge and then what's on
the other side let's pause here for a
second and for the audience say hey
we've gotten up to date on game a then
you have also synthesized I would
actually help a little bit in the early
days synthesize something called game B
which is an alternative for what might
come next you want to talk about that a
little bit some of your admittedly
rougher thoughts but they're getting
richer by the day thoughts on where do
we go next yeah so game B is notoriously
difficult to think and talk about for
the very good reason that if you were
using the conceptual structures that
came out of game a to do so you may very
well be poisoning the well and so
fortunately in the context of what
John's been doing I've actually got a
new way of thinking about but you
actually have to find a meta psycho
technology place to be able to do the
meta design for psycho technologies to
actually then come back down to the
level of doing the psycho technologies
of game B which would be in principle
now at this point distinct from the
secretaries of game a that's actually a
huge insight I don't know if I'm such a
big deal for me I'm not sure if I've
articulated even vaguely useful epitome
your backup game B alright so the
hypothesis is that the innovation of
game a has now the set of three plus one
and by the way the plus one is the
problem of exponential technology you
just sort of brought it in but it's kind
of a problem all the time and it has an
end point of its own and it looks like
we're reaching the end so on the one
hand you can take a look at game a and
say okay any given instantiation has a
finite lifespan to it and all
that it appears that all kind of set of
gaming instantiations have a finite
lifespan to them and also it looks like
we're kind of getting to the end of it
and so it may in fact be requisite that
we make the extraordinarily challenging
move of trying to level up a whole new
collective intelligence toolkit at the
same level of magnitude as the movement
to the band / tribal level of collective
intelligence and in the game a level of
collective intelligence from so that
something that comes around every 30,000
years or so so that's sort of a good way
of setting the stage for the level of
challenge of endeavoring to construct
something of that sort but if it's what
we have to do it's what we have to do
unfortunately we've come a long way
we're actually quite sophisticated as a
species in thinking about these kinds of
things in comparison say tunes for
example the big reboot that happened in
1776 the Enlightenment gave birth to
what I would say is now sort of the last
stage of game a or close to it and there
was a pretty big deal that was actually
a pretty major shift they made from late
stage feudalism to early stage
liberalism and in the move from game any
game we're looking at something this is
similar in kind just maybe three orders
of magnitude larger and magnetic or in
difficulty so in that language then one
of the characteristics of game B has to
be that it can't be constrained by the
problem of complication it doesn't solve
the problems of human needs through the
construction of complicated systems it
doesn't use either society or identity
to do the things that it does now this
of course the very first blush has all
kinds of consequences and if the beliefs
to wish it demoralizes a lot of people
because it feels like that can't be done
but we can take a look back and say okay
we did do this at least up to the scale
of the Dunbar limit back at the previous
iteration we were actually running the
human the band level of collective
intelligence was running in complexity
it wasn't running in complicatedness I
mean to the degree which complicated
things came up they were relatively
minor in the scheme of things they're
still held in a way that didn't fall
into the pitfalls of danger or defection
and so a way of stating it is how do we
go about maintaining the level of
coherence the level of complexity as an
intrinsic
that we have at the band level and
scaling that up to include well
effectively ultimate billion people but
more than 150 initially that was the
statement the problem literally you and
I came to what twenty thirteen or so
yeah and it's still the same problem
right that's the nature of the beast but
we can actually now get the story hasn't
sat still meaningfully more
sophisticated in beginning to gesture in
that direction the one characteristic I
hope that I can say in a way that works
as I know in the past you've actually
had some challenges with this but it has
to do with looking at the possibility
space in human psychology the
proposition is that we have actually
concretely this is where again I'm going
to continue to refer to John because
he's a fourth generation or whatever as
a generation cognitive scientist Jordan
let me just drop in here for the
edification of our audience that the
original attempt to build a game be it
was probably too early we didn't know
enough but it also fell apart over an
internal schism between I would call the
personal change faction and the
institution's faction one group thought
that game B could be reached by making
better people and the other group reject
the bed and said no it has to be by
building better institutions I haven't
been very involved with it for the last
five years but just occasionally check
in with Jordan and his friends duh it's
the usual social science answer both
right nurture versus nature both right
and so this false distinction then the
civil war that the earliest version of
game B fell into on personal change
versus institutions I am now perfectly
happy with both wow that's amazing
all right so that's really good because
I have come to the conclusion that is
absolutely both and quite frankly
concretely because in some sense the
good news is that the level of making
better people it's really not a whole
lot about making better people it's
making less shitty people the tragedy
out to the primary tragedy game a is how
enormous Lee it has screwed up humans in
many many different ways obviously you
go back and do the beginning you look at
this human lifespan got cut in about a
third though you can take a look now and
just take a look at the
what I would consider to be nearly
Holocaust level nastiness of what is
happening to the psychology of every
single child who was put through school
with a degree to which we're destroying
the capacities of human beings an
industrial scale at the level of their
psychology is really rather significant
so what I've discovered over the past
five years is that while remediating
that damage and bringing people friendly
back to the basic capacity to be mature
adults who can use the whole of their
mind to be thinking and I simulated
thinking is really quite hard there's
this so the healing piece is a massive
issue I myself have been struggling with
that since well grants 2012 it still
have a ways to go so that's a big
problem like the humanity that we are
working with right now I would say is
maybe operating at about 10 percent of
the capacity of just normal human beings
and then of course we actually have some
pretty high quality stuff to take it up
a notch not a lot like we're not talking
about going up 50% but taking it up say
7% at the level of say how children are
parented we have much more sophisticated
capacity to actually know what the
developmental stages are and what kinds
of things are appropriate certain
developmental stages at the level of
nutrition and things like that and now
moving into the institutional side
there's like the mesh between those two
is the institutional fabric that sits on
top of human development and human
relationship I was just yesterday having
a chat with somebody who has what
appears to be some really sophisticated
technology for how groups of individuals
who have very distinct perspectives
meaning even to the level of distinct
epistemological frameworks can actually
be facilitated into extremely effective
collective intelligence the kind of
stuff at SF I kind of found this up
having to deal with but at a much higher
level and quite diverse I think you
could grab a Christian fundamentalist
and put him in a room with an atheist
well as a part of a group of seven and
through this facilitation process
actually gets something which has a
truly functional collective intelligence
and so this is an example of a
technology it's it frankly it's a psycho
technology and so the collection of a
what I would
the technologies of healing of the
technologies of sovereignty that bring
human beings up to the level of being
able to simply participate being able to
say be not triggered by things that make
them emotionally triggered or to be able
to not be bound to a particular way of
saying things but able to try to listen
to what is being said thoughtfully and
wonder and curiosity about what might be
possible even if what's being said is
nonsense I'm just trying to listen to
anything that could be useful like that
set of techniques has been kind of
already worked through we just got to
collect them and bring them together
throw out the trash because there's
still a lot of trash but there's people
out there who've been doing that work
now for decades and it's not bad and
it's a lot better there wasn't say
nineteen ten and then the set of
technologies that are associated with
being bringing groups together in
deliberative process of being able to
actually get a synergistic capacity all
of it is much larger than some of the
parts in collective intelligence is also
there's a lot and they're pretty good
I'm currently in the process of actually
going out and first-person experiencing
a number of them and then endeavoring to
find a way to curate the ones that are
most effective and then recursively
using them to bring groups together
using these techniques to then give
insight into what might be a deeper and
better way of doing it and then the
third piece which i think is actually
rather interesting is kind of the
inverse of this problem of the
globalization of civilization and that's
that in principle everybody can be
involved you can find the right people
imagine if Facebook didn't soccer dream
on boy that is astounding like how
extraordinarily Facebook sucks it's
actually if you thought about the
potential so just think about this you
know uh ramanuja right you do the story
of him oh yeah we had the mathematician
that's before the listeners we had this
really great story of this guy who was a
like way way out the charts asymmetric
genius in mathematics it happened to be
an Indian guy in the I guess the early
20th century any time for a man in a
context where almost all ordinary paths
would have had them being just maybe
working at the post office and nothing
happens but by it's almost sure
circumstance he happens to run into a
guy who knows a guy
get them connected up to Oxford they
send the paper over it gets read because
it Oxford actually or legitimately
honorable interesting curious people
they read it this amazing they pull his
ass out of India and bam he delivers
just genius into our mathematical
discipline well in in 1910 1920 that's
almost a random event but in 2020 in
principle with very limited exceptions
you could do that for every Ramanuja
everywhere where you can find these
people you could find every single
person who has unique asymmetric
information or capacity and you could by
the way bring them in relationship with
technologies from the first two buckets
you could actually help them increase
their capacity to give what they have to
the world by solving whatever happens to
have been bends and bumps and the
developmental arm and bring them into
collective intelligence with
sophisticated technologies to support
that and boom now you've got something
that could really do things in a huge
way like now you're using humanity's
capacities to our advantage and I
honestly think we're not it is sort of
evidence for these uh was a Tantalus
we're not we're not that far away from
this unfortunately we're sort of chained
to this rock of gamei and so we can't
quite get to it but in terms of the
actual reach the possibility of putting
together a collective intelligence that
has the capacity to generate the meta
psycho technologies that would then give
us the capacity to generate these psycho
technologies to birth game be is right
there and it's right in front of us it's
not that far away
more or less we just have to get over
ourselves ok let's say you do that let's
say you finish your curation turn you
come up with five very cool psycho
technologies that brought together
produce really powerful small groups to
medium sized groups of people for
solving problems but you're just 150
hippies right and you got Goliath right
last night I watched the democratic
debate what a shit show right compound
idiocy to the fourth power right what
the fuck you know we're a million miles
from innovative thinking about anything
right how does your hundred and fifty
hippies who figured out the right way to
do it basically gather the
levers of power and more specifically
let's to say the levers power we find a
way to make them go away
but fundamentally a society is about a
flux of energy in the actual physics
sense right because it's energy that
causes us to deplete our ecosystem and
it's the means by which we deplete our
ecosystem so how do your 150 hippies
gain control of the energy flux of eight
billion people before the whole shit
show collapses to put it in very bland
and mild terminology right by the way I
will now publicly tell you about it that
my recommendations should be called the
gym rot experience harking back to the
Jimi Hendrix Experience but that's your
doing the thing you're supposed to do
it's it's good thank you so yeah
obviously you and I have talked about
this particular question quite a bit and
even just this morning I was sharpening
my tools in terms of imploding the
entire global financial system and
getting rid of money because you may
have to go there but let's be a little
bit more abstract first and then come
back down to the tactical strategic
before we tactical so strategically I'd
like to make two changes to your
formulation first it can't be hundred
and fifty it's probably gonna be more
like 1,500 to 3,000 and second I'd
replace the term a hippie was something
like Vulcan Spartans or something like
that okay that's fair enough let's remap
it to the population of a tiny county in
rural Virginia let's call it 2500 and
let's call them Balkans Balkans my
friend you have to improve gotta have
both even better the theory and by the
way this is actually being run from a
theoretical level the theory points to
two possible paths that are viable the
first path is the friendliest path so
I'll just kind of go in that direction
and it looks a lot like early
Christianity with a lot less bloodshed
and on an exponential growth curve the
ability of individuals to opt out of
game a and opt into something else is in
the West at least relatively open and so
to the degree to which you can actually
design something that is complete and by
that I mean it is a fully
sending those small in scale and and
also but also scalable instantiation of
game B so now I've got my my city state
in Levine Virginia Island County so I've
got a city in Highland County and it's
small it's it's you know somewhere in
the range of the village to small town
but it has all of it it has kids being
born it has kids going to school it has
old people it has people dying it has
food production it has energy and for
the moment it even has an interface
layer with game a but it has an
interface layer that is operating on an
asymmetric advantage think of it as like
google village where the capacity to be
able to generate high value product into
game a is asymmetrically high and so
that produces the output that generates
the influx of resources necessary to be
able to kind of get the things you can't
get out of the community but the
communities can is constantly looking
for ways to use its capacities and its
relationship with the larger world to
become increasingly local and
increasingly autonomous I think it was
almost like an effort to construct a
Mars colony in Highland County just
imagine you had something like that and
then imagine that you had a mechanism
whereby human beings could either choose
to a immigrate by the way under very
specific parameters or B could actually
copy this entire socio technical
infrastructure and endeavor to launch
their own in their own environment using
the same by the way immigration
protocols because it's obviously keep
pieces of the psycho technology is how
does somebody actually become capable of
participating in this symmetrically true
the degree to which this simple choice
for a very large number of people to
begin the process of playing this game
becomes an easy yes either because their
current circumstances let's say like
West Baltimore or North Baltimore
wherever the hell it Baltimore they
happen to be or well frankly all over
the place exists I would say shit San
Francisco what I should show that place
has become Dan Francisco's a really good
example right so from a design
perspective the challenges that you have
are how far away are the individual
from their capacity to participate in a
wholesome fashion like what's the amount
of healing that has to be done before
you have a critical mass of people who
can actually participate and how many
can be brought in to an existing context
at what rate without destabilizing the
coherence of the existing system at the
primary rate limiters how rapidly can
you well what do you start with in terms
of where people are coming from how
rapidly can you heal them of the things
that prevent them from being able to
participate it's just a good citizen and
how rapidly can you they be integrated
into an existing coherence without
disrupting their cohere so those are the
three great variables right now there's
actually a pretty sizable population of
people who are not that far away they
are still pretty healthy honorable
honest good folk who if they just had an
opportunity to be able to do the things
that they know are right without being
fucked over or just overburdened by
bureaucracy or corruption would choose
to do so and so whether you think that's
four million or you think it's 70
million somewhere it's certainly more
than two thousand and if the psycho
technologies are not radically difficult
for people to learn how to get into just
take a look at the challenges of
immigration that happened in the United
States in the period between say 1840
and 1940 my great-grandfather
but maybe great-great but something in
that order was like 9 and spoke Russian
and it was on a boat by himself in land
in Galveston Texas and became a thriving
shopkeeper in the art of his life so the
capacity of people to immigrate and
upgrade into new psycho technologies is
historically actually not radically
difficult it ain't easy but is now
radically difficult and that's path one
ISO path one is basically you build
something that is complete
that actually has all the stuffs and
this is important because if it's not
complete at a complex systems level then
you may be throwing externalities you
don't understand access to be
homeostatic and has the ability at least
perceived the loop that is connecting
with does it have to be completely
closed or just has to include all the
aspects and then you begin the process
of immigration and scaling and you scale
both organically directly in that
location and also to the degree to which
you can actually have this be very
prototype
or let's say for example you don't want
the first one in San Francisco you watch
the first one in Virginia but then
Oakland from San Francisco comes and
wants to try and you have say forty
people from San Francisco come live in
this environment for a couple of years
until they've really in their cells have
absorbed the culture and all the
techniques and technologies that have to
be brought they then go out and maybe
forty people go with them like good
old-fashioned Greek city-states had that
characteristic by the way there's
actually two great precedents I can
think of the biggest one historically
that's how the hunter bat gatherer bands
did it right they didn't clone
themselves right these got to the point
where they were too big for their
business model and they fissioned right
and so maybe you don't think about
cloning but you rather you think about
fissioning and it may be that the
fission component decides to go to San
Francisco right part of the ethos of
spreading and the other example
modern-day are like Mennonites right
whole families of Mennonites pack up
from Pennsylvania and move to Mexico
there are Mennonites in Mexico there are
now Mennonites in Highland County
Virginia who some of them came down from
Canada right so think about it rather
than planting colonies externally you
bud them off from the mother ship and
then then those of course blood off and
you have an exponential growth right
I've got mentioned John for Vicki in the
past a few times and remember I
mentioned that he's characterizing it as
awakening from the meaning crisis and I
think one of the things that is not is
obvious I think it least wasn't to us
back when we talk about the past is one
of the primary values when the primary
things that a person will notice when
they're participating in this game be
environment is a radical upgrade and the
meaningfulness of their lived experience
their life will in fact be and feel
meaningful and that's a primary currency
of this culture so the invitation you
know you're sitting in San Francisco and
and yes if you join this culture and you
begin to participate in it you get
better friends who are more considerate
and are more capable of interacting with
you you have the possibility of finding
mates who are more likely to be better
parents you can actually raise better
kids well fill in the
like all the things that are part of
what just living a simple meaningful
human life is all about and your day to
day life will actually be felt and will
be meaningful and that's the kind of
thing that will of course make it rather
attractive of course that's what
Christianity grew from right you know
yes I was a into my mind a bogus meaning
but it was a meaning that was
large-scale and attractive well I mean
parts of it were bogus but I mean in the
context of early Christianity you were
living in a society where throwing
people to the Lions was entertainment
for everyone so the Christians were
actually entering into a context where
the people around them were not likely
to sort of stab them in the eyeball for
accidently forgetting their lunch that's
a pretty significant real upgrade in the
quality of your life yeah the community
was good I was just argue that their
metaphysics was baloney but it may be
irrelevant actually as it turns out
whether the metaphysics is baloney or
not well this is where the interesting
thing is because what's really neat
about the story of game B is that we
also get the advantage of actually
having a really seriously kick-ass
metaphysics that is totally inclusive of
the totality of all the cool stuff that
sciencism in the past 1500 years because
we should we need to write it I mean you
just need to be in relationship with
what is actually real and true is a
really cool advantage if you want a
competitive advantage of a game a in its
current state
tell the truth and have the capacity to
perceive reality with simple clarity and
then convey that to other people this is
where the interesting insights I've been
having now over the past three years is
that a large piece of what happens in
game B is that it's actually extremely
simple and actually kind of slow it
moves at a much slower pace because
that's almost like the pace of
meaningfulness and most of what you
discover is that it's shockingly simple
is just that the world that we're living
in is hyper hyper complicated so we get
confused and yet because of the and this
is them in the last piece I me just put
this last piece in and then we'll
probably just tie it on or at least for
the moment all right by the way there's
a whole other giant story to explain
what I'm saying here but there's
good reasons to believe that the kind of
context that I'm talking about the kind
of thing that would be game B would
actually be vastly vastly more let's
call it competitive in old fashioned
game a terms visa the game a to just
kind of extract it a little bit just
gonna give a little meat to that bone if
you look at the arc of game a just go
with straight military history very
concrete for a long time military
history was built around either
physicality or around tactics or around
a certain level of strategy and weaponry
host everyone semi weaponry may have
made a difference and then they begin to
see some movement and there are things
not that long ago where technology began
to show up as playing an independent and
increasingly important role in the story
of how you actually beat the other guy
about 1450 he can say started to become
significant yeah I mean that's not that
long ago and then of course you just
kind of fast forward and get to our
World War two where the emergence of
where they called the pointy headed
geeks with the pencil-necked it's like
geeks and I think they're probably just
talking about Alan Turing and the guys
down at the Manhattan Project
holy shit like those guys actually kind
of won the war and it didn't take long
to realize that the capacity of the
people who are capable of innovation has
vastly outstripped physicality
that's the outstripped tactics it's in
fact easy to the point where it's going
to be vastly outstripping all possible
strategy we can speak about that
detailed like but the basic point is as
it turns out game be actually also ends
up being the theoretically optimal
conditions for maximal innovation
because is the theoretical optimal
conditions for maximum creative
collaboration it also has this
characteristic of having sort of an
escape velocity in techno utopia space
but in a context where it doesn't lead
to the catastrophic consequences of
exponential technology there's a lot
there I think this has been wonderful
Jordan actually I had high
hopes for this session as you know I've
always respected the work that you do
occasionally we argued sometimes
violently but this has been at one of
the most wonderful conversations I've
had in a long time we actually did do
some thinking here not just simulated
thinking and I thank you for this very
at the end of the day hopeful discussion
that's beautiful man thank you my
pleasure my absolute pleasure production
services and audio editing by Stanton
media lab music by Tom Muller at modern
space music com
[Music]