you
but the object they feed us between
those ilaha illa-allah Flavia la mouche
hello Daniel
hello everybody we will do a short
introduction in Portuguese and Daniel
wouldn't talk in English with Portuguese
subtitles my name is attorney ahsoka
China economics group institutes of
power Portela project is on a Yamaha
think about the region Ellison and
puppet to read before to routeburn and
shallot Americana music clad in three
Otis yummy Film Institute promote waiver
prints are done in polymer he ferment ah
we tell computer ow
he knows this grandest Davis criss-cross
lucerne Cerro COSO giovanna mundo until
now still astronomers Amalia Toru a
crevasse district ashes against evil to
Nova Taurus you see Google television
sustainability is famous going home
through to see good time machine achieve
he also would contain ship America's
embassy who the Parana Zion abuse Dorado
its format to another door with
inclusive nos debemos present a sequence
treatise de tolosa sconces to move into
Brazil he's saying creeper Edessa
photosystem conozco to me he got over
the same window Daniel Danny eval
agradecer Sylvania father with my aqua
to an exorcist a link oh yeah is a
massive cyber connector across ASEAN
a connector for sociology spewpa
bellicose through spell Mesopotamia and
that is a huge deterministic Uno's Rufus
in the capital Marcel another cetology
technique of the recipe Nene he knows a
through the formal agenda - corner
to see you Yaroslav Priscilla Malina
pellet reduce tone though the days of
todos whistling - baby man his age - for
say the water poor fuckin oh what a
todos de fátima legria majestic human
orgy its eco design it is an achievable
yongsan you Joe Gonzales he yeah
jung eun-ji Avena - Daniel do Brasil
yellow Jean clue he has a ferry G
webinars is Lincoln's presidency is a
single more traditional delivery a
públicas number to guess it or no pass
freedom encounter Frankie
Hodge conceit resume from say to
delusional assume I stabbed a meeting
Jemaine tofu settlement Raja new Brazil
the messy oh no super easy power GG
working he asked but seriously since
Tibet acero nest egg you Dallas Newsom
Ottawa Nellis knew somehow care per se
years of India don't forget to look at
the Inca the u.s. I opposed to divert
Institute's as opposed to data tiesm
expeller connector so here specialist
new Brazil Brazil you can say to you
think Stan former prodigy but managing
to give you produce the farm original
achievement we all play Mike he detailed
any of our questions a touch his domain
there's so much Tom but our designs
butters promises bono instrument talking
angrily huh the main face superb superb
Akhenaten he said we discovering she
grupo de Percy topic in you
let's say the secret design a generic
container in Brazil boom
yatta facility lu s how oricon
versailles he algumas massage ins
avocados Pradesh Cammisa who primera
form poking that's true Tudor nós temos
mysimon who's my presentation - Daniel
g3 in Catherine take Cinco minutos hit
the poison has to do tempo nos vamos
guess a bit the giunta's has a very has
from their Perkins's yet imprisonment
importance a king passion assume the
programa the webinar who says one with
cod Regina screech ok yeah Q&A a saccade
Regina Ong donkey carry Colo Carrisford
giunta's in quanto Daniel file is a
presenter something
so I'm just gonna say that in English if
you're watching this and you don't speak
Portuguese I'm sorry
today we're gonna have about 30 between
30 and 35 minutes
Daniel will just make a presentation and
then we're gonna have some time for
questions and if you'd like to ask a
question there is a button on the zoom
menu just at the bottom of your screen
which you can click and then you can
just type a question and this is the
best place for you to be fielding
questions during
daniel valves presentation which will
take at the end right kimye's cutting
file is Jing down AC I was in
Switzerland English with Daniel for some
English he's fully distributed English
Massey was a father import against thing
and some mash can cleave primera vez
esto English no zoom he deposited
legendas in Portuguese but I used to
Versailles precision klika cumbia bottom
keep ice clip is great to closed caption
you bottom tank a Virginia I was
consoling ensure galas in de coca
problemas revenue Shh here Flavia e AR
Flavia acai ISA vantaa Adam Rose's boom
Akamai's
ah just to say in English that I there
will be subtitles in Portuguese so you
need to click the button that says
closed caption at the bottom of your
menu and then you will get simultaneous
translation more consecutive translation
as a subtitle in Portuguese so it's also
an opportunity if you want to learn
Portuguese right watch ha ha
if they shall Daniel Daniel needs a
present now kill if they are present
owashi yeah purchase agora it willful
angley's could give a system window
illusion dang Portuguese so from now on
I'm gonna speak English because the
people who only understand Portuguese
can read the subtitles it is a pleasure
to be here tonight well today and to
listen to daniel Val again we work we've
been working quite closely together on a
series of really interesting projects
all connected to regeneration and Daniel
is someone I admire a lot especially
because of his generosity with his
knowledge and his experience I think
he's one of the people that I see giving
a lot to the world in terms of yeah
describing what regeneration means and
how can we embody the practice in our
lives so without further ado Daniel Val
thank you so much Ruth and thank you
everybody for making time to come to
this webinar and the admiration is
mutual Ruth I think that Ruth is one of
the people who really embodies what
regeneration is all about weaving
networks of collaboration so more people
can build their capacity and act
positively at restoring ecosystems
locally regionally and globally and Ruth
is doing wonderful work with that and
I'm glad to be able to help every now
and then so thank you so much for this
second webinar again also the way that
this is coming together that it's
actually possible to speak for me for me
to speak in English and for there to be
simultaneous translation into Portuguese
and then simultaneous subtitle
so you can follow the subtitles for me
as an example of what can happen when we
shift from competitive advantage to
collaborative advantage which i think is
one of the transitions that are at the
heart of moving towards regenerative
cultures we can just do so much more if
we work together and so as we said I
will start with a short well short half
hour presentation and then I open up to
questions and just looking how to share
my screen and this is the one I want to
share and now it should work okay now it
looks like I've got I've got two screens
here so if you see me looking off-center
it's because I'm looking at the screen
just slightly there the topic of this
webinar is systemic bio-inspired
design and it's part of a series of two
webinars - as a warm-up - my visit to
Brazil and I'm really looking forward to
this visit and March and giving a talk
at good Institute and also a short
workshop at Curtin sitting you can find
out more at the design Rehana at Evo
org and just to this
English that this webinar is not about
pi inspired design in terms of
biomimicry levels one and two which is
basically the examples of how we can
innovate new products that are inspired
by the way that nature with its 3.8 year
eight billion year head start in
research and development has innovated
wonderful solutions that we can learn
from of course and the most important
thing here to reiterate from what I said
in my last webinar is that while very
often I think I just did it myself we
use language that says learning from
nature as if nature is something out
there and we're somewhere separate from
it the key internal reframing that we
need to do to work regenerative ly is to
first and foremost understand that we
are nature and that at the very best we
can design as nature creating conditions
conducive to life and really that's what
this is about and and just briefly these
examples here that that you've got on
the screen at the moment are all
biomimetic design innovations all the
images are from my book so i also speak
about the product design level but in
this webinar i wanted to focus more on
the systemic level so as you can see
here on the screen there's ways to
optimize the aerodynamics of a car and
the stability of a car following
biological models there's ways to create
fast swimming swimsuits or Hospital
interiors that don't allow bacteria to
attach mimicking the way that the shark
skin is structured and we have all or
many of us have seen how the wings of
airplanes can have tipped up at the end
of the the wing over the last years
because it makes them more aerodynamic
more using less fuel and more stable and
that's an innovation that is copied from
the
of prey um so rather than staying with
the product design level I said I wanted
to speak to you today about the third
level of biomimicry which is biomimicry
that is inspired by biological and
ecological processes and systems and
this map is a map of the world's biomes
meaning it's a distribution map of the
type of ecosystems that we have around
the globe and as we begin to rematch the
human presence onto the biological and
ecological patterns of nature because
we've kind of divorced ourselves from it
through being somewhat overly focused of
what technology can do and not paying
enough attention of how even our highest
technology needs to fit into the life
sustaining cycles of nature if we want
to use it for any length of time and if
we don't want to go extinct in a hurry
and so this map of looking at where the
key ecosystems are is a good point to
start of how to rematch ourselves
learning from nature how to be part of
nature again and how to become a healing
regenerating regenerating influence on
the ecosystems we inhabit this image
taken from the International Space
Station
it shows the Mediterranean and right in
the center you can see the island of
Majorca and you can see a very lit up
Half Moon Bay and right in the center of
that is where I'm sitting right now in
Palma de Majorca and I like this image
because a it shows how at night we
really light up the planet with our
unsustainable use of energy which
unfortunately is still by and large
coming from non-renewable energy sources
and nuclear and if we want to redesign
the human presence on earth we have to
shift fundamentally from these energy
sources nuclear also being a
non-renewable source to
renewable energy sources and the image
also shows when you look at that just
above the curvature of the globe you see
that green line and it gives you an idea
of how small or how how relatively load
the atmosphere actually is and between
the earth and that upper layer in in
that layer of air is where everything
that we've ever done as a species has
taken place and all our actions work
about from a very few exceptions when we
travel beyond that sphere but all our
actions have had consequences on this
living planet life as a planetary
process that we're participating in and
with the converging crises that are
coming at us we're now really challenged
to redesign our human impact on earth in
such a way that we fit back into the
system and that we heal this system so
the big question is this is another map
of the earth built up from satellite
images and you can see that there are
large areas that are deserts and
unfortunately because of human action
over the last five thousand years we
have drastically increased the deserts
and the question is what would it take
if we actually started to inhabit each
of these diverse ecosystems that the
previous map showed but do it in such a
way that we try to bring in that
ecosystem to its peak productivity to
capture the most amount of carbon and
store it in soil store it and biomass
store it in the bio materials we use and
in the process draw down carbon from the
atmosphere and reverse global warming
and climate change
avoid runaway cataclysmic climate change
and make that shift towards regionally
focused by a material cultures and of
course the world isn't going to look
quite like that because of the way that
global climate patterns create desert
areas but with ingenuity and careful
attention to the bio cultural uniqueness
of place we
can do a lot and these images from the
Loess Plateau in China sure that it
really isn't a question of feasibility
it's a question of leadership and a
question of commitment and a question of
will and whether we leave the eroded
landscapes of the planet to continue
further to decorate further and become
less and less by productive and become
more and more of a driver of global
warming or we reforest and we make soils
fertile again and in the process
actually avoid early extinction as a
species because that's really what we
might be facing if we don't act now
these images are also from the Loess
Plateau and just to give you an idea of
the scale of this it's a thirty five
thousand square kilometer area of which
so far only five percent have been
restored but that's still hundreds of
square kilometers and all those images
show that we can really within
relatively short period of time bring
back in 15 years
a much lusha much more verdant
environment and also with that bring
back the river systems bring back the
water because as ends girge who is one
of my great heroes from Brazil said we
plant water we need to plant the trees
and work with the soil and increase
carbon in the soil and then water will
flow again and even the the hydrological
cycle will function again and the rains
will start falling again and fountains
that have long been dry will start
flowing again this is really possible
and we've demonstrated it over and over
again another series of maps that Robert
Zuke's has produced which might help us
to rematch our human ways of meeting
needs on to the patterns of bioregions
is this map of the world's river systems
and you can see these are not to scale
but you can see in the bottom right
corner that's Spain and you can even see
Majorca the island that I am speak to
you from in the very far right corner
and you can see some of the watersheds
are enormous ly big and others are
smaller and of course gigantic
watersheds like the Mississippi
watershed or the Amazon watershed might
be one or two or three bioregions from
clusters of bioregions but simply by
looking at these hydrological maps we
get an idea of what natural patterns on
earth actually pre dictate in terms of
what's possible and and then follow
these patterns along with overlaying
patterns of the ecosystems are shown
earlier to look at how we can improve
the way we work with land so it is at
its most bio productive because
fundamentally all our economic activity
is dependent on this primary bio
productivity on the way that
plant life can capture solar energy and
co2 and turn it into cellulose and other
materials that we can then use for our
purposes but also it's important to not
see it as only utilitarian value its
intrinsic value we need to be stewards
of the biodiversity of life in all these
diverse watersheds and ecosystems in
order to increase the capacity to
respond and to increase the resilience
of these systems to change and
transformation because one thing we know
for certain life is always going to keep
changing and we live in a dial in a
dynamic planet in a dynamic universe and
so we will never be able to stand still
we'll always have to adapt and diversity
is one of the key elements that makes us
able to adapt to more to the bigger
disruptions in in ways that give us a
greater chance to meet our needs in the
future and so this is all by ways of
introduction and in the announcement for
this webinar that I was going to focus
on three main terms that people
talk about a lot but it might help to
review what they actually mean and the
first one of them is this word what is
resilience and when you look at
resilience there's on the one hand the
capacity of an ecosystem to persist in
the face of disruption of changes from
the outside or another way of saying it
is absorbing or coping with these
disruptions in such a way that the the
structure and the function of the system
stays the same and then when the
disruption becomes too much or the
intervals of the disruption becomes so
frequently that the system cannot cope
anymore
then the next level would be adaptive
capacity which is to change the
structure of the system slightly in
order to still be able to maintain the
functions and both of these depend
critically on the levels of diversity
and also the levels of redundancy how at
different scales certain functions are
repeated and we don't maximize by
scaling up everything and then we take
out redundancies which which normal
economic theory you would ask you to and
by that we create brittle ER systems so
keeping the capacity to meet basic needs
both at the local the regional the
national and the global scale at the
same time so when there is a disruption
we can use backup systems that happen at
different scales and another he
component of resilience is
transformative capacity and this only
happens in socio ecological systems but
basically all systems that we
participate in on this planet in this
planet are now socio ecological systems
because we live in the Anthropocene
there is not a place on earth that isn't
somehow affected by the actions of
humanity and the way we interact
socially with each other and with the
environment
but critically here our capacity for
foresight and anticipation the way that
now we're waking up to the fact that
we've created over 250 years of rapid
technological evolution and and
industrialization that we've created
systems that have increasingly eroded
resilience and biodiversity and that we
have started anthropogenic climate
change that has become worse to the
point that we're now facing imminent
runaway climate change all these the
fact that we're beginning to see the
problem and the fact that we are
beginning to understand we need to do
something about this adds to this system
of humanity in nature of us being part
of nature the capacity to say ok we
might have made mistakes but we can
respond to them now and we can increase
the capacity of the system to respond to
the changes that come ahead are coming
at us and so this is the third level of
resilience that we as life being part of
the community of life add to em social
ecological systems and don't worry this
is a lot to cover in a talk at the end I
give you some some resources where you
can follow up some reading if you want
to repeat some of this and go deeper
into it and another thing that I said
that I was going to talk about and
explain a little bit more about in this
talk is what is called the adaptive
cycle and what's really important to
understand here is that resilience
theory isn't just some kind of detached
academic theory it is the result of 50
years of studying change dynamics within
ecosystems and eco social systems and to
look at common patterns and to
understand how change and transformation
happens in these systems
and this adaptive psycho is kind of a
distillation the essence of some of that
understanding and that's why on the
cover of my book design decoder is a
regenerative us in Brazil you can see
the same image repeated because it is
central to what designing regenerative
cultures is about the capacity to adapt
and transform in response to changing
environmental conditions and changing
social conditions is what regenerative
cultures need to grow and need to
improve on and so let me just talk you
briefly through this adaptive cycle
it's basically best to start at the blue
arrow which is when the system is
starting to if you if you think about it
in terms of a clearing or a forested
area like the forest areas in California
that have been leveled by a wildfire
last summer and then when ecological
succession starts to happen and the
first species come in and then
succession plants come in and take over
and eventually you get a series of
successions that lead to a peak canopy
peak productivity ecosystems which is
when when you get into the green arrow
where rather than lots of like the
reason why where it says in blue growth
and the little our that's our selection
our selections are species that produce
lots of seeds and some of them survive
but most of them don't and then in the
in the in the second in the green arrow
conservation happens where K selected
species are favored which are basically
species that produce just a lot a few
offspring but care for them a lot which
is most of the mammals and particularly
us and when you in these systems where
the green arrow gets to the top then the
amount of free
Capital is like most capital is
locked-up most nutrients are locked up
in the system and most connections that
can be made are already made most
relationships are already defined and so
the system becomes rigid and as the
environment changes it might not serve
the new conditions anymore and really
that's where we are at the moment we've
created a globalized economy that is
quite rigid in the way it
structures access to capital and access
to resources and it has created an
enormous Lea brittle system particularly
because we've divorced ourselves from
the rest of nature and nature's ability
to create abundance for all of life and
so then you move into this breakdown
stage where the existing patterns don't
serve any longer and we need to release
structures that don't serve and move
into from break down into break through
move into experimenting rapidly with new
options and reorganizing the capacity of
the system to respond to the new
conditions and so this loop happens
whether it's in the patch in a forest
where just a tree fell or where it's in
an entire forest ecosystem in in an area
in California and it happens at
different scales at different time
scales and so nature is this nested
system of these dynamic change loops
happening all the time and I focused I
gave us this idea of a hole a cube and
when we work regenitive lee we always
have to think of where does what we do
sit in a relationship to the next larger
hole where does our community sit in our
bio region where does our bio region sit
within our national patterns of of doing
things and where do our nation-states
sit within the global patterns of life
creating conditions conducive to life
how do we collaborate between nations to
increase planetary bio productivity in
such a way that we create abundance for
all and so as you can see in this this
diagram
these patterns of change that are
described by the adaptive cycle are also
nested at the local regional and global
scale and sometimes when a system is in
that breakdown phase the red phase it
can lead to a revolt at the next level
up it can create innovations that then
like local innovations can can become
innovations at the biosphere the by
origin or scale and by a regional scale
innovation can then also affect the
national scale so in many ways what
seems to be the case in ecosystems is
that innovations are local and then
spread into the global and that's a
lesson for us as we redesign the human
presence on earth our impact on earth we
need to start locally and by originally
and then spread patterns that work
between bio regions but always with
sensitivity to the unique conditions of
those bio regions and this is both scale
linking work in terms of spatial scale
linking but also in terms of temporal
scale linking because these big patterns
at the global scale are much slower
or this patterns at large biomes levels
like the regional patterns are slower
again then the change at the regional
level and so one key lesson to take from
this is that breakdown is nothing that
we should fear breakdown is part of
these change cycles we need to have
breakdown at different scales in order
to have innovation at different scales
and we need to maintain connection
between the local the regional and the
global working locally globally and
locally if we want to succeed in
creating a regenerative culture and in
my book there's a
this this diagram that that and talks
about the scales of regenerative design
which is basically looking at how from
the material science shifting to
biomaterials to new types of product
designs made from biomaterials to new
type of architecture that are also based
on wood and biopolymers that lock carbon
into the built environment to new types
of community design that see trees as
part of a public health infrastructure
and more holistically integrate the the
more than human parts of nature into our
urban settlements and then then linking
our industrial processes in such a way
that they are closed loops and then that
one processes waste becomes another
processes resource just mimicking again
biomimetic innovation at the ecosystems
level mimicking what ecosystems do and
and building new types of industrial
system closed-loop biomaterial
industrial systems at the bio regional
scale and then co-locating or locating
our urban patterns within the patterns
of the bio region really marrying again
how the city relates to the resource
flows of its bioregions all of that is
described in in my book in a lot more
details and I can't go into too much
detail right now because I really would
like to have some questions so I'm just
gonna move on I know this is a bit of a
tour de force with a lot of very
technical concepts
I hope the translators coping and all of
this for me is contextualized within
what I said earlier the fact that we are
as life capable of creating conditions
conducive to life and if we understand
this within the context of the
evolutionist evolutionary story then we
can see that while competitive behavior
does exist in nature it normally within
within groups selfish competitive
behavior sometimes beats altruistic
behavior
if you have a group where too much
competitive behavior happens then it
doesn't compete very well with other
groups so this is called multi-level
selection so basically groups which can
collaborate and be altruistic
out-compete groups that are full of
competitive individuals and so we need
to understand that as life has evolved
it has evolved through a process of
diversification and then subsequent
reintegration of that diversity at
higher levels of complexity and this
reintegration happens more often than
not through collaborative processes and
we are now faced in this multi-level
selection kind of way with global crises
coming at us as one species where the
only way we can respond viably in a way
that we will have a future as humanity
is to make that shift from thinking that
it's all about competitive advantage to
that shift towards collaborative
advantage and learning from how
ecosystems do this all the time is what
I call systems level bio-inspired
innovation and design and so just lastly
we we are really at what I would call a
species level rite of passage we have
been an immature young species taking
more than we give back we have by and
large been a degenerative presence on
earth on the ecosystems we now call this
era the Anthropocene because we've
become a geological force I would prefer
to call it the eco zoic the the era
where we finally understand that we need
to reintegrate ourselves into the
ecosystem and Otto Sharma and others
have worked with this shift from ego to
eco and I quite like this illustration
that I found on the internet where we go
from E to E
to savor savor being the Sanskrit
concept of being in service off and
really that is at the heart of
regenerative cultures and regenerative
cultures create elegant solutions
carefully adapted to the bio cultural
uniqueness of the places they inhabit
and they do so in ways that are in
service to the full community of life
and in service to all of humanity so
it's not about coming back into some
kind of self-sufficiency locking down
and in survival mode community by
community or by original by bioregion
it's about matching our patterns to the
natural patterns in our bio regions but
doing so in global collaboration and if
you think back to that map at the
beginning of the ecosystems we can learn
a lot from each other people in similar
biomes and different parts of the planet
will face different climatic and
challenges and will also face similar
access to resources and similar access
to water and all of that the way they
overcome that their way they find
creative innovations to match meeting
human needs within the limits of their
specific ecosystems and within planetary
boundaries that's what we can exchange
globally and that's why it's so
important to collaborate both in terms
of stewarding the Commons but also in
terms of peer-to-peer open-source
innovation and I touched on a lot of
things not of not a lot in much detail
but that's the nature of only having 40
minutes to talk to you about this so I'm
really looking forward to some questions
and I'm gonna stop sharing screens but
you can get the PDF on the website of
the Goethe Institute will will arrange
that it's downloadable or that you can
get it emailed if you signed up for this
and at the very end of the PDF is also a
series of articles there are my medium
block that you can learn more about all
the things that I just
today thank you so much and over to Ruth
to get some questions so it would be
really good if you could add your
questions to it the Q&A box cerium Moon
to logout Cespedes in Colchis Oscar
giunta's Elina Kushina do do Q&A he I'm
gonna start with the first one that was
actually even before you started which
is how to develop interesting ways to
apply regenerative concepts in education
initiatives to students finishing high
school
Wow a very important question i i've
spent a large part of my professional
life working with education because i
believe that ultimately that's the meta
design shift if we shift worldview and
value systems if we shift the way we
meet the world and see the world we we
can shift everything downstream how we
design what we design and i must say i
personally haven't done so much work
with high school students of mainly work
with university students but a friend of
mine in norway has set up a institute
called the small earth institute and she
is looking at exactly that how do we
work with high school students on
regenerative cultures and i think she's
already listed a lot of resources on the
website and so if you google small earth
institute norway you will probably find
some inspiration but if i had to answer
the questions respond taneous lee for me
so much is about educating kids about a
connection to the natural environment
and taking them out of the classroom and
and letting them experience and vibrant
ecosystems as much as possible and in
work with natural environments and i
know that's not always possible in city
environments but bringing some kind of
nature into the classroom working with
even if it's just in the courtyard a
little bit of container based gardening
and a little bit of permaculture
bringing plants into the classroom and
involving the students into maintaining
and caring for them all of that you can
abstract really key lessons from
biomimicry and also regenerative design
based on that but that's just just a
starting point okay amazing thank you
and then we have a long question here
which is we are working in Brazil with
some huge communities who are dealing
not only with traditional and innovative
knowledge but which are developing new
ways of living in communities supporting
themselves creating alternative
technologies which we think could
contribute to a kind of a regenerative
culture not only for those communities
but also for many other social sectors
what do you ever heard about them and
beyond this are we able to interconnect
many of this and other communitarian
initiatives all over the world so I
reckon he's talking about eco villages
or yeah Cristina - no communities so I
have spent a lot of my well the last 10
15 years with the global eco village
Network movement and I've lived in
Finland on eco villages in the finto and
eco village for four years and I'm very
excited like the last time I was in
Brazil was at Rio mas bench in the UN
summit on sustainable development and I
met a lot of the people in Casa the the
Latin American network of eco villages
and I think these intentional
communities working in place working
with indigenous communities in many
cases in South America a key innovation
places where we can learn a lot and the
key bit about my book's title is
designing regenerative cultures it's
plural we need to match them to the
unique conditions of place and culture
and so we need more of the
experiments and we also need to find
ways of how to infiltrate mainstream
communities in sub urban and urban
environments and sometimes there's a
there's a benefit from working on
small-scale eco village intentional
community because it allows like you
have more buy-in you have a group that
wants to live differently so it allows
for much more rapid iterations in your
innovation innovation cycle and learning
but it tends to always be somewhat
removed from the majority world from how
most people that are still running in
some kind of treadmill are living so
while we need these experiments and
they're really important and I think gen
and casa a good networks to start
interconnecting them um in terms of more
the technological innovation side the
peer-to-peer network is a wonderful
platform to bring them together and yes
it's it's about local innovation in
global collaboration and exchange let's
have more of it great and there are
quite a few questions here about
business and commerce and regeneration
so maybe I read a couple of them and
maybe you can give a an answer so the
first is what
what could a sever economic system look
like and then another question is
whether there are companies applying the
concept of regenerative design within
highly competitive systems and then what
are some of the challenges of
implementing that kind of change at the
executive level so a little bit a dream
question about what could the severe
economic system look like and what are
some examples are some some of the
challenges of implementing this okay so
in terms of the like I I'm actually part
of a global research project at the
moment that is looking into what
regenerative economies might look like
and in many ways this question what will
the saver a service focused economy look
like
is very akin to that and what I'm
beginning to get towards is if
ultimately over the course of evolution
life has created conditions conducive to
life by increasing the amount of bio
productivity in the planet and basically
making the planet more inhabitable
making it lusher more abundant storing
up generation over generation and over
generation a wealth of biodiversity and
and energetic and material abundance
that that life thrives off then we could
say that while the second law of
thermodynamics
the march towards entropy still holds in
the large timescale of universal time
patterns on the timescale of our planet
Earth only a few billion years which is
nothing in terms of universal time
patterns life is actually a sin tropic
force life pushes the end march towards
entropy in the other direction and so
I'm answering with a higher level
question again a saver economy is an
economy that is a sin tropic economy
that creates conditions conducive to
life that is saluto genic that is
increasing the health and vitality and
capacity to respond to change of the
system at different scales from local to
regional to globe and I know that's
relatively abstract and I think just as
with the question what would a
regenerative economy or regenerative
economies look like we are we have ideas
we have models we have case studies that
are definitely giving us hope that we
can do this but we in the middle of a of
living the questions together I am don't
expect answers in and be somewhat
suspicious of anybody who will say yes
sure I'll give you the answer to this
kind of question and it's the same
coming to the corporate questions and I
have big questions about how some large
companies can be transformed and I had
the pleasure of working whether with a
unique large company that is still
family
and therefore not having to bow to the
pressure of profit maximizing
shareholders but most of the large
corporations that that can't even decide
for themselves how they make the shift
from being degenerative monsters
destroying the planet to being
regenerative participants m.d
centralizing production and consumption
in such a way that they become knowledge
holders for regenerative networks they
might not be able to do this because in
the short term it might be less
profitable then it then following a
different path but their reality is it's
only less profitable or it seems
seemingly more profitable because we
tend to externalize all the impacts and
socialize all the costs that that these
impacts have so yeah it's it's a long
journey and I think it will take a lot
of soul-searching for large corporations
and I pull my hat to anybody who's
trying to work with one of these large
corporations in in a regenerative way
I'm open to joining the conversation and
but I don't have answers I just have
ideas I have a lot of questions that we
need to ask to do that thank you and
maybe just to ask a fragment of one
question that was asked here so knowing
that it's this big challenge in order to
change the world view and the mindset
from the people in charge in these
corporations which do you think it's
gonna happen sooner do you think that
these companies will end up dying or you
know going through a cycle of breakdown
or do you think the planet will you know
succumb or humanity will succumb first
well I think we we definitely have one
glimmer of hope that it this is none of
this is about trying to save the planet
and Gaia will be absolutely fine without
us one could even be facetious
well maybe she would be a lot better if
we just exit it faster it's
unfortunately like that unless we change
our behavior but we have the potential
of becoming healing and stewarding
elements within gaia once we understand
that we are gaia and so in that sense
these large corporations well we might
see human civilization as we know it
collapse before some of these
corporations were change um and if
anybody's not watched djembe and Elle's
video on deep adaptation please google
it it's it's worth watching because he
spells out that we are facing imminent
near-term human extinction if we don't
change our ways and we have left the
window of opportunity so small that even
if we start changing our ways we don't
have guarantees anymore that we will
make it we will have to find it within
us and that's the species-level rite of
passage we have to act even if we don't
know whether the outcomes is going to
save us and that very action from that
place in service of life and future
generations is the transformative
process and I'm not sure how many large
corporations are willing to make that
shift but as I hinted at before my guess
is that if you want to just as when the
dinosaurs were still around and they
were little shrew like little mammals
running between their feet and the
dinosaurs were the megafauna
and well we have agile small bioregional
companies who are already acting
regenerative ly between the feats of the
dinosaurs of large multinational
corporations at the moment but I also
don't want to say that there isn't a lot
of wealth in the people in the knowledge
in the tradition of these large
corporations and that I don't want to
bedevil them in any way um but my sense
is that for them to be relevant in the
second half of this century or even
within the next 10-15 years they need to
start to look at how
what they're doing their whole supply
webs on to a much more RiRi generalizing
level they can become global networks of
knowledge holders but they need to free
all the patents and move towards an
open-source innovation pattern because
this is ultimately not about what
company succeeds anymore it's about what
the humanity finds a future in the
community of life or whether we go
extinct and in the process erodes so
much of life's inheritance of the last
3.8 million years so watch this space
that the jury's still out
and as I've just recently seen an
article that I wrote in 2004 where I
quote Donella Meadows saying that when
people ask her do we still have enough
time she always says the same thing we
just have enough time if we start today
and I think that's that's it we're gonna
do all do our best to see whether we can
turn this oil tanker around before it's
too late
and I think maybe a common thread
amongst three or four questions here is
about the evidence
so both as in what are some references
or case studies or examples of this
scale linked regeneration where you know
a local initiative for regeneration
actually had systemic impacts and could
be could be scaled and and another is
also how how do we build the evidence so
people who will be so like from you know
economists to politicians to people who
are sitting on the board in in large
corporations like how do we build the
evidence where is the evidence like how
do we build a business case I take a
little like I know that we love looking
at performance indicators and evidence I
mean there there's a lot of evidence but
it is anecdotal it is
specific storytelling evidence it's it's
like you've seen the pictures of the
Loess Plateau there are other places in
Ethiopia in Senegal where similar
large-scale ecosystems restoration is
happening a lot of eco villages have
been involved in ecosystems restoration
for a long long time and they can
demonstrate that the the springs start
flowing again and that the the water
comes back and there are companies who
can demonstrate that they've improved
the social cohesion in their communities
and and increased the positive effects
on the environment and but I think we
have to watch out we just have to get on
with the work we know what we have to do
we we know that we have to shift towards
a biomaterials economy we know that we
have to re regionalize production and
consumption and we know we have to find
ways to meeting our basic human needs
more regionally in global collaboration
and the evidence will build itself but
what I would almost say as a note of
caution because I've seen this in my
work with the sustainable development
goals it seems to me we've got it wrong
with the SDGs at the moment we're
spending probably 2/3 of the time if not
three-quarters of the time looking at
voluntary local reports and national
reports and how are we getting on and
what our indicators and and we're so
obsessed with making the evidence case
that we divert most of the energy from
actually doing the work and so since
we're so early on in this start of the
regeneration rising let's just get on
with the work and I'm not saying not
build an evidence case but build the
evidence by doing it in this kind of
specific place-based anecdotal way of
look it worked for us here and if you
abstract from it you might be able to
learn from that but please whatever your
abstract make sure that it fits your
culture and your place if you try to
transfer transfer it from one place to
another so and again I'm somewhat
evading the answer but it's how I would
see this thank you
Thank You Daniel and there are lots of
really good questions here left but
we're running out of time
it will I'm the thing that is but one
does a key Allah's message about a key
term Anand shall I take it eminent
Portuguese Mara villains yo so I'd like
to thank you Daniel for your time and
for sharing your wisdom and your
experience and your questions and also
your you know doubts with us
and now Flavia will just share a few
words about the cycle of regenerative
design here in Brazil just just briefly
I offered this yeah I offered this after
the last webinar and I I don't think
I've actually got the list yet but um I
can try at some point to answer some of
these questions on the medium block so
one once if we manage to download the
questions I can go through them and see
whether some of them the basic script
there was no poder the obamas now very
special simple Daniel Tosh personal
recipe we may call a presentation to
Daniel link oppressor webinar Yahoo so
to slinky Osito don't inconvenience
email on Jerusalem they accessorizes hip
earrings karo appropriate approach Isaac
he a man era como territorial mentorship
snapping salut who seek you design a
precision era Chivo a crea
coming you Joe Prince Arjun own gps's
webinars Kumasi who Daniel firmeza
present I would say to sharks prowl
thing Jame to to create a generic sound
you fucking serious
may Allah cannot to Desiro genera
my spolanos papel my sister Dina he died
Eve
Apache Jesus I'm staying a much Mossad
agent Contras presence is approximate
going to present job and which I reach
those marks on a chip on Judah never saw
so much Palestra gia better unless you
to get : cemented to live ruin for two
days
keep us sane to kita same vegetable
village durable block he yes he as a
family who just seeking to sabotage a
beach tourism workshop which in Peru as
fish fishing in some Tacoma San Luis
Alonso de Washington signals Ababa Ora
lucite designer a generic open to Rd
which the main right the media rich
Quattro workshop Khun Danai on de
Janeiro imagery says workshop cottage
treszura school Mohammed believe in
Brasilia a new phenomena DaVinci reaches
oil to treat a young coach merci
beaucoup Daniel it imagine that she
supposes padania Campania
verses hotel not rotten tomato here do
design edition at our children
he value G sake has actually this key
Thomson who hell is hardest to institute
some achieved as gratuitous he the one
oportunidad uses a better day provides
the bay progress a Mason agency keep a
technical topic tries to possess webinar
cool to say Canaan Valley dodgy
transmission as a person
Nigel is a selca Institute presents nada
mooch and Raja facility' so he human G
tell Daniel tresine two consecutive
is consist MMH complex fundamental
necessary this moment my scooter petrol
is a fancy detachable Singh
jeetendra make project moving to new
Gotham thank you so much bye-bye
9
you