[Music]
if it's a real pleasure to to speak
you run the intellectual explorers
podcast in Toronto so in a kind of
similar place with the podcast and the
people that you're interviewing sort of
some of the same people that we've
interviewed you've interviewed on your
podcast and you also wrote this amazing
piece that went kind of viral in the
circles that that we both move in called
mimetic tribes tried to give a sort of
greater definition to what's going on
below in the sort of culture what you've
called culture war 2.0 could you
describe briefly what the thesis of that
piece was I guess it's prudent to
describe what a culture war is right and
put simply it's a war to define what's
sacred and profane in society or culture
and culture at one point it happened in
the 90s people like Pat Buchanan and
religious right kind of fighting by
secular left and using international
relations terms sort of like them
bipolar war we had two left and the
right and we make the speculation that
culture war 2.0 is what they call a
multipolar war it's a fragmented war
it's no longer left and right
it's a multitude of what we dub the
mimetic tribes fighting each other in
order to control the narrative of our
culture can you outline some of those
tribes maybe that might Ellis trace it a
little bit more people maybe describe
what a memetic tribe is describe what a
meme is first what people popularly
known as a meme is those images that go
viral of a cat or whatever and meme and
the Richard Dawkins sense when he coined
it in The Selfish Gene is a unit of
information that wants to replicate
itself and when memes take team and they
team up they call it a meme Plex and
that enhances its ability to replicate
so a religion or an ideology it could be
described as a meme Plex and so a
memetic tribe is the idea that people
are becoming tribal around me
Lexa's and we listed this the
spreadsheet that has about 30 different
mimetic tribes and some examples would
be social justice activists or me to
black life matters the alt-right the old
light neo reactionaries manosphere
rationalist post rationals new atheist
there's a slew of them and we argue that
where we speculate that these tribes are
fighting amongst each other
internally as well as externally and I
know one of those tribes was the
intellectual dark web right yeah I'd
like to hear your take on the
intellectual dialogue first because I'd
like to talk about sort of where it
might be going and kind of air critique
of of it as well right right so the way
I view it is it was sort of we were
talking about this offline about a
placeholder tribe that was sort of
pushing back on some of the social
justice activists or kind of a coalition
of the woek tribe me too black lives
matter and they were trying to fight for
I guess they're pushing back against
blank slate ISM and fighting for reason
in science and and promoting that as a
sacred value in our culture with that
can't be compromised in free speech
obviously and so I view it as sort of
yeah pushing back against blank slate
ISM but more more reactionary a more
reactionary tribe it's responding to
sort of this push of woke nests in the
culture yeah and this is something that
I even said to to Eric and he really
didn't like my use of the word
reactionary because the the unifying
factor for the people that were
originally considered to be in the IDW
was this sort of sense of reacting to
something in the culture now you could
argue that that needs to be reacted
against but my question is whether it's
being reacted against in a way that sort
of drags the conversation up to a new
level or whether it drags it down into
the more polarizing kind of being at
before or anti social justice whereas
what I what I see is the necessary kind
of move is to say the values that you
care about fairness being the principal
one they're hardwired into it
some hike talks about like these are
values that are important to everyone
but there are other values that are also
important and also that any value system
when taken to extremes and becomes an
ideology can't become self-defeating and
that's sort of that's the nuance of the
conversation that I see that is being
lost
especially when you have people like
Jordan Peterson and Dave Rubin who at
times can slip into very simplistic
critiques of the left I feel that what's
required is a much more nuanced critique
that kind of takes us up to a new a new
level in the discourse right and that
resonates a lot my to be charitable
someone like David Rubin or Jordan
Peterson I think if you are embattled in
this culture war right you potentially
stop evolving or looking for that kind
of liminal space where you can push
yourself at the edge of your map of
reality and you're pushing back against
another mean Plex and so from looking at
it from the outside it might looks taken
right it might not be evolving this
intellectual dark web but maybe that
battle between the intellectual dark web
and these world tribes is evolution
itself and we're sort of is someone
who's studying this kind of the warring
tribes of culture war 2.0 where do you
get the sense that the the IDW kind of
needs which is a relatively new tribe
what do you think that it kind of is it
is right now like part of me sees it as
sort of an engineered tribe and when
something gets engineered and doesn't
manifest organically there's sort of a
deadness to it right so maybe it was
born to die and maybe it was just sort
of a temporary tribe they needed to push
back and create some space where either
dialogue could ensue you know I don't
personally find it interesting and I
think a lot of people are not finding it
interesting there's this quote that by
the post rationalist I really like they
say that it's better to be interesting
and wrong than right and boring right
because being interesting and wrong
inspires others
to be right in the future so with that
whole white paper I'm not attached to it
but the idea is to provide an
interesting speculation for others to
play with and I think that is where all
the live players are going to be
operating in in that kind of sandbox
environment and I know we've talked
about the idea of the intellectual deep
web as a kind of place for the
intellectual dark web to go next I mean
my sense of the intellectual dark web is
I was really excited by it when it first
emerged because there's a quality of
conversation that felt very alive and
very emergent thinking about sort of
Brett and Eric Weinstein on the Rubin
report and then a conversation between
Jordan Pederson and Ben Shapiro about
religious truth that also seemed to be
kind of scaffolding each other's thought
and moving in a direction there was a
sense of an emergent conversation and me
personally I've been slightly
disappointed with the lack of that sense
in the IDW conversations probably for a
over eight months maybe a year or so and
this sense of everyone almost starting
to stagnate in their positions and just
repeating themselves more and more and
not getting this sense of an emergent
synthesis of conversation that maybe was
promised when it first arrived it's like
its audience they have an audience now
right and it's almost a business
[Music]
speaking against certain mean plexes and
ideologies are speaking for free speech
just to speak personally I just am
somewhat bored by the dialogue and I've
been for a while and you mentioned the
intellectual deep web that's something
that excites me right and I don't think
it's been established yet this mimetic
tribe this intellectual deep web the
other tribe but it's it's calling out
you know and the way I look at it is a
more embodied
tribe you know someone who kind of it's
like a spiritual embodiment of the ideas
where the intellectual dark web is just
sort of a ragtag group of people pushing
back against this will
yeah I want to pick up on that because
that's I think we both have a sense like
of what is needed to in the kind of
emergent conversation to move forward
and this kind of intellectual deep where
idea brings in those thinkers for me
it's people like John Vevey key who's
talking about kind of deliberately
integrating the wisdom traditions and
the much more embodied knowing it's
people like stan grof with the kind of
integration of like really cutting-edge
psychedelic thinking psychedelic therapy
it's people like Richard tarnis who I've
been hugely influenced by it's people
like it's also the people sort of on the
fringes of the critiquing the sort of
the Western materialist model so people
like Rudolf Steiner Carl Jung obviously
was already being kind of brought in
through Jordan Peterson I say Jordan
Pederson is more intellectual deep web
than an intellectual dark web almost
because he is bringing this kind of
liminal space and the idea of
integration of mythopoetic sand so I
think he he he would be one figure that
I would see it as being part of both of
those I'm not sure he strikes me as a
potential bridge so who are the other
figures that you would put into this
kind of emerging constellation like I'm
not 100% sure right but John rebecky
definitely Ken Wilber and again this
this intellectual deep web well what
comes to mind is is mmm there might need
to be an intellectual meta web and I
think we were talking about this right
because what I'm doing in Toronto this
intellectual Explorers Club the idea
there is to view different maps of
reality on their own terms and have the
capacity to articulate it back to them
to the point where they feel fully
understood right and just hold that
space hold all those different maps of
reality without any judgement without
any kind of being seduced by any one of
them and I think we need to be in that
space kind of there's a dialogue all
right an understanding because I think
true understanding is an act of love and
once we can get there how that capacity
to understand another mean Plex and me
intellectual deep web might naturally
emerge but I don't think he can be
predicted or engineered I've heard the
phrase the trans paradigm attic mind is
that does that fit in to like the idea
that you can see a wall of all of these
different and also it maps onto Ken
Wilbur's integral and that very well the
idea that you can see all of these value
systems as containing some truth but
there is also perspective that
incorporates all of them rather than
being in conflict because you're
thinking that your truth is the only
truth right right it's a yes end yeah
what comes to mind there is you know all
those mimetic tries we listed a lot of
them it strikes me and again this is a
lot of this would I talk about a
speculation right I don't really hold on
to this with with I hold on open with
lightness but a lot of those mimetic
tribes they seem like they come from an
egoic space right it's like a zero-sum
game that they're playing their map is
right your map is wrong right where were
these kind of these trans egoic tribes
that are merging like integral theorists
or post rationalist strands rationalists
is this kind of placeholder of an
intellectual deep web they seem trans
egoic right and ego at tribes they view
it as a culture war right where trans
egoic tribes do and as a culture dance
this is a part of the evolution and so
any kind of thinker who views it as a
cultural dances it's kind of like an
evolutionary necessity I would say we
belong to this potential intellectual
deep web and Jordan Peterson do you
think he's you do you think he's maybe a
bridge between the two I don't know what
Jordan Peterson is or what he's going to
be about but he's obviously an important
figure in this culture war cultural
dance whether he likes it or not
I think we've called him before one man
lightning rod for the culture war so
what you've called a culture war 2.0 why
why 2.0 what do you think is different
about this iteration the idea is sort of
like a postmodern war right it's a
multipolar war it's not about left or
right these monolithic forces it's a
multitude of memetic tribes competing
and I like to term the noosphere
collective consciousness right they're
all kind of swimming in this space
trying to
dominate the narrative or the
meta-narrative and we we speculate that
they're there six crisis crises that led
to this culture war 2.0 right one was
the meaning crisis right and the other
was the reality crisis and those two
together kind of give you the is in the
art right so the reality crisis tells
you what what is what is the map of
reality but if we can't have a
consistent collective sense making
capacities if we can't dialogue together
and figure out what is true or even have
a the same Epis Tamala G to arrive at
truth then we have a reality crisis on
our hands right and Scott Adams commonly
talks about how there's like two movie
screens where we kind of flirt with the
idea that it's Netflix level variety of
reality of tunnels that we're wrestling
with and the meaning crisis gives us a
not right what we should do with our
lives
and when you have one sort of religion
or meta-narrative that dominates it kind
of creates internal coherence with
society but if you have a bunch of them
competing with each other then that's a
crisis right the other ones we have a
belonging this crisis where people don't
feel like they're they're connected with
each other there's a warfare crisis
going on which is with the internet some
speculate that we're in a fourth World
War and it's a memetic war whether it's
sort of memetic mercenaries like
Cambridge analytic ah Russians hacking
or Chinese hacking the United States
government but everyone can be a memetic
warrior in this kind of ecology that
we're operating in if this is a wool
what do you think of the key from it so
out of the 36 mimetic tribes that we
listed and I mentioned a few already
both social justice activists me too
black life matters I'll write all that
stuff you could say that there's and
again this is me at the edge of my
thinking there's there's two broad
coalition's if you want to call the woke
coalition and sort of this red pill
coalition my
map over to Jordan hauls the blue church
red church I think those are the two
driving forces currently in the in the
culture war and they're fighting
internally amongst themselves but
they're also fighting themselves as well
and I would say the one that has power
is the woke coalition's because they
dominate most media except Fox News and
Breitbart they dominate a lot of our
institutions HR departments PR
departments politics and the red pill
tried to soar like a gorilla warriors in
a way some people would kind of pick you
up at that point if I can you said they
dominated politics when Trump is in
power and right right and I should I
should speak a little bit more nuanced
they're they don't dominate all politics
but they dominate sort of the liberal
parties but yeah you're a hundred
percent right that the rightist parties
are sort of red pill in a way and I
would say these these two broad
coalition's the woke coalition they kind
of use virtue extortion ISM I like this
term that I'm flirting with and you know
the Mafia if they wanted to get money
from a business they break a few windows
and we'll protect you right so if you're
not virtue signaling a certain way then
you're at risk of being called a racist
sexist whatever right and that's a form
of power where people on the the red
pill right it's more or I would say
virtue terrorism you know in a sense
rein where they engage in online
harassment if somebody is critical
Jordan Peterson whether it's in bad
faith or good faith they can be attacked
by trolls and in the worst case as in
cells who engage in actual terrorism so
those are this virtue of extortion ISM
and virtue terrorism we're kind of two
ways this culture wars and being engaged
in but one thing it's not happening is
dialogue genuine dialogue between the
two and some may say this could be what
Robert focalin calls a deep disagreement
something that can't be reconciled or
it's just bad faith actors engaging in
in combat do you have a sense of where
this is going at the moment
do you have a sense of that there is do
you see much hope that this this could
be resolved
I like this term called existential Hope
the idea and you know I'm as you know
I'm a kind of practicing stoic and I
operate the stoic community in Toronto
and there's this thing called the
Stockdale paradox and John Stockdale or
the James Stockdale he was a fighter
pilot in the Vietnam War and when he
crashed his plane he was playing got
shot down and he says I'm having a date
with Epictetus one of the prominent
Stoics and he practiced his stoicism
when he was a captive and he noticed
something that the the soldiers who were
held captive that kind of set a time
line towards being released gave into
nihilism they gave up they gave hope and
he noticed the healthy balance to have
is to have this ridiculous hope that
your situation will be resolved that you
know heaven will arrive but be
absolutely realistic about the brute
facts of your situation you don't know
when you're gonna get out right so
holding that tension between that
existential Hope and then that kind of
that gritty reality right and when I
have those moments you know
possibilities open up and one thing I'm
flirting with right now going back to
this potential of intellectual deep web
and how they don't view it as a culture
war but they view it as a cultural dance
how can people playing in this space
dance so seductively that they want
others to dance with them or how do you
have you make the meta space cool enough
that people want to want to go that
right yeah and so in Daniel thorn from
the emerge podcast we were talking about
this that one thing that I'm almost
allergic to these days is this kind of
like certainty that's radical certainty
which a lot of medic tribes and kind of
the Chieftains in it have and I love
being uncertain these days right and
there used to be a sense of anxiety when
I held this uncertainty but now it feels
I'm very comfortable with it and there's
this term called the the gray pill I
don't need it
kind of like map it out the the blue
pill red pill analogy from the matrix
right they got repurposed by some of the
reactionary tribes but if you you're
kind of born into a blue pill you don't
take it right and that's kind of
consensus reality then you take a red
pill then you're kind of shown the harsh
truths of reality but then the gray pill
is sort of muddying the waters of your
red pill truths right it's kind of
dancing with nuance and you can get an
existential crisis if you take a gray
pill but if you kind of sit with it long
enough it starts becoming fun and sexy
and you don't know where you're going
you don't know what will emerge so how
can we make uncertainty sexy right
that's kind of like something I'm
thinking about and how can you be
confident with yourself with uncertainty
hmm I guess there's something around
aesthetics and fun like how can you have
more fun in the kind of meta tribe that
then encourages more people to want to
join and the aesthetics around that as
well which is something we think about a
lot like for me there's this sort of the
more meta tribe embraces what we've
talked about before like the more
embodied practices the personal growth
background that I come from as well like
I see as absolutely core to that because
you've got to be able to hold complexity
you've got to be able to kind of be in
much more aware of your inner processes
while you're having conversations to
avoid cutting getting hijacked limbic
hijack and Migdal hijack all of those
things so there's there's a there's a
big part of that right and I do think
that you know the aesthetics is a Trojan
horse to get into that deep stuff and
what I like about rebel wisdom is you
guys are engaged and a wealth of kind of
spiritual and and kind of
psychotherapeutic modalities right and I
think that is key to engage in that
these these modalities because there's
something that this term of flirting
with is the outrage portal right we no
longer have a culture we're in an
outrage portal right outrage porn is
what connects us the longer shared
values or whatever right whether it's on
the left or the right we're all an
iPhone away from being on the casting
couch of the culture war
whereas producers by sharing memes on
Twitter but we're also it's um you know
stars we never know when we're gonna be
cast into it
and but in order to be a participant in
this culture or this outrage porno you
got to be a dick an addict right in some
capacity and if you kind of remove that
impulse to for addiction which what you
guys are doing then you might peek your
head an outrage porno and they won't
have real sex yeah and there's I don't
know if it's just because of what I'm
interested in but the most interesting
conversations I think we've had on the
channel of being with people who are
also sensing this drive towards that we
have to get down into the how we have
these conversations as much as what
we're talking about and and and the
necessity for getting into this sort of
collective expect of intelligence space
like Jamie wheel talks about Jordan
Green all talks about daniel
trachtenberg er those kind of that there
seems to be a destination to the
intellectual exploration and it's it's
coming together in a much more nuanced
way in the sort of space of coherence
which I think can only happen from this
more meta perspective right and three
things come to mind and I don't know how
they're related to what you just said
but I think intuitively they are there's
just one term called meta communication
that I quite like right it's being
sensitive to not only the content that's
being exchanged but their relationship
right and being able to call out each of
those and have a discussion about it
right so just step out of the
interaction and talk about interaction
itself another term I like is
conversational narcissism right and then
there's two components to that there's
the shift response and the support
response and so let's say you tell me
that you went to Cuba and then I say
well great what you do there right
that's the support response the shift
response is turning it back to myself
right anyway like oh I remember the time
I went to Cuba and you know you're
talking to a narcissist or at least a
conversational nurses
they're pathologically use the shift
response right and I operate a lot of
could you explain that again I'll just
describe what that is sure so the shift
response so conversational narcissism is
someone who constantly shifts the
conversation back to themselves the
offense decline of someone who does that
yeah they the authentic relating
community they have an appendage term
for it like asking interested questions
versus asking interesting questions so
an interesting question is inquiring
into the person that you're genuinely
interested in but asking an interesting
question points the finger back on you
right and that's that's what kind of
conversational narcissism do and when
I'm in Toronto I have a lot of these
impersonal in-person communities where
we have a lot of like in the book clubs
to base and stuff like that and there's
always a couple of characters who are
constantly pointing the fingers back at
themselves by making these kind of
interesting statements and they usually
don't have the space to hold someone
else's reality tunnel right and there's
ways to kind of break into that like we
were kind of playing with this modality
called the anti debate
so if we have opposing disagreements you
tell me your position and I repeat your
position back in my own words until you
feel fully understood and we can only go
to the next stage if you say I feel
fully understood but if you like if I
only got 50% of what you said then I
have to repeat that 50% to you say you
feel fully understood and only then I
can give my disagreement and then when
you hear my disagreement you repeat my
disagreement back and your own words
tell I feel fully understood right and
so it's like a sense making debate and
you're Trojan horsing a real dialogue
between two people who can't dialogue it
is really like couples therapy at the
Raj Aryan argument so that's one way I
find to get over the conversational
narcissism so it's interesting that you
use the Yeats poem as your the last pee
bit in your piece that the center cannot
hold mere anarchy is released upon the
world because that of all the that just
seems to resonate so clearly and I've
had it kind of come to mind several
times I've sort of thought about what's
going on in
do you think the center can hold or not
I think maybe we're faced with two paths
right or the center can't hold and maybe
it shouldn't hold and we're kin and we
have to unify come together find common
ground as they say maybe the most
heavenly existence could be found in
either one of those possibilities I
don't know but I think that's the choice
that we're heading towards
[Music]
you
[Music]