[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time we discussed
the important and foundational work of
Plato the grammar of Western
civilization is basically made up of the
the Bible and Plato will keep coming
back to both of those repeatedly in
certain ways and we talked about Plato's
notion of wisdom and how it involved
this process of aligning the psyche so
as to reduce inner conflict and reduce
self-deception by bullshitting ourselves
and that how that enabled us to also
achieve one of our meta desires the
desire for inner peace but how we could
also align that reduction in
self-deception with getting more in
contact with what's real and that as we
practice tracking real patterns in the
world we could then reflectively
internalize that back on ourselves and
there was an intimate connection between
how we knew the world and knew ourselves
and as we increased our ability to pick
up on real patterns we could increase
our self-knowledge reduce our
self-deception increase our contact with
reality and that would flow in the
process of an agog a and that would
bring about the satisfaction of our
second Metta desire which is to be in
contact with realness and so Plato has
this idea of wisdom as this an agogic
process and we talked about that in
connection with his great parable the
parable of the cave I then pointed out
that he had just as Socrates was lucky
to have a great disciple in Plato Plato
was lucky to have a great disciple in
Aristotle and Aristotle is pivotal for
us because he lays the foundation for a
further aspects of a scientific approach
to wisdom and meaning and also for an
important formulation of one of the ways
in which we deeply connect the self to
reality that we're going
talk about when we talk about worldview
attunement so as I mentioned Aristotle
was a student of Plato he studies with
Plato for about twenty years and then at
some point he breaks away from Plato
famously claiming that while I love
Plato I love the truth more Aristotle
remained and many people would argue
this gearson for example and others that
Aristotle remains in some very important
senses of plate Ness but there was an
aspect of Plato's work that Aristotle
thought was lacking Plato did not really
adequately account for change so
Aristotle was deeply influenced by
Plato's account of what made for
something real for us but he thought
that Plato wasn't could not really
explain change very well and he was
going to invent some very important
concepts that are going to become
integral to understanding of what it is
to be meaningfully connected to reality
now Aristotle is very influenced by his
father who is a physician he's much more
of a biologist than a mathematician so
all Plato is much more prone to using
mathematical analogies aerosol is much
more used to using biological analogies
and the word that Aristotle uses for
change is actually better translated as
growth or development Aristotle was
really interested in how living things
grow how they develop and that should
that should prick up your ears right
away because part of I take it what we
often mean when we say we have a
meaningful life is that we are growing
or developing in fact people will often
use the word growth as a way of
indicating an improvement in the meaning
of their life and in some sense the
developing of wisdom so Aristotle picks
up on Plato's notion of the I das so if
you remember last time we talked about
this we talked about that a bird is much
more than a set of its features it's not
just a beak it's not just some feathers
it's this Gestalt
it's that structural functional
organization such that all the parts
function to get
there was a hole and so what you have is
something that acts as a bird and that
pattern that logos that I toss is very
hard actually to put into words but it's
very much what does two things for us
it's what makes a bird a bird and it's
also the pattern by which we come to
know what a bird is when we can grasp
the structural functional organization
that ID us then we understand what a
bird is now Aristotle was very impressed
by that but he wanted to give it a more
dynamical approach he wanted to talk
about it in terms of development and so
he was very interested as I said in how
things grow and he noted the role that
form had in growth and development so he
what he did was he first started what by
an analogy so he would use the analogy
of artifacts human-made things and then
use that to try and understand
biological things so for example I can
have a block of wood right and I can
make it into a chair or perhaps a table
or if it's big enough amount of wood I
can make it into a ship or a boat and
Aristotle asked what makes the wood
behave like a chair as opposed to a
table or to a ship and this is where we
get the notion of actuality from we
often use the word actuality in fact as
a way of talking about realness it's an
actual something is a way of saying it's
a real something as opposed to a fraud
or simulation so what makes a chair act
like a chair why does the wood act like
a chair here act like a table here and
act like a ship here and so Aristotle
said well first of all this is important
change and it's a good analogy for
development when I'm making a chair
that's somehow analogous for how an
organism is growing
so what is it that makes the would act
like a chair here and act like a table
here and his argument was well it's the
forum again where this means i dot snot
shape although you can use shape as an
analogy this is the structural
functional organization the wood is
structurally functionally organized in
such a way that it will act like a chair
whereas here it will act like a table
and here it will act like a ship now
Aristotle's point is that this doesn't
it's not that this doesn't play any role
but he invents this really important
idea he invents the idea that the wood
is potential these terms actual and
potential actually come from aerosol we
use them every day we think they're just
part of our natural grammar but they're
actually an invention of Aristotle we're
going to see how important they are so
the idea is wood is potentially a chair
what is potentially a table what is
potentially a ship
now when that potential has a particular
form given to it then it starts acting
like a chair it starts acting like a
table and acting like a ship and this is
where we get the notion of information
from you put a form into something and
you will actualize its potential namely
you will give it a structural functional
organization so it will start to act in
a particular manner now that's really
important and then what Aristotle argued
is well what you see in living things is
that they are basically doing this for
themselves so if you'll use look I just
mean this is an analogy a living thing
is like a chair that is making itself a
chair imagine that a chair could somehow
start to impose a structural functional
organization on wood so that it started
to turn itself into a chair that's what
a living thing does I mean you you food
food is potential you you put food into
you you inform it there is a code
in your DNA that ultimately puts a
particular form in it that gives it a
structural functional organization that
becomes you now of course this unfolds
across time it's it's not it's not that
doesn't happen like that and that's why
we see it as change and development now
this is really important as we'll see
because it's going to be foundational to
understanding a lot about how you
connect to the world so how are we going
to make use of this in talking about the
way human beings are connected to
reality the way they develop and grow as
cognitive agents so what I want to do
first is to step aside from Aristotle in
the axial age and move into current
cognitive science and talk about an
important way of thinking about
development and change especially the
work of Alicia Arara that was directly
and explicitly inspired by this
Aristotelian framework so when we talk
about how things change right we often
have a model that we inherited from the
Scientific Revolution a model we get
from Newton and this is a model that
change occurs because of causal impact
so the standard thing it here's this
marker right I press it why did it move
it moved because I pushed it it seems so
obvious and non-controversial right so
we give an explanation what causes it to
be because it was pushed it was and the
idea of all change and development is
there's an event a and it's some how
right causes event B it causes event C
event a precedes B makes B happen and
then B precedes C and B makes C happen
so as Newton was engaging in the
Scientific Revolution this notion of how
things happen was becoming prominent in
him and for the people that was going to
take up the Newtonian worldview and what
was very interesting about that right is
that this seemed to solve a lot of
problems and this was brought out by a
famous philosopher Immanuel Kant who the
lessee Oro talks about Khan was
interested in why was this Newtonian
model becoming so successful the
Aristotelian model had been around for
thousands of years why was Newton's
model overtaking it so rapidly and what
Kant said is well this does something
very wonderful for us because what it
does is gives us a very simple account
of how we explain things I explained C
by showing you how it was preceded by an
event B that caused it and he'll be was
preceded by an event a that caused it
very nice linear clean and we like it
seems it really isn't that what's
happening so obvious all right and again
remember again and again I've tried to
show you things that seem so obvious so
natural are actually historical
creations you have to pay attention to
how we got where we are now why does
this matter well because this prevents a
kind of vacuous explanation that can
occur this prevents what are called
circular explanations this line right
prevents circular explanations
okay so circular explanation is when you
assume the very thing you're trying to
explain in your explanation so here's a
standard kind of model people often use
this without realizing you know there's
a triangle out here in the world the
light comes in into my eye that goes
through new earth pulses that goes into
my consciousness right it's somehow
projected onto an inner screen and then
there's a triangle there and then
there's a little man inside and he goes
triangle right and we have updated
versions of this like the Central
Executive and such right this is called
a homunculus eerie homunculus means a
little man now when you present it like
that I hope you can all see why this is
obviously useless because what you
should then ask is well how does the
little man see the little triangle
inside and then what you go is well
inside the little man's head there's an
even smaller screen with a littler man
going triangle but how does he see you
you see what this is it's an infinite
regress because you're actually using
vision to try and explain vision now
please remember this notion of a
homunculus II cuz that's what this is
because well it's easy to explain I need
you to understand that we fall into it
very often when we try and understand
and explain ourselves okay
that is a circular explanation because
you're using the very thing you're
trying to explain in order to explain it
Kant said this Newtonian scheme is
wonderful because if you stick to its
grammar of you sticks to its rules the
cars has to be an independent event that
proceeds right then you don't fall into
circular explanations that's amazing
now you've got some problems here what
started it all right right and you know
maybe God and then Khan says no and he's
got all his arguments when I'm not going
to get into that right now suffice it to
say that this became a predominant way
of trying to explain how things work but
then Kant encountered a very significant
problem and it's it's and it's not a
coincidence and it has to do with the
kinds of things we were talking about
with Aristotle
the kinds of things that can grow living
things because Conn went out and he saw
a tree right and this was very
problematic for him because trees don't
follow this model readily because he was
looking at it was saying okay well
what's making the tree well it's the
sunlight well how does the Sun like get
in through the leaves so right what's
making the leaves well the tree so the
tree makes the leaves and the leaves
make the tree so the tree is making the
tree and he coined the term
self-organizing the tree is
self-organizing now the problem with
that is right living things make use of
feedback cycles in a feedback cycle the
output from the system feeds back into
the system the tree makes the leaves
that gathers energy that goes into the
processes that makes the leaves living
things are self-organizing they use
feedback cycles but when I try and give
an explanation of a feedback cycle I
fall into a circular explanation I fall
into a circular explanation and so Kourt
came to a rather startling conclusion he
came to the conclusion that there could
not be a science of living things the
biology was impossible now Cantus one is
a towering intellect is like he's a gene
is a philosophical genius and so you
can't just sort of dismiss that K well
there obviously is biology what an idiot
conscious no no you're the one who needs
to step back and think where's the
mistake in the argument because if there
is biology and it's true that there is
and I agree that there is right and that
living things use feedback cycles which
they necessarily do they're
self-organizing which they necessarily
are and when I try and trace out the
causation I get into circular
explanation
which seems like a necessary thing and
circular explanations are vacuous and
empty then where's caught going wrong
this is what your yer ro takes up and
she said actually for a very long time
we had no way of solving this problem
and so there was a huge gap between our
biology and our physics now again why
are we caring about this because we need
to if we're going to understand
Aristotle
if we're gonna deeply understand what we
mean when we talk about that we are
living things that grow and develop and
that growth and development is integral
to our meaning and our sense of who and
what we are our personal identity that
if we cannot give an answer to this
problem we cannot understand
fundamentally who and what we are and
what the hell we are talking about when
we talk about how important growth and
development are to us because that
language will forever be separate from
any kind of scientific understanding so
where's this going wrong this seems just
like living things our feedback cycles
self-organizing they grow they develop
they they make themselves right so what
what has to go well this now before you
jump with it but that's just that's just
what causation is think about the fact
that we know we actually know that
Newton's ultimately wrong right
Newton doesn't work with relativity
Newton doesn't work at the quantum level
so we know that we shouldn't be
absolutely committed to this view now
your ro actually makes use of an
important idea from Aristotle to solve
this problem so
she's going to use Aristotle in order to
explain in a new and powerful way of
talking about growth and development and
self-organizing processes which is known
as dynamical Systems Theory so aro first
of all makes a distinction between
causes and constraints so to get at that
distinction let's go back to what seems
so obvious okay here's the marker I push
it why did it move
and immediately the Newtonian grammar
just comes into place it moved because
you pushed it and then you might step
out outside of physics and say well I
wanted to push it and the Dodson that's
not what I'm asking because it right it
could also just be that some other
object bumped into this and it moved why
else did it move okay so think about
what has to also be true in order for
this to move there has to be empty space
relatively empty space in front of the
marker this has to have a particular
shape to it
this has to have a particular shape to
it
those aren't events right those are
conditions causes are events that make
things happen
constraints right aren't events they're
conditions they don't make things happen
they make things possible and there's a
big difference between a condition and
an event the Newtonian way of thinking
has us so fixated on this so
foregrounded on this that we're not
seeing this anymore BC Aristotle because
of his platonic view actually considers
this more important why because when I
talk about a structural functional
organization when I talk about a pattern
I'm talking about this this is where you
will find form this is where sometimes
called the formal cause this is where
you'll find the structural functional
organization
right conditions are structurally
functionally organized such that motion
for this is possible now this is
important because this is of course
actuality and this is where we get
potentiality when I shape possibility
that's what I mean when I say something
is potential I mean that possibility has
been shaped by constraints so that these
events are more possible than these
events okay so we're going to do more
but let's stop here and let's see how
this is already starting to solve the
problem of talking about the tree and
it's self-organization so in a tree
you've got a bunch of events happening
biochemical events what they're doing is
they're actually causing a particular
right form or formula or structural
functional organization now think about
it why do trees grow the way they do why
do they grow like this why do they
spread out their branches why do their
leaves spread out because what they're
trying to do is they're trying to change
the possibility of a photon hitting a
chlorophyll molecule the structure of
the tree shapes the possibility of the
events so the events right cause this
structure and then right they cause it
but this then constrains the events so
look at me I'm a living thing I've got a
bunch of events happening in me and that
creates a structural functional
organization that organization creates
an internal environment in which the
probability of events is dramatically
altered so events that have very low
probability happening out there have a
high probability of happening in here
and events that have a very high
probability of happening out there have
a very low probability of happening in
here and that's what it is to be a
living thing the events right cause a
structure
a structural functional organization and
I das a form and then that constrains
the events now this is not a circular
explanation because I'm talking about
two very different kinds of things I'm
talking about actuality and potentiality
now it's important to realize that the
discussion of possibility many of you
were saying oh this is like ah so
abstract and what does this this is
actually integral to science okay
science depends on there being real
potential the potentiality is a real
thing all right so you know here's the
object moving around all right
it's on the ground look at all this
kinetic energy look at it moving look at
oh it stopped did I destroy all that
energy where did the kinetic energy go
you can't destroy energy
well the kinetic energy has become
potential energy if the principle of the
conservation of mass and energy is real
then potentiality is real look at this
look at look at something from Newton
force equals mass times acceleration is
that an event is that oh that's
happening over there right now was it is
it that does it happen every Tuesday at
4 o'clock this isn't an event this is
right how things are shaped it puts a
limit on what's possible in the world
talking about real potentiality is not
talking fictional or abstract it's a
it's a way of talking that's integral to
our current science ok
we're still not done though because your
ro points out that there are two kinds
of constraints so our explanations can
become even more refined there are
constraints that make a form of event a
type of event more possible she calls
those enabling constraints right and
then there are constraints that reduce
the possibilities reduce the options for
a system these are the selected or
selective constraints
now this is going to give us a very
powerful way of understanding
development let's use it the way yarrow
does to talk about one of the most
significant theories of development and
change one of the great hallmarks of
science in fact it's a foundational
theory for the science of biology which
of course is the theory of natural
selection its theory of Darwinian
evolution because the theory of
Darwinian evolution is probably the
first dynamical Systems theory in
science and it is a theory that is
designed precisely to account for growth
and development obviously they are not
within an individual but across
speciation ok so let's take a look at
the theory so what you're looking for
first of all there has to be a feedback
cycle for right any dynamical system
theory because we're talking about a
process that's self-organizing so what's
the feedback cycle that evolution talks
about of course well it's sexual
reproduction where the dotes come from
other goats goats are produced there's
the product and then it feeds back into
the system and becomes the producer
makes more goats that make more goats
that makes more goats that's why we call
it reproduction it's a feedback cycle so
what did Darwin realize well he realized
that there were selective constraints
operating on that there were conditions
in the environment that reduced the
options for organism that's right so
what's those conditions scarcity of
resources okay
so I've been looking at some of the
theories of early life and there's an
argument by several biologists that
there's no evolution for about probably
eight hundred thousand years or so
because there's no scarcity of resources
with my first of all so life is static
because there's no scarcity of resources
scarcity of resources means there's
competition scarcity of resources means
not everything can live
and so that reduces the options for the
system
okay so selection reducing options but
that's not all that's going on right if
that was the case everything would die
evolution would end I mean you know and
that can happen extinction events but
there's something else there's enabling
constraints that open up the system open
up the options so look around look at me
look at other people there's variation
there's considerable variation variation
increases the options
so look what's going on here you've got
this feedback cycle as its as it's
cycling through you've got the selective
conditions reducing the options that are
available and then the variation opening
in them up you can think of it almost
like an accordion model the variation
opens it up and then as it cycles the
selective constraint pushes it down and
then from there it opens up again and
then it gets pushed back down and then
it opens up again and gets pushed back
down and as it cycles like this it's
constantly changing in a way to be
better fitted to the environment that's
evolution right it's a kind of circular
evolve is related to words like revolve
it's this revolution with change now
notice what I'm trying to get you to see
is like first of all this is important I
mean I wish I was Charles Darwin this is
one of the great great theories he gets
to sail around the world and what a life
he gets to sail around the world go to
some amazing places and then he comes
back and makes a world-changing theory
it's amazing but notice how much this
Darwinian theory that is at the
foundation of biology how much it is
beholden to Aristotle how much it
depends on Aristotelian ideas okay now
your ro
talks about this as a virtual governor
so a governor is right there's any
device that sort of limits what you can
do on a system like if you have a
governor on a steam-engine right
it sets the range it limits the range at
which you can cycle she calls it a
virtual governor because it's not an
actual machine it's the shaping of
possibility she stops there and work
that I've done with Leah Ferraro and
Anderson Todd and Richard we think we
should you should continue to finish the
metaphor this is a virtual generator
because it's a set of conditions that
are generating off
for a self-organizing system and here's
the idea when you put a virtual governor
systematically together with a virtual
generator such that you are
systematically regulating a feedback
cycle this whole thing is a virtual
engine because when you attach a
governor to a generator you get a
virtual engine so this is what a
dynamical system theory is a dynamical
system theory is basically a theory that
lays out the virtual engine it shows you
how there's a feedback cycle and why
that's not just random and chaotic why
it produces growth and development
precisely because there's a systematic
relationship between a set of enabling
and selective constraints now all of
this is very very Aristotelian so let's
now take it back to Aristotle because
Aristotle was interested now he he
doesn't use this he doesn't use the
dynamical systems language that's our
language but this language too was
directly inspired by powered by
Aristotle so using it backwards to try
and connect Aristotle to a current
understanding I do not think is
anachronistic so Aristotle is interested
in our development he's going to add
something that was missing from the
Socratic notion of wisdom
remember the Socratic notion was trying
to overcome self-deception and then
Plato
adds a whole structural theory of the
psyche to explain how we overcome
self-deception how we become wise and
achieve wisdom but what's missing in the
account of wisdom and meaning according
to Aristotle if I can use this language
as what's missing is an account of
growth and development
how does wisdom develop how does meaning
develop well this is where we get
something
that we talk about and we use as in our
language but we don't I think get the
depth of what Aristotle is talking about
there's an aspect of who and what you
are that's fundamentally connected to
your projects of meaning and your
project of wisdom you often it might
have used this term or related terms but
do you really know what you're talking
about and this is the notion of your
character now first of all your
character isn't your personality because
if we're going to use these terms
strictly you're born with your
personality personality is part of your
just your general Constitution it's
what's given to you by the biology and
the environment that you have no choice
over right but your character is that
aspect of you that you can cultivate now
you can either cultivate it
unconsciously surreptitiously indirectly
or you can cultivate it more explicitly
but what is your character when we say
that somebody's acting out of character
we're usually making and this is
important we're usually making either an
existential or moral criticism of them
when we say Peter is acting out of
character we often will mean something
like he's normally honest he's normally
honest he normally has the virtue of
honest notice the connection here by the
way virtue and we've been talking about
a virtual engine that is not
happenstance when you're talking about a
virtue you're not talking about an event
you're talking about again a set of
conditions that have been cultivated
systematically in somebody now that
points to something that we're talking
about character I'm gonna suggest that
what we're talking about is what is the
virtual engine on a person's development
what system of constraints have you
identified with and what system of
constraints have you internalized that
regulate the development that's let's
ask a Socratic question let's do
something that Socrates would do we
spend a lot of time on our appearance we
spend a lot of time on our status how
much time did you spend today on your
character how much
if it is the virtual engine that is
regulating your growth and development
you should be of course spending a lot
of time on your character but are you
now Aristotle proposed ways of trying to
cultivate your character I I would argue
that his method his famous method of the
golden mean is a way of trying to get
you to set up conditions to cultivate
your character so for example what is
courage we would all like to be more
courageous they take it
well Aristotle proposed that it falls
it's the golden mean not the average
that's a misunderstanding right because
it's golden mean between two things of
course you can be a coward you can
somehow be defective by having a
deficiency but you can also be foolhardy
right just running into traffic doesn't
make you courageous what you're always
trying to do is you're trying to set up
a system where you're paying attention
when you lack the enabling constraints
where you don't have enough generation
and also conditions when you lack the
selective constraints when you have your
right you too broadly you have too many
options that you're identifying as
courage what you have to do is you have
to train yourself if the cultivate your
character by engaging in practices that
will slowly over time create a virtual
engine because you are look you are a
self-organizing process you are the
source of your actions that modify the
environment that then feeds back into
you and changes you and then you produce
your actions and then the environment
feeds back and changes you here's the
question I ask you are you just letting
that run
or are you trying to rationally and
reflectively cultivate your character
structure a virtual engine so that that
self-organizing process is growing and
developing in an optimal fashion
Aristotle takes the question and we use
this we even use and we are not saying
we use it trivially but we don't get the
depth of what we saying what we're
saying
one of the most trenchant criticisms we
can make of ourselves of other people is
this listen listen to my language listen
to it he's not living up living up to
his potential part of what makes your
life meaningful is that you have
cultivated character that allows you to
actualize your potential you've created
a virtual engine that regulates your
development in a way in which you grow
up it's a constantly improves proof it's
a confidence in which self-organization
has been regulated and shaped into
self-improvement so that your potential
is fully realized so Aristotle brings in
this notion then of development and
growth as part of what it means to have
a meaningful life he brings in a new
aspect to the notion of wisdom wisdom is
gaining the ability to cultivate virtues
to create your virtual engine a set of
right virtues that basically is
regulating your growth and development
so that you actualize your potential
again
think about it what are you doing to
cultivate your character because
Aristotle points out there's a deep form
of foolishness that comes from a lack of
character calls it a crazy which we
poorly translate as weakness of the will
because we're all post Protestants and
we think the will is our central thing
even though increasingly there's
scientific evidence that the notion of
will or will power is a defunct idea we
should give it up right so what's a
crazy
the creature is when you know what the
right thing to do is you know what the
right thing to do is and we talked about
this remember with the chocolate cake
but you don't do the right thing and
here's where we can sort of put
Aristotle and Plato together Plato gives
us the sort of story about how we have
to structure the psyche but Aristotle
gives us a much more penetrating
analysis of what that structural
functional organization is here's what
era thought it would say why you're
behaving foolishly ignorance is when you
do the wrong thing because you don't
know part of what foolishness is is when
you know what the right thing is and you
still do the wrong thing here's
Aristotle's answer you do the wrong
thing because although you have the
right beliefs and notice the again the
impotence of belief here you don't have
the right you don't have sufficient
character you have not trained things
you've not trained skills you've not
trained sensitivities you have not
created a virtual engine that is
regulating your development and growth
such that you will live up to your
potential
you will actualize yourself and do the
right thing so we're starting to see
again the deep grammar of what we talk
about when we talk about meaning
and we notice now that there's this
developmental aspect to it what is it to
live up to your potential
I mean that's a phrase we use what is it
you're saying when you say that about
somebody why does it matter so much so
Aristotle would say let's go back to the
analogy please always remember that
Cinelli let's go back to the analogy of
a man-made thing okay how is it when we
know when something has been well made
what makes it something a good knife
right well when it has a structural
functional organization right that
allows it to fulfill its purpose no
knives are for cutting if I've taken the
potential in the metal and organized at
the right way structure to the right way
it will actually function to cut very
well right I noticed that this is a word
that's also deeply associated with our
sense of what it is to have meaning so
Aristotle asks well what can we do with
this analogy human beings aren't made
the way knives are made we're self
making and here's here's an important
idea we're self making we're not just
self organizing the term that's
Francisco Varela and Evan Thompson have
generated to talk about this is we are
autopoietic we are self making things so
you're different from a tornado a
tornado is self organizing but a tornado
will move its behavior can be rapidly
self-destructive it will move into
conditions that destroy it your self
organized in such a way
that you have a structural functional
organization that allows you to seek out
conditions so the tornado does not seek
out the conditions that will protect and
promote its own self organization it's
not self making you are self making so
here's the interesting thing in and this
is a brilliant idea that Eric pearl
brings out in his book thinking being
right in living things right the purpose
of the thing is its structural
functional organization it's a it's a
self making thing so what your what your
purpose your function is is to enhance
your structural functional organization
it's like oh well let's this is a
problem you'll say with philosophy
there's also abstract what does that
mean specifically well for Aristotle it
means paying attention to the fact that
you are a rational reflective creature
you're unlike a plant a plant has this
but all it basically does is actualize
its ability to sort of digest so let's
take a look at this we have in organic
matter right and then it gets a
particular it's informed and that makes
like a living thing and that living
things can get a more complex structure
that make them self moving that's what
an animal is an animal isn't a mammal an
animal is a self moving thing and then
some of those self moving things have
structural functional organizations
here's in here for example that take
that self moving and really actualize it
remember we talked about that the word
psyche where we get our word psychology
mind originally meant your capacity for
self moving and we claim to apply to the
mind because the mind is that part of
you that is the cell most self moving
the most self making
your mental thing a psychological thing
but is that enough no we're getting from
Socrates and Plato and Aristotle you can
optimize that you can take charge of
that you unlike other organisms you can
do the actual revolution on yourself
you're capable of cultivating your own
character rationally and deliberately
you can become right a rational thing to
live up to your potential is to make
sure you have cultivated a character
that takes you as high up this hierarchy
as you can go that's how you live up to
your potential somebody who lived only
as a plant would be a debauched failed
degraded human being somebody that lived
only as an animal unreflective Lee
impulsively would be a debauched failed
human being but the argument continues
you say of course of course but all the
way up here
you must cultivate your character so
that you as much as possible actualize
your potential for being a rational
moral human being that's the hallmark of
for Aristotle you become a good person
if you actualize if you inform your
being with a virtual engine that really
realizes those things that are
distinctive of our humanity what makes
us different from the plants the animals
the other creatures that just have Minds
what makes us different we understand
that we have always and we still do
understand
understand ourselves in contrast to the
other things we find around ourselves
how are why am I more valuable than this
table what is it why do i matter more
because there are things that can be
found in rational beings things that we
find intrinsically valuable and
important that cannot be finding in
merely mental things and all the way
down what are those characteristics that
are unique to us well here's where
Aristotle gives the actual revolution
answer your capacity for overcoming
self-deception your capacity for
cultivating your character for realizing
wisdom and for enhancing the structure
of your psyche and your contact with
reality
that's what rational means this sounds
if I hadn't said all this what I'm going
to say now it sound trite your purpose
is to become as fully human as possible
how are you cultivating your character
to do so this is what era stalls going
to ask you again and again how much of
your life is dedicated to creating a
virtual engine that realizes your
rational capacities those things that
make you most human in contrast to all
the other things around you so Aristotle
has developed this very impressive
theory of wisdom character growth and
development one of the things we could
use today is to go back and make use of
this so we can reanimate rejuvenate
these terms that have become tired and
superficial we have no alternative terms
to for describing our lives for the
meaning in our life we talk about
purpose and living up to our potential
and growth and development and which
blahblah because we don't have any depth
to these terms one of the things we can
use Aristotle to do is to go back and
deepen what those terms mean for us
rejuvenate what they mean for us but I
want to continue on and to talk about
this development that was occurring in
the actual revolution and I want to talk
about how Aristotle helped further the
historical process by which he
contributed to our cultural grammar of
what it is when we're talking about
meaning purpose wisdom self
transcendence and so what I want to look
at next time when we're together is I
want to look at Aristotle's account of a
worldview and what a worldview is and
why it matters so deeply to our self
understanding and our existential
meaning thank you very much for your
time
[Music]
you
[Music]
you
you