hey folks welcome to the seventh dark
horse podcast livestream I am sitting
here with dr. Heather huiying as has
become our custom and we are about to
embark on another exciting discussion of
our global situation we have been
opening up with Corrections we had some
technical difficulties in the last
stream which caused us to have to
compile the footage and upload it
separately which may have gotten in the
way of us registering some things that
needed correcting or it's possible that
there were fewer Corrections this week
but I'm not aware of anything major that
we said that would require an update are
you aware of anything no am i alright so
I do have an update or two that are not
quite a correction several livestreams
ago we talked about the possibility that
was being raised by several doctors on
the front lines of treating Ovid 19
patients that the the symptomatology
looked more like altitude sickness than
it did like a standard viral pneumonia
I've now seen several papers address
this question and it is looking less
likely that this is high altitude like
symptoms and more like standard viral
pneumonia now as we covered last time
it's possible that different doctors are
seeing patients with different symptoms
and I would also point out that the
dialogue between doctors about what
they're seeing and what its meaning is
is actually a very healthy thing for
medicine and that in some sense doctors
once upon a time were very much more
scientifically oriented in the sense
that they had fewer pharmacological
tools at their disposal and their
greatest tool was their ability to
analyze patterns that they were seeing
and figure out how to treat people
individually and maybe among the
positive things that might come out of
this terrible situation is a rebirth of
Medicine
science on the frontlines yeah in the
era of Big Pharma diagnostics and
hypothesis testing became something
relegated to a specialist view rather
than something that all doctors did all
the time and every ICU doctor and really
every health care professional who's
looking at patients right now is
effectively having to generate and test
in a you know imperfect way but with the
patient's they've got hypotheses about
what the best course of action is yes so
that would be a positive thing and maybe
they'll be a renaissance in old-school
medicine I'd love to see it let's see
among the other things that I thought
were worth raising before we get to the
the meat of our discussion are I've seen
several reports now that suggest that
the actual infection rate is
spectacularly high relative to the rate
of cases that are detected and this wood
on the one hand it sounds like terrible
news but it would in fact in some sense
be great news yeah we said that a few a
few livestreams ago in fact yeah because
what it would mean is that a lot of
cases are asymptomatic and so presumably
if one acquires an immunity to the virus
by having an asymptomatic infection then
it would mean that a large fraction of
the population has actually encountered
this thing already and gotten through it
without a major cost now on the flip
side I have also as you may have even
brought it to my attention there was a
report that suggested that of South
Korea I think right out of South Korea
that suggested people may be getting the
virus a second time and I must say I'm
very doubtful that this is going to turn
out to be the pattern there are viruses
that behave that way but I don't think
there's any reason to expect that here
and what there is reason to expect is
that we will definitely see given that
there are false positives we will
definitely see a certain number of
people who have not had the disease who
test positive and then do get the
disease and test positive again and that
would look just like a case of somebody
getting it twice
so I think we can be certain that we
will see that pattern a little even if
there is no truth to the idea that you
can get the virus a second time I think
I mean the the data such as it work that
was cut that was reported on in this
very brief article out of South Korea
was scant and very hard to interpret but
my sense was that it was people who were
sick enough to be identified as as
patients with koban 19 the first time
and we're now sick again so that would
that would not fit with that possible
model that you just know I think it
would because in fact I've seen
unrelated to this particular claim
another paper suggests that the number
of influenza cases and I've forgotten
where this study was done but the number
of influenza cases was too high in
January relative to the progression of
influenza and the conclusion that those
authors drew was that in fact some of
those influenza cases weren't influenza
at all they were covered 19 so the cases
that were diagnosed as kovat 19 may have
been something like flu that was very
serious they got tested for Kovach 19
got a false positive recovered and then
tested for kovat 19 in a second about so
you would expect some small number of
those and the problem is the way and
maybe you know and maybe a high number I
think we won't do this this time but
maybe in a future live stream we can
talk about what how false positives will
give a very wrong sense of what is going
on depending on what the base rate of
infection out there is which we can't
necessarily know until we start doing a
lot of testing so there would appear to
be a circular logical problem there yep
all right good so let's see I had a
couple other things that I wanted to
cover Oh
also began to see several tests one was
a test and the other was a meta-analysis
on hydroxychloroquine both of which
suggested it was not effective at
treating people who
admitted to hospital with severe
symptoms so that doesn't say it couldn't
do something preventative and nor is it
definitive but it's interesting if so
given that it's also used only as
prophylaxis for malaria and actually is
chloroquine used as treatment for vivax
malaria it's certainly one of it it
certainly is prophylaxis which is to say
you take it in advance of getting
exposed to malaria in order to prevent
you getting it but I don't I can't
actually remember if chloroquine may
also be used as treatment if I recall
correctly back from when we used to
travel in these places and actually
you've had a field assistant come down
with malaria yeah in one instance the
treatment for vivax malaria involved a
large dose of quinine which is related
to chloroquine and but when this was in
rural northeastern madagascar so what
the what the treatment there was may not
at all be the state-of-the-art it may
just have been what was available right
but it's effective um what it doesn't do
if I remember correctly is vivax malaria
retreats to one's liver and the quinine
apparently does not reach it in the
liver and one requires a second drug to
chase it out of the liver and I can't I
can't remember what drug it was that
does that job but if the quinine
apparently did not did not reach it if
I'm if I'm remembering accurately so
anyway I guess stay tuned for that story
both of these things or all of them that
we've talked about so far reflective of
what we talked about in the last live
stream which is that we are now all of
us who wish to be on the front lines of
an active scientific discussion in which
nobody really knows the score we're all
learning as we go along and that is
fraught with pitfalls you know you're
getting to tune in on all of the false
starts about different things that may
or may not be true but you're also there
to witness the dawning of understanding
of how the thing functions and
that really you couldn't ask for a
better lesson in science or medicine
than then being on the front lines of
this one mm-hmm all right so maybe
that's all of the things I wanted to
cover that reflect on prior discussions
do you want to introduce the first of
our topics for today's discussion sure I
think what we've called this episode is
smoking and other essentials which is
not quite quite what we actually mean
but it was it was maybe enough to garner
some interest so we want to talk about
smoking and the apparently contradictory
evidence that is coming out with regard
to what the effect of smoking has on bad
outcomes for the guard to cope of 19 and
then also talk about what what makes
something essential for humans in light
of the kinds of and ways that lockdown
is happening and services are being shut
down in the US which is where we know
most about it but so let's start with
smoking shall we so there are there are
a lot of papers out there this is all
pretty much on the preprint servers as
we talked about last time that that say
a variety of things so I'm just going to
mention three here part of us I'm
probably mispronouncing the names for
Davos and Nikki tarah 2020 found that
smoking is predictive of worse outcomes
in covent 19 patients they did it's a
preliminary meta-analysis which means
that they went and looked at other
published papers most of which were in
preprint stage as well and they
initially found in this case 71 studies
that they thought they could use they
went out at 2 5 on the basis of whether
or not those studies actually had
evidence about you know people in kovin
19 and all of the things that one might
need to winnow it to and by then doing a
again a meta-analysis of those five
pieces of published research they found
that only one of them had mmm I've got a
typo in here they found weak positive
association between smoking and worse
outcomes for kovin 19
but they concluded that there is indeed
there is a neater correlation between
smoking and bad outcomes Lippe and Henry
did another preliminary meta-analysis
using different search search terms in
slightly different in slightly different
databases and they initially found 27
studies they wintered it also to 5 and
they find effectively no association
whatsoever but when you look at these
two meta analyses side by side you find
that ok they both were actually looking
at 5 different papers and as it turns
out for the papers in their two cases
for exactly the same so the statistics
that they're using which are pretty
black box for almost anyone even people
who are fairly savvy in statistics is
where all the you know where all the
magic or you know in magic is happening
and they came to quite different
conclusions based on meta analyses of
four of the same five papers between the
two of them so that tells you something
about what what kind of numeracy sorcery
is going on and so you know the
interesting stuff happens a minute but
did you know something to add there well
there's there's a lot to say first we
should probably say for those of you who
aren't familiar with the term
meta-analysis what it really means is an
analysis of analyses so to the extent
that you have a bunch of papers that
disagree on some point somebody can
analyze them and there may be reasons to
discount you know if all the papers that
say one thing happened in the same
location and that population might be
anomalous you might discover that if you
you know if you throw out that data that
the pattern becomes very consistent or
something like that but a meta-analysis
is an important thing to do when you
have a complex phenomenon and the the
the conclusions go in different
directions so well and in this case they
weren't they weren't looking for
conclusions that went in different
directions they were just looking for
all cases all published papers on Kovan
19 that had that said that included any
information at all as to the smoking
status of
right that was just that was what they
were looking for so there I mean still
it amounts to the same thing if you were
an expert in such a field you would be
faced with the fact that there were
different studies that said different
things some of them will be
contradictory and figuring out what you
believe and therefore how you proceed
with your own work requires you to
figure out why the pattern is not
consistent and what message exists if
you pool the data and and ask a question
somebody else hasn't asked so anyway
this is an essential art but what
Heather is saying is that it is fraught
with dangers because it is inherent that
the methodologies will differ and so
figuring out how to compile the data so
that it tells a coherent story even
harder now when everyone who's doing
this work is working so hard they
probably are not eager to respond to
requests to you know just supply me your
entire data set so they're comparing
they're comparing the publications
really they're not necessarily even able
to go and look at the original data sets
which means that there are whatever
biases are in you know in data set one
two three four or five are going to be
different are not going to be visible we
therefore don't know what assumptions
were being made add to that the whatever
assumptions and biases are are present
on the behalf of the people writing the
meta-analysis and it's just much harder
to assess where the errors might be than
in a non meta analysis but it has the
opportunity to potentially reveal bigger
patterns right and this is a I mean in
some sense it's like fieldwork for data
if you go into the field you're faced
with a chaotic environment that doesn't
tell a clear story and figuring out how
to you know to prune out the noise from
what you're seeing so that you can
identify a pattern worth pursuing that's
part of the art of fieldwork in this
case the noise is in the different kinds
of data interacting and the different
you know labs that have biases to them
and figuring out what's worth pursuing
is you know it's at least as much art as
science and trying to make it rigorous
requires sharing
methodology this is another place we're
having this done out in the open with
all of us amateurs with respect to
epidemiology able to tune in and you
know maybe bring evolutionary and
evolutionary toolkit with us or whatever
that that helps because it allows us to
spot errors that you know an
epidemiologist may not be an
evolutionist and to the extent that an
evolutionary perspective might allow you
to rule out certain kinds of
explanations and cause you to focus
elsewhere we can bring it to bear so
good I think it's all quite positive now
the question though is what might be
going on with the smoking we haven't
gotten to the major part of the meat of
it yet what I will say is that those two
which I just said something about are
two of many actually there have been
both many individually published
pre-printed papers and several meta meta
analyses already and and articles
calling themselves review articles which
basically I think the distinction
between a review a review article and a
meta-analysis is that a review article
doesn't inherently try to do the fancy
statistics on the the competent cognate
Oryx of the analyses that they're citing
I would say view article is just saying
okay here's here's what I see from all
of these different lines of inquiry
review article does not have a method a
review article reports what has been
found even if it disbelieves some part
it may say that but it basically says
here's the state of what we know so far
whereas a meta-analysis actually goes
about trying to integrate these things
into an emergent yeah good it's
empirical yeah yeah every vertical is
known as American mm-hmm so in either of
those two review of those two
meta-analysis that I just mentioned
isn't their attempt to look at
background rates of smoking in the
populations from which the patients came
so they are effectively comparing
outcomes of patients that have that have
been hospitalized and saying you do
smokers or non-smokers do better but far
cellino's at all 2020 and Saeki
you did have that you could pull that up
now and if you don't that's fine just
let me know so this is a paper cool that
came out on it's a very new server it's
like it's like a new kind of open-source
I think it is the moment acting is a
preprint server but it could become both
a preprint and a post print as it were
server it's something I'd never heard of
before today oh okay sorry we can see it
but but you guys can't so
as of April 14th it's in pre print
version 13 and it's and some of the
versions some of the versions through
version 13 are adding new reviews to
their to their meta analysis and you can
see now it's it's up on the screen it's
smoking vaping and hospitalization for
kovat 19 I'll just jump to one of the
one of the conclusions which is that
because there are literally no data on
vaping they have nothing to say about
vaping so I'm not sure why that got
ranked is so important to end up in the
title given they really don't have
anything to say about it let me talk
first for a moment about something
that's not that interesting I think from
from what we can what we can add here
and you can maybe take it down whenever
you want to Zak but you're you can leave
it up the section from the intro on
possible mechanisms of action has to do
with these ace 2 inhibitors which we
feel that a question on this I think in
the Q&A last time and it reveals how
little we know really so I'm just gonna
read this I think it's the second or
third paragraph in the introduction
Sarah's Cove 2 is known to use the
angiotensin converting enzyme to that's
ace to as a receptor for cell entry
there was a complex and unclear
interplay between Koba 19 and the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
until recently smoking and Lickety and
nicotine were found to down-regulate ace
to expression in the lung and other
tissues more recent analyses suggest
that up regulation of ACE to caused by
smoking could be detrimental for cope at
19
however experimental data suggested
infection with SARS Cove to SARS Cove
and SARS Cove 2 leads to down regulation
of a stew and this down regulation is
detrimental due to uncontrolled ace and
angio
to activity it has been observed that
decreased days to availability
contributes to lung injury in arts
development therefore higher age to
expression while seemingly paradoxical
may protect against acute lung injury
caused by kovat nineteen so that tells
us that we don't know what is going on
with regard to mechanism that three
things covert SARS Cove to more than
three stars Cove Sarris Cove to smoking
and nicotine as distinct and separate
ball objects which usually when we talk
about smoking we kind of conflate those
two but SARS Cove to smoking and
nicotine all have a relationship with
and on the ACE to receptor that's about
all I can say with certainty at this
point we know that they all three of
them have a relationship and that that
has led some people to say maybe maybe
there will be some kind of a protective
effect so I think I think for me anyway
I'm prepared to leave that part of the
conversation because we just don't know
much more but the results of this paper
this far Salinas at all 20/20 paper
suggest that current but not former
smokers are underrepresented in
hospitalizations and severe outcomes
relative to Cove at nineteen compared to
the sample populations from which they
come so specifically they're looking
these are these are hospital
hospitalizations in China where I don't
have the numbers here but it's something
like a quarter of the Chinese population
or smokers and that's highly sex skewed
like two plus percent of smokers of
women or smokers and slightly over fifty
percent of men are smokers in China and
that allows knowing that that allows
someone in this case these authors to do
what is called a goodness-of-fit test on
the data that they have on
hospitalizations and in fact what
they're doing a meta-analysis they went
and looked at many of the same papers at
those previous meta analyses that we
talked about looked at plus a bunch more
and they said given that a quarter of
Chinese people only you know 150 Chinese
women but one in two Chinese men smoked
we should expect if there's no effect of
smoking
on on infection with SARS cough - and
development of covin 19 symptoms that
one in two Chinese men who show up
hospitalized with cope at 19 or smokers
and one in 50 Chinese women who show up
hospitalized are smokers but in fact
they find much lower rates so this is
this does a this does this beautiful
simple statistical analysis of this sort
like I said it's called the technical
term is a goodness-of-fit test which
allows you to say here's what my
expected values are here's what the
observed values are let's map them on to
each other and see see if they patch and
you my favorite is former students of
mine nose Chi squares which you can you
can literally do the math on on the back
of an envelope you really can do the
math on the back of an envelope but you
have to compare your result to critical
values that I've been calculated
elsewhere but you don't need any
heuristics that you cannot understand to
do these sorts of tests and furthermore
what they do is they lay bare the
assumptions of the researchers right so
in this case these these authors said
the expected values are the base rate of
smoking in the population
let's compare hospitalizations based on
to that base rate and lo and behold we
get a much much much lower rate of
hospitalizations for smokers in China
which is where these data were taken
from then we do then then is present in
the population so let's be clear on what
sort of complex world we've landed in
here that could be the result of all
kinds of things which would be
fascinating some of which would tell
exactly the opposite story that this
data seems to be suggesting like this is
not going to be the case but let's say
for example that people who smoked had a
high chance of dropping dead within
hours of contracting Tsarskoe - they're
less likely to end up in hospital yeah
they don't end up in the hospital lo and
behold it looks like it's protective and
it is in its own way it's protective of
ending up in hospitals you don't live it
to get to getting there but let's just
bracket that with this isn't going to
end up being true it's very unlikely to
be true although I will say you know my
favorite stuff is often the things that
seem really really unlike
but I have some reason to think they
probably are right and one of them I'm
gonna pat myself on the back here
potentially which is I have been saying
forever that as terrible as smoking is
for you it will turn out to be a mixed
bag in the end now I'm not a smoker
you're not a smoker but the reason I
said that was because you had
populations of Native Americans with a
long history of smoking tobacco and that
passes what we would call the adaptive
test which makes it a presumptive
adaptation we're it true that it were
simply bad those populations that didn't
do it would have an advantage and you
would see the behavior go extinct so I
mean there's there's also for with
regard to Native American traditions it
often is smoking tobacco but separating
out these two variables smoking which we
know to do damage to lungs and to cause
cancers in the entire respiratory tract
and such and nicotine which you know we
we understand some of the risks of
nicotine to we presumably don't
understand all of them nor presumably do
we understand what some of the benefits
may be and you know for all we know
there may be benefits to smoking
although I hesitate to say that out loud
but these are these are different things
the nicotine reduces rates of VirB every
so if you're a plant it's a slam-dunk
because well alright maybe that doesn't
make sense but but let's say you know
again heading down into this complex
rabbit hole a the tobacco that Native
American population smoke is not the
corporate tobacco that you find at the
the gas station right it was a different
tobacco and the tobacco that is being
sold at the gas station is optimized for
economic realities that have nothing to
do with even well being and so it may
well be that the smoking that people in
generally do in the modern world is
almost entirely unhealthy but I mean
there's there's a perfect analogy and
it's just not very hard to get there to
the marijuana that people smoke now
versus even even just in the 80s even
just before 60 70s 80s before there was
such financial pressure to make it heavy
to melt to make it dense and small and
pack
also across borders yeah marijuana
you're too kind
Wow that was terrible all right I
apologize for it but but in any case it
is likely that merit that tobacco in an
ancestral context has a net positive
effect for populations that smoked it it
is likely that that has been disrupted
by the way tobacco is now currently
delivered but even in the current
context I believe there is some evidence
that in cases of Parkinson's it has some
sort of positive effect and I also
remember years ago when we were reading
and teaching the emperor of sent about
luca turin and his model for how
olfaction functions terrific book
excellent book yeah there was a question
this luca turn is one of the world's
leading experts on smell not only how it
functions but in the art of describing
smell he has written perfume guides for
example that our world renowned and they
too are exquisite like his writing is
unlike what most people have to say
about perfume and smells if nothing else
reading this book will cause you to have
a completely different relationship to
the way things smell and even if you had
never had any interest in perfumes
you'll find yourself going to seek them
out and trying to identify what the
various notes are but anyway Luca Turin
at least when that book was written was
a smoker and he was often asked how
could you possibly be you're destroying
your olfactory sense and it turned out
that no in fact if anything it went the
other way
it had a heightening effect so so let me
just say I tried I went down this rabbit
hole just a tiny bit today I went
looking for you know I've I've heard
that smoking increases people's sense of
taste and that often chefs are smokers
and I can find nothing in the published
literature just just from you know a
half an hour of looking today but
certainly you know this is anecdotally
we've heard this report from you know
people with masterful noses and
masterful senses of taste and the fact
that the literature isn't bearing that
out at least so far as I could find it
does not inherently mean it's not true
yep now I also did read I wish I
remember where it was but I did read
somebody it's just a conjecture but
somebody was going down the various
paths of how the lack of smokers of
current smokers to meet the expectations
in hospital could possibly be explained
and one of the things that was offered
as a possibility was that smoking was
effectively keeping people at a distance
from you therefore reducing your
likelihood of contracting it so anyway
there are you know probably thousands of
different ways that this could interact
other than being physiologically
protective but certainly physiological
protective physiologically protective is
one possibility and it might it might be
obscured you know the the first minute
an LSE is I pointed to you which one of
which found you know maybe mild support
for the idea that smoking is actually a
risk factor which we've seen elsewhere
and you know again I'm not sure how
seriously to take that result but we
know that smoking is associated with
other issues that are comorbidities for
kovat 19 so if you're a long-term smoker
and therefore you have lung damage
and/or
COPD you may well be at greater risk for
Kovan 19 even if either the nicotine or
somehow the smoking and you know were
going to remain agnostic as to what the
mechanism there is even if smoking
nicotine is giving you some sort of
protection the other effects of the
smoking may outweigh the benefits that
may obtain yep this this goes to what we
discussed in our last livestream about
non-mutually exclusive hypotheses and
this is going to be if you are new to
biology this is a very frequent case
because biology is above all else
complex and that means you're often
dealing with a bunch of factors that
pull in different directions and you
know you may see the top factor and rule
out the others falsely and anyway you
get down the list to some very subtle
stuff if you pay attention long enough
yeah it's an interesting set of
questions indeed well that's what I've
got
smoking for the moment so let's see from
the point of view of advice we can say
well to give advice no I'm smoking
tobacco at the moment here's the thing
first of all if we're not saying you
should take up smoking but if you were
going to you probably have time to do it
now that you're in lockdown but it makes
more sense from a medical perspective if
you're going to take up smoking to do it
in China because you're less likely to
end up in the hospital that is some of
the worst advice I have heard you give
today all right I feel like we're
getting something okay so we also wanted
to talk about what what an essential
item is all right so this is in light of
we've talked a number of times here on
the livestream about the shutting down
of nature areas the 85 miles span of the
Columbia River Gorge is shut down I just
heard from our friend Sam caviar today
that most of the national forests in
Washington and Oregon are maybe was just
Washington are closed and and breaking
these breaking these rules potentially
come with very large fines and that you
know we we've talked about the the
desirability and potentially the need to
get out into nature a fair bit
and then Michigan which you know we
lived in for eight nine years something
in the 90s into the early aughts when we
were in grad school
Michigan stay home stay safe order has
been extended to April 30th as of a few
days ago and it has all the stuff that
we've now unfortunately become
accustomed to with with the lockdown
well including this line though large
stores must also closed areas of the
store that are dedicated to carpeting
flooring furniture garden centers plant
nurseries or paint and this this came to
my attention through Amy elk on Amy elk
on retweeting on Twitter someone from
Michigan finding I don't know what kind
of store it was well martyred Kroger or
something that it roped off the area
where you could buy seeds
to plant vegetables which you could then
eat which are somehow included and this
isn't essential for you you can't buy
that now order which is obviously not
only essential by many measures for many
people but also timely it's not like
well you can just get around to it
whenever you get around to it and nature
will wait because nature won't wait so
there's a number of things to talk about
here but you have something to say right
now yes I'm going to try not to visibly
fume I'm going to try to deal with this
carefully but yeah maybe this is not the
place to start maybe what we should do
is we could steal man the argument for
limiting sales to essential items before
we confront still Manning for those of
you who are new to us is a concept
sometimes associated with the idea but
the IWR owed the concept of steel
Manning from the rationalist community
and basically the idea is that you want
to offer the alternative position in the
strongest possible terms rather than
straw Manning it you want to offer it in
terms that people who advocate this
position would recognize favorably as a
description of what they what they are
thinking so we want so stores are
potentially incredibly potent modes of
transmission they are enclosed spaces
with recirculating air with people who
until recently mostly weren't even
masked and they have a density of people
that is quite high typically so along
with these measures we have increasing
rules about how many people can be in
stores at a time you have these circles
on the floor saying where you can stand
when you're ordering meat or when you're
trying to checkout etc and keeping note
having people know that they cannot go
shopping for paint or or plants at this
point may keep people out of the stores
who don't need to be there for four
reasons that you know for for toilet
paper and food so so that's that is that
is one argument that it may it may keep
people out of the stores for not for non
us
reasons it will keep some number of
people out of the stores and it will
reduce the amount of time that some who
do go to the stores will spend there
because they've got less to do ok so it
will reduce the amount of contact that
people have and some number of people
who would contract this disease and
presumably go on to die of it will not
come down with it because somebody
didn't go to the store because they knew
that the thing that they would go to buy
wouldn't be available to them right so
that's one argument I think there's
another argument that you could marshal
in favor of the sale of only essential
items which is that there's a problem
that this arbitrarily affects different
businesses differently so is it fair
that I can go to Costco and because
Costco is open since they sell a certain
amount of stuff that there's some
resemblance to food and then I can go
buy a TV while I'm there but if there's
a mom-and-pop TV store down the road
they're closed because we've got a lock
down and they don't sell any food that
is unfairly favoring the Costco style
store and not the mom-and-pop place and
may get people in the habit who were not
already in the habit of shopping at
Costco for their televisions of just
figuring it's the one one-stop shopping
place and it further takes the
mom-and-pop and small businesses stores
out of business once we're out of
lockdown right so I think we've done a
pretty good job of steel Manning this
one those seem like two really good
arguments see them you know we've got
we're defending mom and pop and we're
preventing people from dying by hey
we're saving mom and pop and the economy
right I mean to that look look at how
good that is so now let's get to what's
wrong with this policy so much so much
so much so I will say one of the things
about this pandemic is that it is
simultaneously demonstrating the
insanity of libertarianism and it is
also driving many of us in that
direction based on the horror of what's
being deployed on our behalf and because
of how bad government is how bad
government is when it went
poorly which is frequently and that's
not to say that it has to be done poorly
no it doesn't but in this case the idea
of limiting sales only to essential
items it's not the worst idea I've ever
heard but it's definitely in the top ten
yeah I mean it's it's really bad it's
it's not quite as high as Joe Biden it's
the right guy to beat Donald Trump but
it's close just leave that one there
I'll feel the political blowback from it
but anyway the problem is the whole idea
of knowing what an essential item is is
preposterous on its face it presupposes
that the people defining what's
essential have a really good grip on
what humans are and what we need so
since I've heard about this policy I've
been playing a little game with myself
where I come up with an item that
presumably is not essential and then
within 14 seconds figure out how I could
make a pretty good argument that it
might be essential and the fact is
pretty much everything's on the list
because you know if we were just
machines and we needed a certain number
of things to keep us running and we
didn't have a psychology associated with
them then for awhile for short term you
could define the difference between
these things but given that none of us
know how long lockdown is going to last
we have a psychology that has to be
maintained that is now being confronted
with this very frightening fact of a
thing we can't see that seems to be
lurking everywhere and pursuing us we
have to deal with living in close
quarters the obvious refuges that we
might go to in order to retain some kind
of normalcy have been shut down or
heavily regulated you know this is this
is a terrible situation and you know
let's take your example of was it
flooring or carpeting that's been mm-hmm
both carpeting flooring furniture garden
centers plant nurseries or paint yeah
now on the one hand not essential I mean
you do need some flooring but by and
large most places that you would renter
I have it installed I actually wonder if
we might not just go back and tell an
anecdote from our own lives here and
this doesn't this doesn't get to
essentials but when we lived in Michigan
we had a little house that was very
sweet
we were in grad school there and at one
point so you were in the field you were
in Panama for 18 months and during that
time I came down and acted you should
feel the system for a couple months and
you had before you went that come to
Madagascar I guess afterwards tell me
man and ask her with me on one of my
field seasons but I was there alone for
a few months between coming back up from
Panama and before actually we got
married
this would've been 98 and we had the
most wonderful neighbors in the world
Tom and Sue McGuire and Tom McGuire was
a flooring guy by trade so he did he
installed carpet and tile and I thought
for our wedding I would have our
solarium tile they've had these you know
cheesy stick on linoleum tiles and we
were grad students we didn't have much
money and I wanted to learn how to do it
anyway so I hired Tom to do the work and
to have me as his apprentice so that I
could learn how to tile tile floor and I
did it and then we together
tiled I think my parents front patio a
few years later and you now had the
skill and since then you I've done a
little bit more but you've done a
tremendous amount of both wood flooring
and and tiling and I've done some as
well and you know I don't know at what
point you call it essential but there's
those are skills that we have that allow
us to be more self-sufficient than we
would be absent them that bring pleasure
that allow us to affect the aesthetic of
our home and our environment and be
creative and be productive and increase
the value of our homes and so much of
what is available to people right now is
shut off just like you said so let's
let's make the argument cleanly all
right on the one hand flooring seems
non-essential on the other hand you
people many of whom are facing a
frightening situation with respect to
their employment what they have is time
and their home to the extent that they
can upgrade their home with that time
that is at least some sort of a hedge
against the situation of having lost
their job and potentially medical
insurance the value of their home could
go up it entertains the mind it's a real
skill so it you know it can be
contemplative it can be educational it's
something people can participate in with
their kids
you know we've spent a lot of time
during the lockdown outside you know
you've done a bunch of gardening I've
done some some landscaping we've brought
our kids into it and the fact is I don't
think we have a problem with our
psychological health here in part
because even though things are very
definitely not normal
there's a lot to do and it feels ok but
we also have a much better situation
than most people you know we're not
cheek-by-jowl with our neighbors and so
we're not stuck at an apartment building
so anyway for people who I think the
basic point is I can't tell you whether
flooring is essential for you or not but
I would easily entertain an argument in
many circumstances that it could be
essential in in in many people's lives
at this point just a simple fact of
something productive to do rather than
dwell on the frightening situation yeah
that we find ourselves in changing your
environment for the better for some in
some way that feels better to you that
has increased the value of of your home
and giving providing a project for
finding you something to see change in
over that I mean cut it's it's
increasingly hard to figure out what day
of the week it is and this is true I
think across many sectors maybe not all
but you know the people on the front
lines who are you know who the health
care workers may have that problem for
the inverse reason the days are running
together because they're always at work
but for those of us who are working
you know whose kids are doing remote
schooling and we're supposed to be
pretending to keep this Monday through
Friday work schedule not really like I
don't I haven't heard from anyone like
yeah they totaled it that's working it's
it totally feels normal and I get up at
the same time that I always would have
been on a Tuesday and I'm going to bed
at the same time no you know those
things are beginning to to tatter and
fray and being able to either do work of
the sort that you already have the
skills and or potentially learn some
kind of skill that you didn't have
before while really working hard to stay
out of the hospital seems like an
extraordinary way and a potentially easy
and cheap way for governments to allow
for this not to be a massive
psychological death as well yeah I would
say it is an interesting exercise try
for yourself
naming a product something you might buy
and take whatever list you think it
normally belongs on and see if you can't
make an argument for the other
I mean it's pet food essential yeah as
pets aren't unless you think they are I
mean that's the problem is we're all
going to agree pet food is is essential
because so many people have a
relationship with their pet that it's
unthinkable that you would view it any
other way but the fact is even even if
you don't like pets even if you think
that people who have pets are ridiculous
you have to know that those of us with
pets if you take pet food offline we're
not going to just stop feeding our pets
we're going to start feeding our pets
human food which causes more of a
problem with the supply chain for human
food yeah it's far better to allow us to
continue to feed our pets yeah people
will feed their pets regardless and in
this case I don't think there's any
danger at all of people making the wrong
choice on this but the point is that's
an aesthetic call and so much of it is I
mean this podcast itself is functioning
on the basis largely of materials that I
mean and all of this came late at night
yeah Zach and I late at night
to Home Depot there was essentially
nobody there and we just sourced
everything we would need because we
didn't know what kind of lockdown was
coming this is right before Governor
Brown put the lockdown order in place so
as it turns out Home Depot and Lowe's
and even the smaller hardware stores are
open just with much restricted hours but
you were going there they were closing
like at 10:00 or 11:00
yeah so you'd go until closing bring the
stuff back then go to the office to
dismantle it to get the equipment but I
mean the thing is you could make the
argument this is not essential right
frankly even if you thought the podcast
was somehow important we could do it
with you know the camera that's on our
laptops and you know sitting in the
corner
so was any of this essential well I
don't know because it has some effect on
how other people are dealing with
lockdown there a lot of people are
finding that they take solace in these
discussions and hearing what rational
people who don't know any better than
you all what's going on but maybe have
some tools to sort it out so and that in
turn provides us Seles so you know it
goes both ways and the places that we
find solace are not obvious in part
because we are not machines which is
where you started right so all I would
say is I don't I think the idea that you
can take a list of products and decide
whether they are essential is
preposterous on its face right and
literally try it for yourself take a
product and then make an argument for
make an argument against and now imagine
bureaucrats deciding this for you it's
an obscene kind of an exercise what
needs to happen is we need to be armed
with good information about how this
thing is transmitted you know so that we
can make judgments we also have to build
a system that doesn't externalize the
harm in other words what we
evolutionists especially people who are
well-versed in human evolution know is
that systems of reputation exist in
order to facilitate
well being so in other words to the
extent that if you're sick and you go
out you're gonna get other people sick
but you're not necessarily going to make
your own situation worse that has to in
some sense be viewed as unacceptable
behavior you know like not washing your
hands after you go to the bathroom right
this is viewed dimly for good reason
because the harm to your reputation of
being seen you know leaving the bathroom
without washing your hands is enough to
inspire people to wash their hands who
might not otherwise do it so we have to
have that kind of reputation accost for
behaving badly and then you need to have
discretion to say actually you know what
in this case this object which might be
not essential in some other context is
essential enough that it's worth it and
here's how I'm going to minimize the
risk that I am involved in creating a
epidemiological hazard for anybody else
right and that is doable with
information but this again requires that
people develop models of what the actual
risks are and where they're coming from
as opposed to receiving a list of do's
and don'ts yeah the the the the idea
that you can do this by algorithm that's
going to be effectively automated is
nonsense and that is not to say that
there should not be a line between
essential and not essential but it's to
say that you can't you can't put the
object on a list and say what its nature
is it just won't work yeah I guess one
other thing with regard to essential
very quickly live entertainment was shut
down so we had tickets both to the
armory here Portland center stage to
some theater and to Oregon Shakespeare
Festival down in Ashland both of which
we are well for Oregon Shakespeare
Festival long term you know more than a
decade we've been going there most
summers in Portland Center stations
we've lived here live theatre is a
fabulous fabulous joy of being human for
those of us who do enjoy it and it yes
it would appear to be non-essential with
regard to you don't die within six
months if you
don't get to see live theater but I
would say that the reason that they were
shutdown was not for their non-essential
nature it's because what you have to do
in order to enjoy live theater puts you
and everyone at risk right so there's
this again a conflation of is the
activity itself dangerous and is the
activity itself actually valuable and
value necessity essential these have an
interplay that are going to be very very
hard to define and no one is going to
argue that live theater should rank
above say grocery stores in terms of
their ability to to run but the fact
that they closed which was you know we
saw coming and were disappointed but we
knew it was going to happen should not
be read as an indication that the people
behind those those theater groups are
not doing great services to humanity and
providing not just beauty but truth in
artistic form to humans yeah and I say
another one of these silver linings is
that I've seen quite a number of people
begin to innovate substitutes for things
like theater using the online tools that
we have and you know have never really
been a great fit for civilization when
it's humming along but in this case lots
of things are conceivable that could be
done remotely that maybe it would be
better if you were sitting there but
given that the the demand side is very
high because people have more time and
less ability to choose what to do so
anyway there's a lot of room there for
people to figure out how to do these
things you and I have talked about
offering lectures in biology to
institutions that are suddenly
scrambling to figure out what to do
where they've promised online content to
students but they're not practiced in it
and so anyway we've
explored the possibility that we should
be offering those lectures and if you
are interested in such a thing then
please contact us at support at Brett
Weinstein net brett has won t alright so
I there was one other outgrowth of that
discussion that I wanted to cover there
more that you had yeah so I wanted to
talk a little bit about the what I see
as the looming game-theoretic crisis
that we I believe are about to face the
fact is we don't have a national policy
of only essential items being for sale
what we have is one state exploring it
several states well several states
Michigan was the one you mentioned this
raises a question let's say that there
was some smart way to impose this policy
which I don't think there is but let's
say that there was and then some state
like Michigan implements it and it
becomes better to live in some other
state because it didn't implement it so
the epidemiology favors the policy but
those who live elsewhere have an
advantage and that they can source
whatever they want and there would be
competitors in Michigan let's say are
sidelined by the inability to source
materials so that creates a asymmetric
competition between states which is
likely to result in the economic
realities dominating the epidemiological
realities the reason I raise this is
that we have a question that we are all
now hearing the the the discussion of
which is well when does this end when
does this end is really two different
questions when do you think we will have
the response to the epidemic that would
justify ending the lockdown
that's one conversation we can have but
there's another conversation which seems
to be brewing right alongside it which
is at what point do we realize
we don't have a strategy for declaring
an end to the lockdown because maybe the
vaccine if that's what we're depending
on might be a year or two down the road
are we gonna live like this or are we
just going to decide to bite the bullet
and move forward and my fear is that the
discussion about biting the bullet and
moving forward is really it will be had
in terms that are not completely honest
it will be had in terms that justify it
that say now is the time it's safe
enough whether or not it is and that in
effect what we would be doing if we
decided to go back to normal is we would
be rationalizing something I mean it's a
loose parallel but you know we've all
heard tales of Inuit for example putting
elders on ice floes now what you need to
know is that this behavior did exist it
was only ever deployed in very severe
circumstances like famine and the logic
behind it is kind of obvious which is if
you live in circumstances as harsh as
the Inuit faced then elders are all well
and good when there's enough to go
around but that there are times when
things are so severe with respect to the
member of the quantity of resources that
a very difficult decision that most of
us never need to contemplate becomes
manifest in a life-and-death form so my
point is I am concerned about a rush to
normalcy
based on economic considerations which
are very real that will in effect have a
massive consequence for well-being of
the most vulnerable people in our
society those who you know homeless
can't control their infections based on
their living conditions the elderly are
physiologically vulnerable people who
live in dense circumstances because of X
I'm a card ship all of these groups
would pay the price for that choice but
the game theory will in my opinion be
very unlikely to support the choice of
the Y's municipalities states nations
that resist this urge that is to say to
the extent that somebody decides to
rationalize relaxing these lockdown
standards they will be economically
rewarded and what we will have is a race
to the bottom where people rush to join
the what will look like an economic boom
for whatever part of the world starts
back up and I think we would be very
wise to prepare ourselves for that
totally foreseeable game-theoretic
catastrophe so that we don't go down
that road because at the moment what we
have is a situation where because the
whole world is offline all at once
nobody's advancing now it's not
perfectly true as we talked about Costco
has certain advantages over the
mom-and-pop shop down the street because
Costco sells food but from the point of
view of one nation versus the next by
and large everybody's offline from the
point of view of individuals well a lot
of people are facing the prospect that
they won't be able to pay their mortgage
now I realize are their rent or their
rent now what is that if you were to
imagine that these were individual cases
that be very frightening on the other
hand when an entire population faces
these kinds of questions together in
some sense the bank doesn't want to own
every house on the block right it can't
use them and if mortgage relief is built
into the care act for up to a year
rent relief is not I believe but
presumably landlords could apply for
mortgage relief the same way that
homeowners could although there are
limitations the mortgage relief built
into the care act such as that you need
to have a federally bank loan federally
backed loan which not all mortgages are
and and of course you know for people
who you know for landlords for instance
who simply own their property outright
and who are depending on rent for all of
their income what you know what is it
that they can do to to to earn income if
suddenly all of their renters have no
ability to pay so it's not there's no
there is no perfect solution so this is
in fact a reflection of exactly what I'm
getting which is because it is not in
the interest of banks to foreclose on
everybody there was no resistance to the
idea of basically protecting homeowners
from facing mortgage default the banks
didn't want it because they don't want
to own every house in the block because
it'd be nobody to sell it to those
aren't valuable assets if suddenly every
house in the block is for sale so in
essence what you had is society deciding
you know what let's just take a time out
but my point is time outs do not make
sense if both teams don't take the time
out right if one team is allowed to
advance while the other team takes a
timeout then there's no such thing as a
time out anymore and so what we have to
avoid is something where homeowners are
in a different situation than renters
where people in one state are in a
different situation from another where
people in one nature and are in a
different state than another we have to
carefully step away from the game
theoretic time bomb that's been set in
motion and then if we manage that then
we have to figure out how to put in
place something so that the next time
something unforeseen like this happens
again we are not in the same predicament
because the game theory isn't new right
this is the thing that put us in that
predicament but there's nothing about
the tragedy of the Commons race to the
bottom
you know free-rider problem these are
all well understood and there's no
reason that we should be having to
navigate this hazard on the fly good all
right
all right perfect perfect shall we move
on to drop this one and pick up another
live stream yes we're gonna drop this
live stream and we are going to start
another live stream where we will answer
your super chat questions Zac do we have
the link to that second live stream in
one moment that link will be in the
description to this video click it and
we will meet you there in a few minutes
yeah ten fifty minutes ten or fifteen
minutes
good all right see you there see you
soon