[Music]
earlier this summer this film from women
to men I'm a woman who's published
online I am a woman where a group of
women apologize for how they've hurt men
I am a woman who has hurt men who has
heard men was art men I do in our time
when we can truly empower ourselves by
owning our parts of the mess and bring
an end to the cycle of hurting and
blaming it went viral with hundreds of
thousands of views online news articles
as far afield as Israel and Belgium and
some very polarized reactions
[Music]
so the impulse for making this film came
out of of a deep longing for healing bit
of the wound between the tendus the link
to my working experience my work
background yeah there is one for sure
I've been working as a mediator for more
than 10 years now
so in conflict resolution work helping
people to get out of very stuck in
different difficult situations and
conflicts and my experience in this work
is that the patterns we are used to
think in either or either I'm wrong or
you must be wrong either I'm right or I
must be guilty either I'm the victim or
I'm the perpetrator it's always even or
and we get stuck in that and that this
is never true in the end and that it
does not lead anywhere and my experience
in this conflict resolution work is that
it's really always the moment where both
sides start to look also at their own
contribution to the conflict that
something starts to shift and that a new
way out of it and really something new
can be created and can happen for me it
really it really put its finger on
something that I've never seen addressed
in the kind of in the public debate it's
not it's not to say like this this is
the full truth but it's like this is an
aspect of the truth that no light has
been shown on I have a lot of friends
who are activists a lot of feminist
friends both men and women and I knew
the kind of reactions that the film was
going to get so so there was a sense of
like okay this is gonna take some
courage to to do this because a lot of
people are not gonna like it I was an
activist myself for a long period of
time and very passionate about making
the world a better place and doing lots
of things and as I started my own
growth work I became aware of a lot of
my own shadows if this film doesn't
challenge me when I participate
I shouldn't participate because I have
to say something here because I've never
said it before and I have never
experienced before that I'm allowed to
say it without being drawn without being
blamed without being the witch and what
is the reaction being so far from
putting the film out into the world most
of them and most of the feedback that I
get directly is very touched voices from
men and women men who say that they
started to cry but they had tears in the
eyes because they have never heard this
and that it felt so healing to them and
then they are very critical and
controversial reactions to from both
sides from men and women from the
woman's side what comes most as fear or
critic is an understanding of the film
as if we said it's all our fault I
understand the anger and rage that can
come up with that and if we truly said
that in the film if we truly said it's
all our fault you are all excused any
abusive behavior from man towards woman
is excused because it's all our fault if
we truly said that rage and anger would
be the right reaction I think but we
don't we don't say that so what are you
saying
what we are saying is let's have a look
to what we are doing to contribute to
the situation that is as it is and we
want to change it so your film has come
out almost a year after me too but it
takes a very different perspective and
almost polar opposite perspective to me
- why do you think that is and is it a
response to me - when I've been writing
this text
it really came out of a moment web came
out of me this was in August 2017 and I
think me too started in September
October so it was actually before me -
it had nothing nothing to do with it
unless you can say there is there was a
lot of stuff in the field and what I
brought up is one perspective so it's
not a response to me - it's another
perspective I think that what is
important in the mid-to is that women
started to speak up and to say I won't
hide anymore because I am ashamed of
what happened to me I'm going to tell
you and I'm going to say it's not okay
it's very important but I I feel that
there is really one perspective missing
and it's interesting that this
perspective came to me to write a text
about it before me to even start it but
when I look to it now because the film
has come out after me - of course I see
it as another perspective - the whole
picture and an important one because
it's really not very present in the
media and society so far some of the
comments online have been kind of the
tone has been you're letting women down
you're betraying women in some way have
you seen that of what do you make of
that like you we are the women who
betray women right it's so interesting
because when I did this film and after
shooting it even more than before I felt
I am saying this for myself I'm saying
this because I embrace all my mistakes
and all my shadows at least I try and
when I hear we are betraying women no
way it's so much self-love at the same
time I somehow liked it because what I
really don't like is every human being
with a vagina is is has this duty to
laugh every other woman on earth like
the sister goddess I see
it's all refreshing if so many women
don't want to be my sisters because they
don't like me it's so refreshing it's
like what happens ladies come on we have
different opinions that's not a real
problem we have real problems out there
we have real problems in our bed
let's deal with real stuff so when women
say you'll be try women I think you are
the one fighting against my freedom in
this very moment no fucking way
I learned my stuff that's what I would
say a lot of people look at me to which
started last October and this kind of
message that you're putting out they
feel is too early because it's only now
after many years that women are finding
their voices are setting their
boundaries or speaking to things that
have happened to them and then to
immediately come in and say well we need
to look at our stuff as well too many
people especially many women I think
they feel this is too early what do you
say to that yes I have heard that too
you know I can see that
on a personal level of course I can be
in a deep process of just starting to
look at to allow for example memories
come back of experienced abuse to allow
my wounds to open up to feel them to
truly feel them and I can be completely
absorbed by that and then being asked to
be bothered about men's wounds and to
own my stuff could be far too much in
that very moment and at the same time
saying while I have not healed my wounds
yet and even on a collective level while
as long as we women have not completely
healed our wounds we should not look at
our shadow and take responsibility for
our part is stupid or even dangerous
because that will and then we will not
change anything I think it's not
either/or it must be both I have to care
for my healing and for my wounds it's so
important and I have to look into my
shado pardon what I'm doing because
otherwise I will never truly empower
myself I will never access my natural
power and while I'm trying to heal my
wounds I'm acting out of my shadow
towards men in a way that they will
continue the toxic behavior towards
women and we will get more wounding and
it will just continue so I think if we
truly want to change something if we
really want to do a new step we need
both care for our bones and take
responsibility for our shadow so
something I've been struck by with the
reactions that people having in is
there's a lot of discomfort around this
issue in this something that I know for
my personal growth work my own journey
is that that is the essence of shadow
work like the definition is like you
don't want to look that you don't want
to go there that's why it's gone into
the shadow and the the beauty of it or
the healing is that if you have the
courage to look and inquire into that
and own it on those really uncomfortable
sides that actually you know we don't
want to ignore this it's the irony of so
often the things that we least want to
say are the things that breed connection
are the things that create healing and I
really believe that I personal
experience that that's true in
one-on-one relations with humans and I
really believe that society socially
what's happening in society it's just a
larger manifestation of that I apologize
for the lack of empathy you didn't
encounter if your partners and wives
when we suddenly want you to show
feelings and understand ours I sent out
the poem or the text message to various
women's networks asking who wants to
participate and I had a lot of very
powerful and enthusiastic responses not
only oh yes maybe I will
but really a thank you for putting words
to that and this is so much needed and I
want to be part of it and so we came
together in different filming days and
did not only have the filming but also
huge processes to go through because it
was not easy for all of us
the women chose what they wanted to say
they chose the parts they were touched
most of or they felt they wanted to own
and most of them chose the most
difficult things for them because I said
that's that one is tough it's tough to
say that and I feel resistance also to
saying it but I feel it's so true and I
want to own it I want to apologize for
all the mixed messages you get from us
women when we do everything we can to
seduce you and then end up blaming you
for being too horny and only wanting to
have sex
many women report it afterwards they
experience and many of us including me
were not only exhausted but even feeling
like like we were going to be sick by
falling sick different kinds stomachache
headache migraine whatever a lot of
different symptoms showed up
nightmares also not being able to sleep
and it lasted only one day and one night
and I had so many feedbacks of how the
next day I woke up and I felt light I
felt fresh I felt more alive than ever
I had the feedbag of I watched in the
mirror and I for the first time in my
life I felt that I loved myself
woman reported that they started to
apologize personally to men of their
past or in their present life for things
and said wow I did never imagine how
much that was freeing myself I felt
lighter and lighter and more and more
self-love and many said I felt so
empowered I felt so I felt my power as a
woman for the first time
so it was quite amazing process in yen
why do you think that happened I think
and it was the experience was far
stronger than I expected
to be honest I think we cannot truly
love ourselves and we cannot truly
empower ourselves truly access our
natural power that we all have without
also known in our shadow and taking
responsibility for this part of our self
and I think this is what happened I was
amazing to experience that what do you
hope men will get from watching us I
hope they get the most air flow from it
and I think men recovering in their
self-love it's the only real drop that I
need to get done if they want to get the
job done but I don't see a deeper
healing point or a deep deeper wound in
the collective masculine soul then lack
of self-love because they really didn't
get an appreciating environment and if
they restore a gram of real self-love
they will treat women like goddesses
they don't have a problem with hating
women they have a problem with loving
themselves people won't act like the
good beings that they are when we treat
them like shit
the more we criticize men the more we
just misuse our right to criticise them
to belittle them if we keep doing that
we directly lead to more hating of women
more misogyny more more rape culture we
lead to more of it and we know it we
know it from psychology we know it from
pedagogic we know it from teachers we
know it from trauma therapy we just
don't use what we know one of the main
criticisms of the film is the idea of a
collective apology saying that you can't
apologize for someone else so you could
apologize for your own stuff but not
apologize for all women for example
which is very true of course I cannot
apologize for anyone else
I cannot take responsibility for anyone
else for sure and yet I think it's not
so easy to make a difference between
collective and personal and individual
there is no collective if not expressed
through the individual and as we are
social creatures there is no individual
without the collective and I want can
give an example for myself I have found
myself many times being thinking and or
talking in a quite judgmental ways about
man when I heard myself speaking these
words these words coming out of my mouth
I hurt my mother talked I hurt my
grandmother talked I hurt my great
grandmother I shall talk so I realized
it's not only my own experiences in my
own hurt it's a learned pattern already
it's out of the herd of farmer women so
how can you really different how can you
really make a difference between the two
levels and what is surprised you most
about the reaction to the film yeah we
have not spoken of the men's negative
reactions yet and that is an answer to
that question because that surprised me
most not that there might be negative
reactions but I have learned thanks to
the reactions to the film about the
men's rights movement and
and going their own way movement I had
not heard of that before you took could
you expect who do you say what some of
the comments were exactly the directions
were for example sorry ladies it's too
late I will never trust you again or
this is all not true you have been paid
for it or you're doing this only to
manipulate us again so a lot of mistrust
some all say I'm just just hateful it
shows to me how deep man rules are and
in the first place it was painful to get
these reactions to a message that came
out of my heart that was meant really
that is mentor he honestly it was
painful in the first place in the second
place I thought wow it's it's amazing
that it comes up that it becomes visible
because it's so important that shows how
important this message is and how
important the work is how important
healing is it and this wounding of man
and of woman actually and there have
been quite a few comments especially on
the YouTube film of men saying exactly
that sorry ladies it's too late or
you're just trying to manipulate us
again what was your reaction to that I
say sorry as honest as I can do it today
leave it or take it and it's interesting
that in those comments especially from
men it's like it's not good enough where
I think but that's the best that I can
give and this comment is hopefully not
the best that you can give because there
is a standard that I said and I don't I
don't go down to this level of of hating
and blaming so yes 100% of the mess
between the sexes is in my hands and
100% is in your hands and I will never
ever take 1% of your responsibility and
say oh I am the bad one I'm not a bad
one so it
like what do you want to get rid of with
this kind of sorry it's too late
they don't even mean sorry it's it's
even well sorry it's so cynic it's so
it's uninteresting for me somehow what
do you hope the film will achieve this
peace and laugh and ecstasy for
everybody and I think what I hope what
this film effects is a deeper sense for
both sexes of how complex this
challenges and that we really have to do
our homework everybody cries for the the
one for the big laugh for the best
relationship then do your fucking
homework it will hurt of course
my hope is that we can truly do a step
into a new dialogue and co-creation
where women start to say I love being a
woman again and a man can say I love
being a man and we all can say we love
being humans I
I dream of a time where we can truly
allow ourselves to love again and that
is impossible without allowing ourselves
to be vulnerable
[Music]
you
[Music]