I want to call it something like
Saturday morning cartoons we have fixed
the world Fridays on Fridays I want
something that goes with Saturday's
that's your like tech with purpose goal
setting it's really room off the top it
almost rhymes Saturday morning cartoon
something how was your week yet your
infographic done and sent off to Dennis
yeah
well fitting that I got it sent off to
mom and then I talked to her last night
she gave me Dan his email so I'm gonna
be sending that out to him this morning
if my computer was faster I would have
already done it but it took like five
minutes actually we got a computer to
wake up or you to wake up I don't need
to be able cannot to send it so but
technically well but how was it how did
yours go yeah and I got my things done I
feel like I'm running on empty and I
have to figure that piece out because
cutting things out of my life that are
not fun and take spoons is easy cutting
things out of my life that I really
enjoy and take spoons because I'm doing
too many of them is not easy and so it's
finding the balance like ending
conversations at two hours instead of
letting them go to three and four hours
and stopping it draining just allowing
the process like a lot then I only have
so much energy that's part of what I'm
here to figure out and figure out where
the priorities are and putting them to
focus on that and not making myself
wrong for any of it and so that is kind
of I'm just in a weird space with that
because it's like right there's nothing
else to cut out that isn't as fun as
watching this teal Swan video on chronic
fatigue and there was part of that ring
really true or she's like chronic
fatigue is a chronic doing what you
don't want to do
and even though I've cut out most of
that in my life there's that underlining
like pressure she was talking about like
a pressure to be so serious
getting well and although I don't have
that with me because I found the fun in
it and I found the joy for the world I
still got a little bit too and so
finding out like but how do you not like
there's so much going on how do you
like and I have and like it can be fun
it can be light it can be in at the same
time there's happening but I signed
up for this because I needed another
thing on my plate but it seemed to be
right in the moment for this Charles
Eisenstein um he has a bunch of courses
all of which I think okay what you can
which can be zero and so I signed up for
this one called changemakers on learning
change make unlearning for change makers
or something like that and so it's like
four different sections I just did the
first section and each one ends in a
fast so this fast I think is I don't
think I know is um to not have any meat
news to stop news for a period of time
but I already have like I'm like I'd
actually don't but I'm like okay all
news not even Trevor Noah not even like
the odd time I watch that like I'm gonna
still get it on my Facebook and Twitter
feed that I can't help but even that I
don't need to sit there and go through
it I can just be proud and getting these
spaces and that time period so the next
one the next section is about others
it's like judgment of others and it's
gonna be a fast food judging others and
that do I feel like you know like I mean
don't get me wrong I've been a very
judgmental person in the past the
universe has kicked me in the ass every
time it's like oh you're judgmental
about this how about we give it to you
you're judgmental with this how about we
give it to you and so it's a different
um it's like I've learned to not be
judgmental because of that but like I
brought it from like a hundred dimes
like a ten not zero and so so being
aware of where I'm doing it I just know
that means it's something as usually as
a reflection of me when I'm judgmental
though because I'm really much better
than everybody else or not being
judgmental you know everyone else is so
judgmental I know right right that that
piece of it it's then I wrote down
quickly it was just yours was
infographics mine were the conversation
which I didn't attend the last two
Monday ones because it was the one I
could drop off I stopped doing the
scopes which has given me more it's been
better um my personal goals I did fairly
well except that on grandma's birthday
my next bracelet fell off and it up
smoking pot that day and it was which
was exactly what I was supposed to do
and it was just like the next thing but
now I have to like last I was like we
already did this you could do it again
I'm like no no you can't know that right
just like that is huge
cuz I kind of accidentally done at the
day before grandma's birthday um it was
the third I accidentally smoke weed cuz
I'm still smoking CBD oh also there was
like this thing that had fallen and I
was like is this a PT as a TC it's a
50/50 and I was pretty sure it was CBD
but I really wanted it to meet you see
and so I smoked it and I was like I
don't actually know what this was and
because it was so like I was high from
it but not my normal high I was like
wait this is weird
and so I smoked its kind of smoked
actual to be like wait is it and that
was like oh this is clearly the opposite
and then the next morning because it was
grandma's birthday in the thing had
fallen off and I was like there's
something waiting for me there's
something there that this is this is
sometimes I can absolutely tell when
it's the meth like it's not my addiction
telling me to smoke it's something else
but then the addiction takes over it's
like well then today how about today
today's a good day like it's like no you
get one day of intermission not a week
of introversion and then just back from
the same exactly which I mean might
happen come January when I'm back on it
but the point and I'm weaning myself off
of anti-anxiety meds because if I'm
gonna be smoking I can't be on that and
I want to be I want to be smoking it
once a week not daily and so if I can't
manage that then I can't have it in my
life like it's not something I can do no
but I and I also yoga like I've been
doing stretching more the so than yoga
and like meditations kind of become an
app like okay because it's been 60 days
and hasn't been this like next leap it's
like it's kind of falling away and so
I'm like hey what do I do
to hold on to it while still like not
like you myself wrong for having those
things happen which just makes me wanna
I don't know go to crap so I don't
really know what what to do with that
but sitting with it and being like okay
right the end of the year during
Christmas seasons right like this I can
do it I can do it or letting myself have
one more day today and then being like
okay no now we're recommitting sometimes
that is what I need is kind of like a
day a chosen day off and said no
stinking day off like yes don't meditate
don't like yes have a slaughtered day
there's like a cheat day yes exactly
it's specified for this is the day I
cheated yeah writing for Canada cheating
doesn't mean it could have been like
that was kind of grandmas birthday but
at the same time because of how it
unfolded it was actually the next
Epiphany it was all this stuff so and it
was you know I'm his birthday and the
bracelet fall at like it's so weird cuz
I chose what the thing that had with
Erics right yes
where it like came off it in like the
exact moment the perfect time I was like
that was weird
and this wouldn't have been a thing if
it hadn't also been on grandma's
birthday like they're both not here
they're both like important people in my
life and they fell off on their
birthdays like it's like okay when's the
last one fall and it was both and I
don't know like I'm you know me I'm
skeptical it at the same time spiritual
like it's like yeah those we're just
universe this freaky and amazing and I
only notice it because it's on a special
day or is this do these things happen
specifically on special days like yeah
well are you fitting with it more than
normal on their birthdays and that's
what I didn't touch you know it was like
I didn't even notice it did I didn't
fall off in my hands like like it it I
was like what is that on the bathroom
floor and I was like oh that's fine oh
it's my bracelet and even know if it was
my a bracelet or anklet it's like that's
weird
oh right it's for birthday like it was
just a weird weird and and it would have
been her 100th birthday right 102nd oh
geez yeah and so on then I was listening
to like oh no it's the one so I posted
on
on her 100th birthday I posted a photo a
video of her holding Georgia
Ian's daughter right and during the
conversation we're talking about you
like I was like oh he grows a dad right
now and it was like over psycho like all
like just and then I have a video of her
with Aurora and that that like there's
nothing in there that it's necessarily
triggering besides my daughter with my
grandmother that's you know trigger and
I just feel like she serves up emotion
and just like you know it's nice seeing
her in the house and and you know her
with Aurora and I'm really glad that she
came in her and her got to meet and
there's always gonna be like a sadness
and a missing that she's not here and at
the same time she died when she was 98
she was like super like she had more
health than I do
it's like more memory like more so much
vitality and had five kids and rebel the
whole time and he like awesome and I
yeah anyway so I'm still sitting with
that from the last week of getting the
next epiphany of me putting this all in
my shoulders and I know that I like I
understand how wrong that is and at the
same time there's a truth to I feel like
I know how to save the world so I have
to like there's I don't know how to let
that go but the more I'm willing to let
that go and just be in it and play with
it the faster it happens the more it
happens and the better it is and yet
it's really hard to do like theirs and
so when I smoke the pot on the 4th I got
this um collaboration platform leap
which is always it's always weird cuz
never very rarely is it a new leap
unless it comes from someone else let
someone else introduces me to something
like the World Cafe I'm like oh my god
this was just um how we need
collaboration to make the collaboration
cafe like to make the collaboration
platform
I need a small group of people who see
the vision of getting a like hundreds or
a thousand people together to create a
collaboration platform for us a hundred
or thousand whatever for that to happen
we need like a few people to be able
to crowdfund it to be able to figure out
what does it look like for a hundred
people to have a conversation like I
have pieces about figured out but not
the actual like we can use zoom very
easily we can get we can even have a
conversation every six hours over a
weekend but it's like I can't coordinate
be getting the people to that and
there's always this block of I can't do
this piece of it and I know it's
supposed to be there because I'm not
supposed to do it on my own it's
supposed to be collaborative it's
supposed to be and so I had these blocks
that whole life it's like oh look I had
this amazing idea for a story but I
don't actually want to write it or I
won't write like I can't write it it's
like and this is it like it's like okay
well this is how we come together and
create a world that works for everyone
it's not by me creating a world that
works for everyone it's by coming
together and saying what works and
figuring it out with a small group to
figure it out for a bigger group to
figure out for a bigger group and keep
problem-solving you guys we go and
figuring it out so I talked about Lee
about that yesterday and yes he's on
board and so we're gonna turn the 11
like instead of just the two of us
having a board meeting looking for more
people to collaborate during that time
period to discuss a collaboration
platform preferably with game be people
because they're practicing the Omega
role and they have that vision of a
world that's Omni win and an anti rival
res but not like this ideas I've I've my
own project and right bring your project
bring you bring all of it it's like how
can we create something that helps you
with your project right like how what
what does a collaboration platform looks
like the idea Cafe is like a YouTube
channel designed around a communication
tool that's my communication tool right
like it's like what I would but I can
both envision being an effective group
tool but also what I would want
I don't like Facebook I don't like
typing things out I don't feel a
connection to people in the same way as
I do when I'm seeing them on video but
that's not true for everyone so like how
do we get everyone's needs met in one
and instead of just saying that's not
possible like the way it is with
technology like Facebook could do it
it's almost there it's just it's done
for profit instead of for purpose it's
they don't have an incentive or a reason
to make
get for collaboration we do we want
lives that work for us we want projects
that are you know we're passionate about
and we want it to effectively help our
world get better we can create something
that's designed for that and have it be
fun because honestly if it's not fun
it's and that is part of the Charles
Eisenstein is like well the movement
needs to be inspiring and fun and not
about moving away from something but
towards something which I get and at the
same time throw something only the other
thing by Josiah thing goes one of the
cards the blind spots I was talking
about how people who play sports some of
them play to not lose and some of them
play to win and those are very different
people who play to win are like the ones
who actually win the ones who play not
to lose don't and I'm like that is what
I'm doing is I'm like just imagining
capitalism to not lose as opposed to to
win like it's like all of this can
go wrong let's not let it go wrong oh my
god as opposed to even if it's not even
if we can figure out climate change even
if we can figure out poverty I want to
figure it all out I don't want to figure
out one piece of it I want to do it all
I can see how they're interconnected you
have to do it all to do any of it but at
the same time like I truly want all of
it I want a world works for everyone and
I can't do it on my own but also the
idea currently resides in me and like
figuring just being with that and
allowing it not to feel too heavy and
allowing it to be fun and it is it's
happening it's moving along in that
direction but it's also exhausting
because of the doing whenever I try to
do the pieces that I can sir don't want
to do it falls apart but like all of
societies like of course you have to do
pieces you don't want to do and no my
learning time and time again is like no
because there's other people to do those
pieces it's just about finding them if I
wanted it to be my finger I needed to
pay someone to do it that wouldn't work
without of money and I you know they're
not going to be on board anyway if you
have to pay them to do it but finding
the people who this is I already found
them I mean Bentley is that person you
know what I mean like the person making
my websites that person like I've
already found it in little ways
there's also this block and me of like I
don't even know how to communicate the
thing I need once I do I'm good with
communicating it and the universe
delivers but it's like this combination
of figuring out what is needed even that
I'm like why do I have to figure that
out maybe I don't that's where getting a
group of people together and just saying
like what is it we need what is it that
um works for you to collaborate right
like what is it because there's huge
pieces of my collaboration process I
like to do all by myself how do I do
that effectively and have it for the
group how does somebody work in a you
know I mean like how do we work in our
individual styles and have it lead
somewhere how does it be fun for
individuals how does it how is it
effective both for the individual
projects and for the whole how do we
make sure that we're not all reinventing
the wheel every time we want to we want
to start a new thing so anyway so I turn
to the projects my personal goals update
you on that on the video series I
finished the video series it also
started launching on grandma's birthday
I'd specifically set it to start on on
that day the introduction so today is
day 3 for today's day 4 so it's
introduction tech is powerful Tech is
risky and today is together Tech is more
powerful that will come out and just
under three hours and I mean it's
definitely not gone viral because I
wouldn't expect it to but it also I got
I've gotten like six five or six
subscribers since that period of time
would just imply me I only have like
eighty so that's it's a more than I've
gotten in a lot of the other other time
periods so it it isn't about like and
that's another insulin being okay with
it going viral truly okay like being in
the spotlight and being okay is is a
hard thing to do I don't think I'd be
comfortable if it all of a sudden I had
a million people watching at the same
time I have to be in that space to allow
it to happen like I have to be okay with
that
and not attached to it not needing that
to happen not doing it for that purpose
like doing it so I'm just putting my
apples out there just making my little
apples in my apple tree and hoping this
should like some
maybe some applesauce or some apple
cider or something someone's gonna make
with it just allowing the process like I
put I published while I was stoned
published I was like typing out
something on Google Drive
and I just was like what happens if I
just publish it and it was like not the
best notes I'm takin but I have hundreds
of pages of notes not even in one page
like literally I just opened a new one
every time to do notes half of them run
I don't even have a name to them right
right and anyway so I just it was like
what happens if I published by my like
discombobulated notes since a few people
call then sit on her one person
commented they were like I really like
this part of it it was like cool like it
wasn't again it's like it went but all
but it's like just putting myself out
there in the best that I can in the
moment which is nowhere near the
perfection I always think it needs to be
and yet the universe like will give me
the next little piece when that happens
I'm like okay like I get the more I can
just be like this is me this is it the
faster it happens but I can only do it
within my comfort zone and that day that
was within my comfort zone I was like I
can publish this what's the worst that
happens like honestly what's the worst
there's no worse and the more that I'm
willing to try those things the faster
because it also gets other people
permission to do things like that
and I've seen that absolutely happen
it's like when you're eating the healthy
way and people see you telling them to
do it never changes but like just
showcasing it anymore right it's that
same way it's good like oh I can I can
if you can make videos and they're this
crappy I can make them too they don't
say it like that but they're like oh
you've inspired me to more quick
I think you know it's probably close but
just a nicer we're phrasing it where
it's just like oh I didn't know that you
could put something that unedited out
there oh cool I think like and also if
you watched it you're like I watched it
it was fine but it was unedited oh I
guess that is okay yeah it'd be like
also because it doesn't go viral right
away it's like oh I thought years to
figure that out cool cool accidentally
does go viral because that was like I
knew if I went on YouTube that was where
I needed to be
you same with women once I go live on
Facebook which doesn't feel right yet um
like I've known that for a year to a
year and a half before I actually did it
like I was like right but no like I
would come on and go live on on YouTube
and someone would be watch heated I
would jump off I'd be like oh I didn't
want someone here that's not that's up
ever back in like the early days of you
doing videos when they come o on
Facebook and I watched a couple of them
you're like can you not watch those
videos it was like but you won't see
them like what there was also because I
had that private Facebook group that you
were part of for a tiny bit that I was
like don't watch this this is it yeah I
know I still have that one in the odd
time when I'm not feeling up to begin to
people I will still go and record in
there but it's like just my own it's
just a place to record that it's in my
memory right edits which is good because
it got me used to speaking on camera and
speaking my thoughts it's still
different though when I know it's being
broadcaster yes
also there's say when it's interrupted
like people ask questions I'll be like I
lost my train of thought like I don't
get into the same heart speech and
that's part of what going online on
periscope in here is meant to do is to
practice that to be like okay am i press
into my body
am i speaking for my harder for my head
and heart all the way around yeah so cuz
the more I can speak for my heart the
more which is also when I want to
rewatch the videos that I put out
because I did them over a couple weeks
and the first caller very very brain
based and someone just can populate it
cuz I lose my train of thought and say
you know have a TD and such and I'm like
I really like the last few the last two
like the collaboration one on the tools
for collaboration what else we can
create and then I think the getting
involved one is he isn't that great but
the last two I was like I actually come
off much more compassion like I'm an
actual motivational speaker or something
as opposed to persons where I'm trying
to convince people right of like this is
what we need to do and it is what we
need to do at the same time I'm getting
how much I can't convince people and
what I need to do is just speak my
as powerful or up our fold as it is is
right or wrong as it is like just speak
my truth and the right people will come
along and those are quite creative with
like there's a piece of this it's almost
like starting its own religion which is
like okay we need to have radical
acceptance of ourselves and others and
we have to meaning also that if you fail
at that that's also we need to have
radical acceptance for that right it
doesn't mean that that's the only way to
be but if you're in it's like practice
you make a rule in game be like if
you're not willing to practice a mega
rule game B's probably not for you if
you're not willing to try to get your
radical acceptance that you don't even
accepting yourself and accepting others
there's power there because you can't
ever understand what anyone else is
going through you can barely understand
what you're going through and so and
like if you're gonna judge anyone judge
yourself and don't judge yourself
because you're exactly where you're
supposed to be the only reason you judge
yourself because you judge everyone else
right that like everyone else can do
this why can't I everyone else is doing
X why can't I and you don't know what
their truth is versus yours you don't
know how much harder or easier you have
it either way and so you can't really
judge other people you can't really
judge yourself all you can do is do the
best you can like in the moments do the
best you can get incrementally better in
tiny ways I do like what jordan peterson
says of like comparing yourself to
others i compare yourself to yourself
yesterday right like that's the only
person to compare yourself to and i'm
like yes and it can't be these giant and
for me at least it can't be these giant
leaps forward if i try to change my diet
and exercise and like do all these
things at once it falls apart the first
time it goes wrong it goes wrong mm-hmm
and then i don't have this compassion
for myself and then it all just goes to
 and i whereas this releasing this
allowing mind like my house is crab okay
cool unless i'm going to do something
about it love it accept it in that space
my house is way cleaner than it's ever
been still not like still me like but
it's like my car is clean i'm like i
don't even know how that happened
like i didn't consciously say i'm not
gonna leave in my car
I just stopped leaving in my car
I was like I can bring this in and do
something with it if I'm going to the
kitchen I bring some dishes with me
my room still gets completely chaotic
and I have to clean it once a week but
like okay that's fine like I clean it
more often and I allow myself when I
have a down day to like right you didn't
do your thing today okay cool and for
everything like yoga okay do a stretch
that was one of the powerful things that
I got her to the transition movement
which was there was a few things I
report they were but one of them was
like me you have a goal do one thing
towards it everyday like literally the
tiniest of things so if you're gonna do
yoga like it's like it's almost midnight
I didn't do you about literally one
downward dog we're done right like that
is as easy anything they can get you to
check off I did something today right
and that that little piece of it is
powerful it like has had way more
catastrophic forward that's the wrong
word powerful forward momentum then when
I would try to take these giant leaves
try to do Tony Robbins try to do the
like okay hour of power every morning
and do it was like it just didn't work
it's not my style
whereas a like and accepting is it my
style either because it's it's it's a
but it was life or death I had to like
there was no like when you're at the
bottom and all you can do is love
yourself at the bottom it's like okay
love yourself deeper and it was like the
irony of this teal Swan video with
chronic fatigue just like everything
comes down to connection I don't like
what a horrible disease this is
that it takes away all of your
connection because it gives you no
energy you can't maintain relationships
but all you're seeking is connection
because you're like underneath there's
this like I want to be a good person I
want to be a good person why do you want
to be a good person you want to be a
good person in order to for people not
to leave you right so the people like
you and people want to be near you but
needing to be a good person takes all
your energy ways you can't do anything
and it's like so then you just sit there
thinking about all the things you should
be doing and should be doing and should
be doing instead which also just like
zaps your energy and so I'm learning in
every area of my life to be like okay is
this something that feels like it gives
me energy or takes my energy and I can't
even judge the thing I just have to say
does it give her
to take right just doing that my dishes
right now give or take energy it gives
it cool I want a clean kitchen I will do
it if it's like her I gotta do it that's
taking out her that's not gonna get
done and Norris anything else it's like
what is gonna be enjoyable what's gonna
give energy what's gonna be in that
space and allowing it and creating a
world where that's possible for people
because our society doesn't exist in
that realm of the only reason I'm able
to do that is cuz I'm on disability
which is both the reason I was able to
like literally the reason and
figuratively the reason like it's like I
have the space and time to do that but
also it was the life-or-death piece of
figuring it out of being at that rock
bottom of being like oh I can't do it
all I can barely do anything like
putting toast in the toaster is all I
can do today like that level of and the
universe is like well if you can't deal
with this we'll just take more how about
less can you if you can't do with this
how about less how about less and tell
your like okay stop taking I will
do it with this I will do with this and
so I don't know what I'm taking on for
the next week maybe nothing
maybe I'm just showing up to my three
conversations that I do have to be part
of um which doesn't include the ones I
want this one the board meeting and the
idea cafe which was also really amazing
this last week there was I didn't know
anyone was gonna show up I reached out
to Remzi because it was how do you see
us transitioning to game B and I know he
has a project so I was like I want to
hear your thoughts on it and it then
three other people also showed up so
it's five of us having a conversation
which is like the limit of what really
works for an idea cap and we spoke for
an hour which is also I was like I'm
gonna stop trying to make these half an
hour they don't like for game B
specifically they don't work half an
hour not when normally our conversations
go two three four hours away hour is a
good amount of time to be like and now
let's pick the next question and we
picked a question like right after so
I'm gonna post it in the game B space to
be for Tuesday and pretty soon I'm gonna
be taking a break for Christmas which
also like Thursday I'm like when I do
with my time on Thursday
is when I just don't have the thing
that's it like I don't have a
conversation to attend and so it's like
okay I need someone to come over or I
need and honor that to be like okay my
friend Aaron came over this last this
last week and I was just you know hang
out Devine I'm gonna be hanging out
there this coming week and it's just
like okay yeah all right
but anyway so I'm but I'm taking two
weeks off during Christmas between like
whenever kids off before Christmas and
then until after her birthday right like
okay
none of the booked conversations know
anybody I'm so sitting with the calendar
and figured that out but I'm going to be
doing the collaboration this idea for a
collaboration platform sitting with it
and just being okay what I always want
to sit and fly it all out and I'm like
oh and I was planning it out and I came
to know a communicate it so it's like
figuring out the very bare basics of
what is it I absolutely need and brave
Brentley Bentley and I kind of went
through the values which we called
something else aspirations I think and
I'm like yeah those are the things that
I want us to like diversity and
democracy and they all have really not
bad words but like words that don't
quite do them justice right let her like
okay like democracy or better
participatory I don't know it's like
democracy is just easier yeah like
diversity to me doesn't mean we make
sure we have token people it means the
diversity of the individual like
everyone is worthy including all of this
all of the like labels you're part of
those things are worthy but so is
everybody else it doesn't make you more
or less worthy it does make you have
more or less if it were in the opinion
on the thing that involves that circle
right like racism is gonna be more
important coming from someone who
experiences racism that is systemic and
ongoing every day right like then than
me like yeah I might have had a racist
event or two but more of my racist
events are figuring out how I'm being it
and letting go of it rather than
experiencing it myself
I definitely experience exit
and got to I'm half the time I don't
even know it's happening until we get
registers because it's just permeates
everywhere anyway so putting down what
it is like what what we're doing like
what's the purpose of the collaboration
platform to figure out a tool that helps
us collaborate that people want to be
part of right I'm putting that out there
in a way that people want to be part of
creating that it's like a small
think-tank to figure out a process and
how we utilize tools that already exist
to the best of our ability to create
this both and I want to have people who
like have tech projects because the most
of minor tech people who have because a
lot of what people wanna do is create
community communities right like by plot
of land have a garden have actual
projects in the real world and so some
like a whole community what is that what
does that look like because you're have
to find the people and they fall apart
and they do to be able to have a
platform that facilitates that well
facilitating other thing it's not only
facilitating that but like yeah I want
it I would love to start a community
that is like a technology company meets
a community because then our needs are
met and I can live outside of the city I
need it to be NBC there's a lot of
things that I need it to be anyway so
like community tech and then like real
world projects that aren't actually
buying a plot of land and doing
something not extreme and finding a
group of people to start that with but
like a community garden a tool library
things that can happen and also a
coordinating right its coordinating with
the group of people you want to create
it with but also other people who have
similar projects like what does a and
that might end up being three different
collaboration platforms right or it
might end up being hopefully one
collaboration platform because we all
can use the tech we all could use
community and we all need projects and
platforms in our life to like facilitate
that so saying just creating that and
one of the things I'm doing is putting
together like a 20 minute video of me
speaking about the collaboration
platform and what it is and Ernesto is
gonna edit it and so I said I'd have
that done by Monday I don't know if
that's actually gonna be the case but
for that too
because of once that's edited then
that's what I'm putting out to getting
be able to say hey let's create this we
have our own projects let's come
together have conversations on how we
have conversations that are powerful
they help us create a platform and is it
your platform in my platform it's like
it's ridiculous for us all to have our
own projects that are literally this but
like I'm gonna create one for me that no
one's gonna use it which is what I
realize about the antigua cafe like idea
cafes my platform like it's created for
me to collaborate which is powerful and
I love it I think it helps a lot of
people but unless I can get feedback
from people to like the YouTube piece of
it definitely doesn't work for a lot of
people and so needing the collaboration
piece to be on YouTube is what doesn't
quite work but that being said we're
doing it live on YouTube to do the
actual collaboration piece because I'll
like on this channel because that's what
Bentley and I are doing we're just gonna
take over that time slot and that's part
I think having that transparency to
bring other people in to have people
take on roles the same reason this is
live so many people watching do that so
is there anything nice yeah so just a
collaboration platform you're looking
for sounds like getting the video for
eduardo's yeah there we go yeah that's
the list 20 minutes I'm just sitting
with it sitting with it between now and
Monday where I'm gonna record that and
then if I can't record it cuz I'm not
ready I'm gonna keep that and if I am
then send it off yeah I think mine is
just continuing to work on the
infographic like I'll be sending it to
Dennis I'm sure he'll probably have some
questions
and then as well like I made kind of a
completely brand new one which I'm
actually a lot happier with in the
biggest ones because the previous ones
there were always elements of that where
I'm like it works but it doesn't there's
all these things like it doesn't work
for that it doesn't work for that this
new one doesn't really have the same
like all these things it doesn't work in
now I'm just like okay now how do i
improve it how do I get the right levels
of detail sort of you know
make it interesting and short enough
that somebody's like oh I'm gonna take
time to read this but I actually conveys
it's still useful information so I've
got some way like some ideas on how to
maybe do like the either sister graphics
or like you know future versions of this
but so it's just going to be continuing
to work on on that and then not really
on the B list because I've been doing
this for a while but I also want to
start properly like making scripts seems
like a strong term but script esque type
things to start making the YouTube
videos that I've been planning for a
while I can't lie yeah yeah yeah there
you go
yeah mine and I just like the outline
for which the videos there would be and
then the outline for sort of the general
bits the video would cover I find it's
the sweet spot that I haven't quite
figured out it's like speak for my heart
which is not always easy when I want to
always be from my mind but having a
outline of what I want to talk about but
not in any kind of script because it's
scripts that I know I'm reading it and
it's like I'm reading it word for word
and that doesn't work but having nothing
also doesn't quite work cuz I train of
thought all of them which is fine you
want it after you know like I missed
that part that was like the key thing to
turn it all together yeah exactly
exactly himmat I forgot to end that
sentence yeah after that you watch it
you're like where that sentence go what
does happen I'm still a constantly
that's also part of it like it's funny
how it's not funny it's not funny at all
but like that we require people to be
adequate communicators to do anything in
the world and I get why I mean what's
the point of having an idea on how to
save the world if you can't communicate
it what is the point but like that we
need people to communicate other people
in a neurotypical way and have it be
like that you can follow the thought
that you can means that we're not
getting the best ideas we're getting the
best ideas from adequate communicators
which is not the same thing because all
of the
cystic mines out there are like well I'm
not going to communicate this not all of
them but like enough of them that that
same thing that makes you nonlinear be
able to communicate it's the same thing
that helps you actually problem-solve
and actually create the thing it's just
the barrier is in the communication or
the networking or that piece of it or
the more we can solve that the more we
get people's ideas out into the world
without needing them to do all of the
freaking personal work it takes to put
an idea there which you know is
important piece of it and also a
ridiculous obstacle if we want solutions
if it were holds yeah I mean I'm not
sure how you would get around that like
I get maybe two-sided because you need
the person to be able to communicate the
idea that people need to be able to
understand that idea because otherwise
we would just what give every idea
that's ever presented full attention and
it's not gonna work it means somewhat
like if you consider like it doesn't
only happen with you know a new fuel
source or a new but like if you are a
decent singer and you have an okay song
right
you can't just record it on YouTube
anymore and get it out there like Justin
Bieber did you need to have it in
production right you need to spend
thousands of dollars recording it
properly having the proper mic in order
to be popular you do because everyone's
doing it and it's that same sort of like
but they're not I believe YouTube
singers I watch a ton of them and they
pretty much all start like because
YouTube's doing it they're not going to
necessarily like if you have the
production you're gonna get more fans
and more thing not based on the quality
of the song not based on the quality of
your voice based on did your parents pay
you to have better equipment right did
your did you and so with that in mind
it's like okay so can we create a system
that like if you can in that instance
created a platform that is like wait if
I like this thing I'm probably gonna
like the singer - it's not about are
they top 40 it's about here's my musical
tastes and here's what I like and have
it in a way where it's like okay like
the regular public library has recording
studios right that you can you can rent
for super cheap or free actually and
like giving people access to those kind
of things where it's like oh here's a
team of people if
like you they'll actually instead
because there's a certain level of like
I put my stuff out there unedited
there's a certain amount of like oh that
I'm not gonna you're not professional
enough to follow you don't know what
you're talking about or like but do I
know what I'm talking about but the
thing I'm talking about and I get that
I'm not communicating it the best way
and I wish I could communicate it better
but if the idea is good it should be
able to get somewhere especially if I'm
willing to put it out there in a way
right there shouldn't be all of these
barriers if the idea is good and so if
your song is good and you're decent
singer and even if you order one of
those things right what if the song is
good in your shitty singer well we can
put you don't even if you're willing to
allow someone else to sing your song
allowing those pieces to come together
and that's just a platform and create
giving people the tools that are like if
someone was able to see my content and
see the value in it that there if there
was a way to put that out to people who
were editors right right people aren't
gonna edit when they don't believe in it
they're like oh sharknado great no I'm
not putting my time attending that right
but like Schindler's List okay or like
you don't I mean like something that's
more meaningful to them or maybe the
opposite good definitely a lot of people
would be the opposite of that but like
finding the tools for to bringing
collaborations together right where you
don't need to present yourself in a way
and the more we are allow ourselves to
show up as we are the formule of other
people to show up as they are but we all
have that peace of like wait like what
you said like other people when they see
unedited video like I'm allowed to do
that like it's like it gives people
permission but then there's also more
noise right there's more rush to step
out there that's the noise and so we
need to have a way to filter it not
everyone needs to listen to my the
people who want my need to listen
to it right the people who like oh I'm
looking for a way to save the world I
want to get involved in and that's where
like marketing breaks us because it's so
expensive and we don't trust it but
creating a system where we don't need
marketing instead we need truth right
truth and product is the product good do
I like it does it last does it you know
what I mean the actual essence of what
we care about not oh I didn't get
supermodels because I tried this beer
right we all knew that wasn't happening
right like no one's doing I think I
actually had a you a supermodel but like
did I like
the beer what was the alcohol content
where you don't know me is it still the
same beer I had four years ago you don't
even is it's still winter ale at
Granville Island no it's not
that that like you don't need to have
the marketing once you have the truth
and together we want the actual truth
and so part of that for like artists is
that piece of it like you have a good
voice do I like your voice
maybe it's your cuz I can all the time I
get your equipment sucks yeah I don't
have hundreds of dollars to put into a
new mic I've tried I've bought mics for
twenty thirty bucks and they're better
but they're not they're still not going
to be the high quality I don't have the
light you don't even have the space in
my house to make to have it when we're
too much about that part a you to by
fault there's a youtuber I follow that
has I think now like two or three
million followers she still has a
garbage webcam like you know her my
guests met people still leave comments
she has millions of followers I'm
putting this stuff out I'm not letting
it stop me but I also get that it does
stop me right that there are people who
and I this happens to me I'll listen to
someone's I'll be like and there's no
way to communicate it right like there
are people who like your mic sucks but
there's people unlike don't have
background music like why are you
talking with background music I can't
listen to you and not everyone's like
that's no only want you to have
background music right like you'd be an
option to click it off
give me it like which would be YouTube
not the actual like person but like they
talk and it's join the intro that it
won't be later so I'll just fast forward
to see if they're gonna have it the
whole time it's like I can't listen to
both of you and music like I'm not here
and this isn't a scene video right it's
like someone having an intellectual
conversation which is more what I listen
to like stop doing that to music that
does not require music why is that
happening but that's my need not
necessarily what other people want and
so anyway be able to have diversity of
ways of hearing things like that it was
in layers
I could easily click off the muse it can
be like I don't want the music or I only
want things with proper subtitles but I
also want good quality content to be
made with proper subtitles so I want the
ones that I know I would want to have in
turn a mean like a request to get the
subtitles put on and I in no way can
subtitle my videos
I can do the automatic one but I'm like
I'm not going through and do it that
takes like an hour to subtitle a
five-minute video like I don't it's not
happening pretty and not what fun you
know doing one a day like it's not yeah
then it's like picking the ones that I
care about that
I will subtitle I keep meaning to
subtitle actually give it ten video
series every night that's one of the
nice things about YouTube is the like
they try to subtitle it for you and then
you can go in there and edit their
attempts and subtitles but it'd be nice
to think audience could do that if the
audience could easily be like that's
wrong and just turn that on YouTube I
think you can sort of crowdsource yeah
but like you have to go into the backend
and do it I mean it has to be either
like I'm literally watching you know as
correcting it is making a comment on it
that should be how easy it is like oh
wait and maybe right because a troll you
mean like you don't want everyone to be
able to do that but like okay if three
of us agree that that was wrong wrong
Nets like should do that too because
there's certain subtitles I'm like well
that's just wrong well I guess on the
best thing on Netflix is when you listen
to something that was done in a
different language in English match
because there are different people like
someone someone dubbed it and so it's
the closest thing to what's being said
and then someone else listen to the the
didn't listen to the English or the
english subtitle they wants into like
the Japanese and put an english subtitle
so they don't match but between the two
of them you can actually kind of get
more of what was said in the original
language okay but it's also more work
some shows where it's like I they
actually had like I think less men
standing had that on Netflix where there
was this one scene where like the
neighbor was I think speaking Chinese or
like that and if you didn't have had
suppose one actually showed what they
were saying but if you had subtitles on
for everything it just said like
speaking foreign language or something
like that like yeah that does that
happen this yeah my my streaming video
site because they don't it's they don't
always have the subtitles and so they
won't be safe or they won't be like
there's what's the one or the world's
there's two more of the world's out now
which is really weird both the more TV
shows ones I think
one what sir said so it was like in the
time period War of the Worlds was
supposed to be in like the fifties
sixties kind of thing and I haven't
watched that one because it's really
interesting the other one is like in
today's world and it's more American I
think it is American and but because
it's an American one they actually had
acknowledged that it's warped the world
so they showcase other culture like me
like french-speaking people and
experiencing it and stuff but they don't
have that part subtitle and I'm like I'm
gonna need a subtitle like I need to
know what these people are saying I
can't miss 20% of the show yeah and that
happens a lot in those type of things
but yeah there were some times on a flex
where when somebody else is speaking any
language there was just no subtitles
like they were just like well this part
is it in English I don't need to do
anything you're like okay that's not
which sometimes is the case right like
sometimes when you're watching it like
that is with our showcases that the
protagonist doesn't understand what
but there's other times you're like this
is clearly something it should just keep
- like what the non subtitle version is
if the non subtitled version has
subtitles explaining what is obviously
that's a part of the show that they're
trying to say you you you can know what
they're saying yeah exactly yeah and
then I also want an add-on for right
like the the periods for it like the
person doesn't know what they're saying
but I want to know what they're saying
so like someone else comes in as
likewise a Cantonese this is actually
what they said yeah cakes are frogs and
Wallops what exactly they were just
almost like an easter egg so it's like
if you happen to speak German you know
you might get part of the plot moon for
you Wow yeah Jesse you know I'm happy to
access to that is would be I'm just
curious and want to know ya know it's
being said but I do it like what about
like we get into a world where you
cannot expect people don't speak your
language there's enough auto-translate
and star freaking be like almost is
someone on the SkyTrain auto-translate
hmm I don't want to hear about your sex
life
in Farsi then one my auto-translate that
those actually are especially we get and
like you know idioms and stuff like that
ya know and we're not there yet for sure
but like that would be hell to try to
translate English into something else
like oh those are funny things where
they take like English and translate it
into another language and translate it
back to english yeah there's some where
they'll they'll take that stuff em out
of like English to Spanish and Spanish
to French and French to German and
German to Chinese and Chinese back to
English and it's just like holy jeez is
that ever wrong
yeah it's telephone AI telephone yep it
does make you realize how how complex if
your language is art how much you'll
need that actually like we need people
to learn in different languages too and
as second languages in their languages
to be like a whole like learning English
as a Second Language is different than
learning it as your your first one of
course and stay with every every one
where you're like oh that's not it's not
good language you necessarily think or
feel in but you have more to offer than
when you learn it like when I went to
Germany and basically failed English
they were like let the English speaker
fail it so whatever she said yeah that's
right too like I don't know what an
adjective is I have a lake I just
thought to speak it barely fair enough
I've forgotten most of this stuff that I
don't know high school look I know what
an adjective is but you know like one
layer deeper than that
nope I have to say due to the whole the
whole trans rights thing I know what a
pronoun is now when I did not know what
a pronoun when I got I know some
pronouns but I couldn't like explain
what a pronoun is like maybe yeah a
vague term thread down but it's like a
whole placeholder for a person for a
noun so I you me he/she/it
or all pronouns like it's yeah don't
call people is that we don't over well
but it's still pronoun and still ER I
believe like it still is
you know all of them all of the things
res nouns or people placing things said
you know
adjectives can you have herbicide yeah I
guess then a pronoun it's not just
people because if you use it for a
building is that a program yeah it's
like a place yeah so it's just like a
big term for nuts yeah we're gonna
indirect that it is she okay complete a
fine program a word that can function by
itself as a noun phrase and that refers
either to the participants in the
discourse example I you or someone or
something mentioned elsewhere in
discourse I usually it this okay pretty
close to it's like having a Candace is
you may ask you things like what I don't
know google it oh oh
people trying to help the kids with
their homework like man not only has
school probably gotten harder but it's
also like that was 20 years ago remember
and like even the things that you
remember it's probably you know it's
less than 10% assist if I found
interesting like I still remember a fair
bit of like biology but social studies
which you know it's not like I'm gonna
need that right it's not like I'm doing
something in the political landscape
where that's the one that I should have
paid the most attention to but sorry
future me yeah yeah all right I think we
should say again what we're doing just
so it's at the end of the video because
then I can rewatch it and then call off
of youtube and then yeah so what are you
doing this week I am going to continue
working on infographic I guess the two
parts is work with Dennis to see
whatever you know questions he has stuff
needs to actually be able to make it and
then work on sort of the next roller
type of that same infographic slash like
sister graphics to figure out how do i
you know further improve it well I am
going to be sitting with the idea of a
collaboration platform and how I create
a offer for people to want to come on
board and create a class and collaborate
on creating a collaboration platform
that works for them for their individual
self and for their projects and what
that looks like in the bare minimum so
that we can decide together with that
it looks like like five of us can decide
what it looks like for a hundred a
thousand people he said of me figured
out what it looks like four thousand
people
um and then doing the 20 minute video on
Monday it's an offshore nest oh and we
have one viewer now but we are gonna say
goodbye to YouTube now that we've done
our goals and see you next week