Hey what's up it's been Greenfeld
prepare to have your mind blown because
my guest on the episode that you're
about to hear is basically the world's
leading authority on smart drugs and
nootropics and how to maximize cognitive
enhancement of your brain how to upgrade
your brain so it's it's pretty cool
stuff I enjoyed this interview quite a
bit I think you will too
however as you know it's not just a
smart thing to upgrade your brain it's a
smart thing to upgrade and protect
yourself with life insurance I've got
life insurance but the fact is what a
lot of people don't realize is that you
can actually save a boatload of money on
life insurance if you're a healthy
person so there's this company called
health IQ and they use science and data
and research to get you a lower rate on
life insurance if you cycle or
weight-lift or swim or run or anything
like that because they have all this
research that shows that people who
exercise a lot have a much much lower
risk of early death I don't have to tell
you that I'm preaching to the choir but
what happens is they negotiate with life
insurance companies for you based on
your health results it's really cool so
the way that you do this is you go to
help iq.com slash Bend and they'll give
you a totally free quote if you go to
help IQ like health intelligence
quotient IQ comm slash Ben you can learn
about life insurance for physically
active people but also get that free
life insurance quote so it's a good way
to protect yourself and also take
advantage of the fact that you're
exercising to save some money this
podcast is also brought to you by some
of the best-tasting green juice powder
on the face of the planet and here's why
I like this stuff and this particular
time of year I usually will do like kale
and bok choy and Swiss chard and stuff
like that in my smoothie dense dense
green superfoods but in the winter it's
like it's hard to find those foods I've
got romaine lettuce and iceberg lettuce
and cucumbers and some squash but you
miss out on a lot of those really dense
antioxidants a lot of the dense
chlorophyll rich green stuff so you can
make yourself a smoothie with whatever
cucumbers and zucchini and iceberg or
whatever kind of
like slightly subpar vegetables sorry
cucumbers that you have around and then
you can throw this powder to upgrade the
nutrient density I'm using that word a
lot aren't I upgrade so anyways the way
that you do this is you get this green
juice powder that's called organifi it's
got like 15 plus different ingredients
chock-full of just about every green
thing on the face of the planet and you
put it in your smoothie or your water
your juice or your coffee if you're one
of those weird people that blends
strange things into your coffee and the
way that you get this stuff you get a
20% discount on it use code Ben at Ben
Greenfield Fitness comm slash fit life
code Ben gets you 20% at Ben Greenfield
fitness.com
slash fit life enjoy and now on to
today's episode with a guy who makes me
look pretty dumb not that that's hard to
do but he definitely does it in this
episode of the been American fitness
show one of the things we realized was
that people who are dealing with chronic
complex disease you're gonna have to do
a lot of things and that have some
complication are also dealing with
decreased cognitive function decreased
energy and some you know emotional
difficulty that makes it hard to do what
they need to so being able to support
those areas is hugely beneficial when
caffeine is bound to pterostilbene the
pharmacodynamics upper very interesting
it slows the rate of caffeine into the
bloodstream and along gates that has
life pretty significantly
he's an expert in human performance and
nutrition voted America's top personal
trainer and one of the globe's most
influential people in health and fitness
his show provides you with everything
you need to optimize physical and mental
performance he is Ben Greenfield power
ability balance whatever it is for you
the natural movement
get out there
when you look at all the studies done
studies that have shown the greatest
efficacy
all the information you need in one
place right here right now on the Ben
Greenfield fitness podcast
hey folks it's been green fell then it's
probably no secret that I often record
podcast with all sorts of special things
circulating in my bloodstream and today
it would be a definite doozy
I am chock-full of huperzine DHEA
curcumin curse eaten by opqqr to choke
coleus gingko taurine theanine centric
scene site a choline alpha GPC zinc
pickle n8 magnesium 3 and 8 and a host
of other variables that are right now
lighting my brain on frickin fire things
called newer topics but my guest on
today's show actually thinks there's a
pretty big problem with this stuff
namely that the entire field of the
entire entire movement of nootropics or
you know smart drugs as some people will
call them even though there's a
difference that the entire movement has
some pretty extreme reductionistic
tendencies meaning that you know even
though popping pills and using bio hacks
and self quantification to make your
body and your brain smarter and and
despite the the plethora of scientific
findings focused on you know individual
neurotransmitters and mechanisms and
cell walls and receptor sites and brain
flow and blood flow it's all mostly a
bunch of like isolated variables
isolated single parts of the cognitive
machinery and in many cases when we look
at all this stuff in isolation there can
be side effects there can be drawbacks
there can be some deleterious impacts in
other areas and so my guest today has a
distinct focus his focus is to somehow
make all this stuff work together how to
better understand basically the the
complex dynamics between the brain and
an entire meta theory of cognitive
enhancement as geeky and nerdy and woo
Lou and white lab coat ish as that may
seem that's exactly what we're going to
be delving into in today's show along
with a host of information on what I
would consider to be
the most comprehensive nootropic stack
ever made and what actually happens to
be circulating in my bloodstream and in
my brain
right now so my guest today is Daniel
schmuck dan berger and i just love that
last name because any name that's that's
multi syllabic that i can say well
without butchering it I'll take it
Daniel schmuck didn't burger I almost
butchered at that time Daniel has
actually been studying health and
neurology for quite some time he was
originally afflicted with some
neurological and autoimmune illnesses
that he'll fill us in on but I wasn't
able to get him fixed with allopathic
medicine or complementary medicine and
so he really took a deep dive into
physiology and pathology and became a
real academic of mind-body medicine a
student of mind-body medicine and he has
a huge background now in everything from
psychedelics to nootropics to meditation
to psychology to all sorts of different
tools for evolving states and stages of
consciousness and evolving the human
cognitive experience and he brings all
this together along with a ton of
scientific research on his website which
i will link to in the show notes it's
called the neuro hacker collective and
the specific flavor of nootropic that he
has created is called qualia and so
we're gonna delve into that and probably
take the deepest dive we've ever taken
into neuro hacking hacking the biology
of your brain your cognition the problem
with modern smart drugs
affecting your neurons in a very
positive way building new brain cells
and a whole lot more so Daniel thanks
for coming on the show man Ben thanks
for having me it's good to be here yeah
no problem and you are down in in
Encinitas California right that's
correct yeah I like it the land of yoga
pants and also Navy SEALs I suppose it's
kind of a weird place right Navy SEALs
and yoga pants is the intersection of
both of those things you aren't wearing
yoga pants and dressed up as a Navy SEAL
with a trident are you yeah that's
private okay all right all right
a little bit awkward but we'll uh we'll
leave that to everyone's imagination
anyways so Daniel before we jump into
this this whole idea of of nootropics
and cognitive enhancement and and the
nitty-gritty you know nuts and bolts of
how to do it um I'm curious about what
happened to you because I know you had
some kind of an illness or something
that kind of led you down this road but
what exactly was going on with you
mm-hmm
this a field that I've always been
interested in the capability for us to
develop human potential in general and
cognitive and psychological potential in
specific as well as just kind of the
cutting edge of personalized and
integrative medicine both on the
diagnostic and therapeutic sides and
with my background orientation towards
whole systems complex system science and
integrating multiple disciplines and
approaches together that like I said
that had always been an area of deep
interest but several years back I did
start having a bunch of symptoms and
when I went and got traditional
Diagnostics I had both autoimmune
rheumatic disease and signs of
neurodegenerative process and the
specific things that I had going on did
not have any kind of adequate treatment
in allopathic medicine and there wasn't
even consistent success anywhere in
integrative medicine and so the answer
for me was to just start seeking to
understand what tissues were being
damaged by what chemicals what was
happening Chane and those causal
cascades that would lead to that
happening what could be the you know
Tier one deviations from homeostasis
they could lead to those kind of cascade
and so that just meant starting to model
out the systems in a more complex way
where we don't silo between Neurology
gastroenterology immunology etc because
obviously I've got brain access disorder
can you know be affecting neurologic
tissues and so when we started to model
that applying complex systems ontology a
lot of really novel insight started to
come about and it led to me figuring out
how to do appropriate Diagnostics for
myself of what was going on I found a
number of key like what we're
what you would call original cause and
then also call Cascade insights and was
able to actually reverse those both the
disease pathology as well as the
underlying causes reverse the out of me
and antibodies etc and then was able to
do similar things for many friends that
had also had diagnoses that had no
formal treatment and this led to a
series of insights about not just
nootropics or neuropsychopharmacology
but the future of medicine as a whole
how do we do a better job of
understanding what health is in terms of
whole system resilience and what
diseases in terms of decreased
resilience and pathophysiology and what
the future of adequate integrative
personalized medicine could look like
that's a lot of big words man I'm
curious in terms of like the specific
nitty gritties like well what are a
couple examples of you know the thing
things that you did like like when
you're talking about autoimmune issues
or neurological dysfunction where you
just like you know drinking bone broth
and following like like an autoimmune
diet where your nating you know
nightshades and and dairy and soy or
were you like where you were you poem
like a lot of like fringe little little
bio hacks or i know what you call neuro
hacks out and if so like what workup
we're just a couple of things that you
did that that kind of like affected some
really significant change well you know
how sometimes you talked to integrative
doctors or bio hackers that really focus
on mold or yeast or GI parasites or
pathogens or dysbiosis or methylation
disorders from genetic predispositions
or HPA access disorders or Lyme's
disease or heavy metal toxicity or it's
like how do you put all of the parts
together of all forms of toxicity all
forms of deficiency all forms of
pathogenicity code imbalance because
you're obviously going to treat Lyme
disease in terms of actual Borrelia in
the blood very differently then you're
gonna treat a mucosal infection or
you're going to treat heavy metal
toxicity and and so the key for me was
actually in numerating the entire space
of all the things that could be involved
doing complex diagnostics across the
whole space and then rather than just
kind of
a shotgun approach have very targeted
therapy that factored exactly what was
going on for me that would be totally
different than was my month or someone
else that had the same disease diagnosis
because you can have multiple different
deviations from balance deviations from
homeostasis that can lead to the same
kind of disease disorder so I was doing
specific kinds of treatments from
mucosal infections weird infections I
had in my gut from international travel
and that was both meds so Alinea and
ivermectin and you know a number of kind
of normal and not very common
anti-parasitic anti bacterial meds and a
lot of supplements that were both
addressing mucosal function addressing
infection directly and so that would be
like an example of dealing with GI
infection where we were dealing with
other mucosal infection like things in
sinuses then there were specific
anti-infectious and biofilm killing
biofilm breaking things that I did
intranasally a lot of IV therapies IV
chelation glutathione etc for aspects of
toxicity and ozone ultraviolet lights
for some humeral infections openness of
things but it it wasn't just like all of
the integrative things it was very
specifically targeted towards what order
of operations make sense on what things
that are here right right that makes
sense so so you you were not just like
throwing everything in the kitchen sink
at your body and some like desperate
attempt to fix yourself you're actually
I'm assuming doing like blood and
biomarker testing as you went along
researching a lot of this stuff yeah it
started with comprehensive Diagnostics
across the whole spectrum of things that
could be involved and then said okay
does this make sense if we look at my
medical history when certain symptoms
started when I was exposed to certain
things I look at the the whole landscape
of biometrics now and an understanding
of how causation could occur do I kind
of have a story of when these exposures
likely happened when these kind of you
know exposures to toxins infections etc
injuries stresses and then if you can
put a picture together then you can get
a sense of okay what would
project plan for reversing the speed
obviously if you've got some kind of say
GI mucosal infection that is causing
continuous inflammation to go into the
bloodstream or allowing toxicity go into
the bloodstream you're gonna want to
address that before trying to address
the blood side most of the time so order
of operations etc that's just all things
you would factor if you're doing kind of
comprehensive treatment yeah and I know
that today we're gonna focus a lot more
and kind of like the like the nutrient
status of things alright like like like
nutrients that you could put into your
body to assist with nervous system and
with brain health and with even like
building you know new neurons and things
like that but in the show notes
I'm putting the shows over at Ben
Greenfield fitness comm slash neuro
hacker as in Walter so it sounds like
neuro hacker um but that's a phrase I
hadn't really heard thrown around until
I heard you use it I'm Daniel and I'm
just curious when it comes to this idea
of neuro hacking before we delve into
the Nitty Gritty of what you know kinda
like a dream nootropic would look like
but what exactly is neuro hacking I mean
how do you how do you find neuro hacking
what is it that your company does from
this neuro hacking standpoint like I
said even though I've been interested in
the field of cognitive optimization for
a long time one of the things that had
me do a deep dive into it when I was
wrestling with some of these issues
myself is that some of the symptoms I
was dealing with were cognitive decline
and my background and like my whole life
work being cognitively engaging things
that was more debilitating than than
physical issues for sure and since I was
gonna have to try and study and figure
out an adequate approach since when
didn't exist obviously I couldn't do
that well while having cognitive decline
so my first thing that I applied the
cognitive and what I had to was how do I
increase cognitive and words and that
was a deep dive into the study of
cognition smart drugs nootropics etc
again applying complex systems models
it's like well okay so what really is
being mediated by acetylcholine what's
being mediated by catecholamines by
glutamate by how do these systems
interface you know etc getting a more
detailed understanding and then seeing
how to support that whole process now
fast-forwarding
one of the things we realized was that
people who are dealing with chronic
complex disease we're gonna have to do a
lot of things and that have some
complication are also dealing with
decreased cognitive function decreased
energy and some you know emotional
difficulty that makes it hard to do what
they need to so being able to support
those areas is hugely beneficial but the
rest of treating their pathology but
then of course that's just relevant for
everyone right even at the other end of
the bell curve people who are looking
for real optimization enhancement and so
neuro hacking for us is you could almost
think of it as a subset of biohacking
but also kind of a Venn diagram with it
where we're looking at hacking the mind
brain interface what things can we do
that enhance so we're not looking so
much at athletic performance even though
that can be a positive side effect we're
looking at optimizing cognitive
capability and psycho emotional state
and predisposition okay got it
so when when we start to kind of like
delve into the actual nitty-gritty of
especially like the type of nutrients
that you can put into your brain my
first question is before we focus on
individual ingredients the the thing
that I'm curious about because I kind of
want to know how this works from an
acute effect obviously when somebody
takes like a handful of pills right I
get like a nootropic or some powder or
some tincture or extract designed to you
know help your brain fire better um is
there an actual chronic change in brain
structure I mean is there any evidence
out there that you can do things like
build new neurons or you know reset your
tolerance to things like you know
caffeine or increase the production of
mitochondria or cell membranes or
anything along those lines um what what
can be done in the brain by putting the
right nutrients into it yeah this is a
really important question
when we think about smart drugs in
general we oftentimes think about
pharmaceuticals that are being used for
off-label purposes like adderall or
Ritalin or etc we'll notice that we get
immediate lift in certain metrics like
focus or concentration or you know
something that's useful but those lifts
not only usually are not lasting don't
produce positive long-term effects but
oftentimes you're producing negative
long-term effects either because of side
effects and other systems or even the
system they're affecting they're
affecting in a way that creates
dependence and the primary way to think
about this is if you have a regulatory
system like say we're looking at
adderall you have a an endogenous system
that's regulating dopamine levels and
catecholamine levels if I override that
system through an external right and
exhaustion is stimulate then I'm going
to create dependence upon that exotic
stimulus and that means down regulation
one of our fundamental goals was how do
we understand how the body's endogenous
regulatory systems work and rather than
override them work through those
pathways where we can increase system
resilience and robustness where if
someone got off of whatever it was that
they were taking they would actually
have lasting positives because the
underlying regulatory systems had become
more robust so that was a core goal for
us and there's a number of ways of that
happening so you've got obviously the
immediate effects that are usually going
to be neurochemical neuro endocrine kind
of effects changing people's levels of
neurotransmitters receptor site
modulation things like that in effect
those fairly quickly you've got a medium
term effects which can come from things
like decreasing inflammation and
affecting say the phospholipid cell
membrane to have more integrity and
elasticity and then you've got longer
term effects like the ones that you were
mentioning where you start looking at
things like neurogenesis the development
of new neurons new neural stem cells and
synaptogenesis the development of new
synapses and both of those as a category
of biogenesis right new biological
structural development increased
mitochondria within cells these are not
going to be permanent because nothing's
permanent and it's a continuous of
changing environment just like exercise
and muscle development is not permanent
but it's lasting meaning if you aren't
then damaging those structures and
you're continuing to support them there
is lasting structural change so I would
say with anaerobic or in general one of
people's goals should be how do we
create short-term immediate benefit
we're looking for without creating
meaningful side-effects or down
regulation how do we up regulate the
regulatory systems for lasting benefit
and how do we regulate structure in a
way that's going to produce again
regulatory lasting benefit when you look
at things like you've got the company
neural stem that is in late-stage
clinical trials for their product NSI
189 it wasn't what's called neuro stem
neural stem they're a boutique
pharmaceutical company and they were
originally working doing neural stem
cell injections for spinal cord injuries
and ALS and they started figuring out
some small molecules that made stem
cells proliferate and their most famous
one is a protocol NSI - 189 and that
will probably become a pharmaceutical
drug but some people have already been
using it as an atrophic and specifically
its mechanism of action is neurogenesis
right developing more neural stem cells
that increase gray matter density in the
hippocampus and then other areas and so
it's been treating major depressive
disorder and is this something that the
people like would get prescribed by a
physician or is this like an injection
into the brain or what is it it's not
something that someone would get
prescribed yet because it hasn't
finished FDA clearance but it probably
will okay this is an example of one that
is actually moving down that kind of
pharmaceutical path but whether it would
be used for say diabetic neuropathy or
anxiety or depression or Alzheimer's if
you can help develop endogenously more
neural stem cells that's going to be
very meaningful for lots of things what
happens to be that there are nutrients
are involved in our body's own process
of doing that that can help in that
direction and other kind of system
modulators so those are all things that
we factor in the nootropics that we
develop interesting so in retirement
like new brain stem cells what about for
people like TV eyes and you know head
injuries and stuff like that I mean I've
gotten orbital fractures and TV eyes and
concussions like they're going out of
style when you talking about inducing
new brain stem cells or neurogenesis are
you actually saying that that you could
potentially like heal certain areas of
the brain yep
so when someone has a TBI a mild mild
traumatic brain injury or severe
traumatic brain injury the the first
thing that has to happen is to protect
ongoing damage so ongoing oxidative
damage excitotoxin see any of the kinds
of damage that can start to cascade and
whether we're talking about a head
injury or a stroke or the no protection
is a first goal and then beyond that
where there has been actual damage to
neural networks then we want to see what
can we do to help regenerate neural
networks and you've gotta know tropics
like amok see pean also known as mechs
at all that have been used pretty
heavily off-label mostly for post stroke
and other forms of traumatic brain
injury some of the russian peptides
c-max and selling and some of the more
common nootropics like some of the rasa
Tam's and amp Atkins and new kept in
particular have been found very both
neuro protective and neurogenic and then
you've got things like lion's mane and
taurine and methyl b12 that are all
neurogenic through normal endogenous
processes so even though the field of
TBI treatment is only kind of scratching
the surface of these areas I do think in
the not-too-distant future we'll combine
much better scan technologies like SPECT
scans and better qejy along with the
normal fMRI etc have a better picture of
what's going on and then have much
better both protection and treatment
capabilities yeah it actually is fun to
self quantify this stuff like I've been
doing
IIIi went down to Los Angeles and
visited this place called the peak brain
Institute and spent about a week there
learning how to how to do neurofeedback
how to actually attach electrodes to my
head and use this software in which
you're you're basically flying a
spaceship with your brain but you are
being rewarded with audio and visual
cues that encourage for example
production of alpha or theta brainwaves
or you know that decreased production
like fast stressful beta brainwaves and
it's really interesting because I've
tried this type of brain training both
with and without certain nootropics
you know circulating in my system and
there's a distinct difference especially
in the amount of like you know
upregulated alpha or theta and decreased
beta when you use a self quantification
method like that obviously you know not
everybody's gonna have like a whatever a
$3,000 piece of a you know electrode and
laptop they can do this with but I mean
you know there's even there's even phone
apps I don't know if you've played
around with a much Daniel but like the
CNS tap test app where it was just like
test your central nervous system by
letting it keep track of how quickly you
can tap in a 60-second time frame or
like the like the n-back app on the
iphone that just just allows you to test
like your your short-term memory recall
and and it really is interesting that
you can see a distinct difference that
kind of goes above and beyond what you
might get from say like a cup of coffee
with this stuff well here's a real fun
concept there obviously we are starting
to get quantified self devices that are
more available which is hugely
beneficial because when when we can link
assessment insights with whatever we're
doing you know in terms of influence
then we get much better and shorter
upregulation cycles in terms of what
we're doing but we've obviously got also
hardware as it's becoming available so
it's not 128 or 64 lead EEG but the
Meuse is actually pretty neat for people
being able to do neurofeedback on their
own right and there's a few EEG
neurofeedback devices that are starting
to become commercially available that
are good enough that they're meaningful
so these are all part of what we would
call the neuro hacking movement the both
assessment and an influential tools
and you notice I'm not saying diagnostic
or treatment because we're not operating
within the FDA medical space but these
are all what we'd call neural hacking
tools that are meaningful and that we
appreciate but when you mention that you
were doing neurofeedback neurofeedback
is not only helping you learn how to
gain executive control of certain brain
frequency states but the reason that
that can be lastingly beneficial is you
start having certain states be more
common more baseline
right and certain things that were
common before saying xiety or whatever
become less common less baseline that
corresponds with structural changes and
so there but when you're doing
neurofeedback even though you have
something on your scalp it's not doing
any transcranial stem it's just reading
and then you are using your own
consciousness right you're using your
own mind brain system to do different
things with your attention that actually
leads to neuro plastic rewiring of the
brain including development of you know
new neural networks and that can happen
also without EEG equipment that can
happen in when someone learns how to
juggle or play drums or any new kind of
coordination tasks they're actually
having to develop new neural circuitry
and now when you start mentioning adding
something like nootropics in think about
what happens if we're wanting someone if
someone's wanting to do therapy to cure
PTSD or they're wanting to do EEG
neurofeedback to develop some new
capabilities what if we could give them
chemistry that actually made their brain
more neural plastic first so it could
change more with it per unit time of
doing that therapy and then we gave them
other chemistry afterwards that was
long-term potentiating that actually
helped lock in that new learning that's
an example of sequencing so that could
look like micro dosing psilocybin before
and doing something like silh tap
afterwards and you get to balance that
plasticity make your synapses more
susceptible to change and potentiation
lock in the learning in terms of
effective synaptic formation this would
be an example of thinking through
something kind of in a in a more
comprehensive neuro hacking way
yeah that that whole field of
neuroplasticity is it's it's actually
extremely interesting you know how you
can strengthen or lessen existing
neuronal pathways or establish new
neurons and and new connections which I
know is is actually it's called
structural plasticity versus like
building new pathways I think that's
called synaptic plasticity but you make
a good point right like like you don't
have to necessarily go out and spend
thousands of dollars on neurofeedback
software you can learn language you can
you know play the ukulele you can tackle
some some difficult interesting subject
like like you know take take an online
course of you to me or you know learn
how to learn how to code and then you
even mention you know something
interesting even even like psilocybin
that's that's that's a really
interesting topic i you know i've used
psilocybin here and there and i have
found that when i have used it the
situations in which I've used psilocybin
in moderation with responsibility and
with intention has actually resulted in
the formation of intense memories that
are far brighter and more clear and more
colorful than memories formed in the
absence of something like psilocybin so
yeah I think this this whole idea of
neuroplasticity is is very interesting
and I want to actually delve into some
of the ingredients that you can put into
your body to make it more neural plastic
but also to do things like you know shut
down brain inflammation or provide the
brain with you know neuro vitamins etc
but before I ask you about that I'm
curious just just for fun do you you
know I was talking about you know
neurofeedback for example and you
mentioned the Muse headband for
meditation do you have anything that you
do on a regular basis in kind of like
the tech sector not necessarily like
pills that you pop but but do you do
like tDCS or electro stem or or anything
along those lines to enhance your own
neuroplasticity any any special bio
hacks that you use frequently yeah I
wouldn't just say for neuroplasticity
but for mind brain nervous system
optimization comprehensively so right
where I'm sitting like within just a
reach of my seat I've got the violate
intranasal transcranial lasers
and my I like that technology quite a
lot it's actually and I'm gonna
interrupt you super quickly because this
is the million dollar question Daniel do
you have the one that that like wraps
around your entire head and goes in your
nose or are you an underachiever and you
just have one that goes in your nose no
no head and nose both how nice you do so
you have that you have the noir oh yes
oh that thing is an isn't but we have a
bunch of other you know fun transcranial
laser technologies so this is primarily
focused on increasing cider ATP levels
through specific frequencies of light
and obviously transcranial transcranial
an intranasal for increasing ATP in
neurons which are obviously very energy
intensive and so I think that's a that's
a brilliant technology there's a lot of
forms of transcranial stem transcranial
direct current is interesting I'm very
careful with it
transcranial alternating current is
interesting transcranial magnetic deep
stem and we've even got friends who are
at the pioneering edge of transcranial
ultrasound at University of Arizona
Stuart Hameroff slab and number of other
places that are pioneering work with
transcranial ultrasound to reverse beta
amyloid and tau phosphorylation involved
with Alzheimer's so there are some of
those technologies that I used regularly
that are here and there are other ones
that I've went and used very
specifically for specific conditions or
that wouldn't be appropriate for me
because I don't have the things that
they're needed but we use them with
other people that they are procure is
right right used appropriately they're
really amazing you know for example that
that a violet device I was speaking with
a really intelligent neurosurgeon and
I've had in the podcast few times named
dr. Jack Cruz and we were talking about
the use of things like you know
intranasal light therapy and the use of
like that head band that neuro headband
and you know one of the ideas behind
that and it's stimulation of the the the
cytochrome C oxidase I believe is is
this specific area that stimulates is it
creates a little bit of free radical
production and so some of this stuff you
know it's not like you're you're hooked
up to it 24/7 it's
like that device you're supposed to use
about once every two to three days or
you know like you talked about
transcranial direct stimulation that the
tDCS which is often done with a headband
I actually I've been trialing a device
called the the neuroscience made by a
company called halo and it's a pretty
intense form of magnetic stimulation
that that massively ramps up the
activity in the motor cortex and so it
will for example decrease your
sensitivity to discomfort during
exercise when you use it prior to an
exercise session or increase your
ability to be able to rip more weight
off the floor during a deadlift but you
also you're supposed to take a good 8 to
10 hours between any type of sessions
with something like that just because
it's such an intense you know ride so to
speak for your brain so yeah some of
this stuff is interesting you just have
to use it responsibly right
I want to interrupt this podcast to tell
you about a few people that you need to
follow on Instagram so that I've got
I've got a few ladies that you should
follow on Instagram whether you're a
lady who wants to be inspired or whether
you're a dude who wants to see ladies
doing awesome things so here they are
jot these down and write them down or go
to the website that I'm gonna tell you
about in a second and there'll be links
to each of these girls molly Elledge she
is an amazing beautiful specimen of a
CrossFit athlete who has some really
inspirational posts on Instagram and
then there's this girl called the
calisthenics queen
Jessica Russian r3d Bogdanov Bogdanov
check her out she has some amazing
twirling that she does all over the
place like a parkour athlete on steroids
check out Kate Minh wagon that's mi n
weg and she's an aerialist
she's also freaking amazing and her
Instagram page is off the hook and then
finally there's this girl that is an
adventurer who does like a bunch of free
diving in deep water and she's really
cool - her name is Ashley Baird so all
of these athletes are athletes who
represent cámara coffee and chimeric
coffee is used by so many these crazy
people like UFC fighters in MMA artists
and and me and professional racing
pilots and biohackers and all sorts of
people around the globe including like
adventurers who are doing amazing things
and they use this stuff because it's
like coffee on steroids without actual
illegal performance-enhancing drugs in
it so this coffee has alpha GPC taurine
l-theanine DME a you're listening to a
spot our podcast on on smart drugs and
nootropics so why not get some in your
coffee in the morning so check them out
a chimeric coffee and here's the deal
when you go to khmer coffee ki m ER a KO
ffe comm you use code men to get 10% off
any of their coffees or any of their
cool things that you can put in the
coffee and if you score to the bottom of
the page when you go to khmer coffee
calm all four of those chicks that you
can follow on instagram along with
frankly all of their athletes on the
instagram and some of them are pretty
pretty cool pretty fun to watch
Instagram is a great way to waste time
and see cool things and be
inspired of course so check them out
chimera coffee calm this podcast is also
brought to you by something I introduced
you to last week that I use whenever I'm
traveling when I want to reset my
circadian biology so here's the deal
every single cell in your body
synchronizes its activity with the Sun
but it can be hard to get full daylight
into your life
meaning that when you're indoors you
have shift work or long-distance travel
like on an airplane reduce date light
time is basically going to restrict your
circadian biology from being normal and
a lot of people like will do blue light
box therapy which basically means you
sit in front of a bright light lamp for
about thirty minutes to two hours every
day but these researchers in Finland
found that your ears the inside of your
ears have photoreceptor proteins in them
and you can target them by shining a
bright light into the ear so they
develop this device called the human
charger they call it the human charger
son in your pocket it allows you to do
things like fight the winter blues and
increase mental alertness and reduce the
effects of jetlag and improve mood but
you do it just by sticking this thing in
your ear for 12 minutes a day it's just
like headphones these little earbuds fit
snugly into your ears and then UV free
blue enriched white light just flows out
of the things for 12 minutes then it
automatically turns off after it's reset
your brain basically it's really cool so
here's the deal
you can you can check this out at human
charger calm slash Ben and they've got a
code a 20 percent discount code for
everybody it's a little bit complex the
code but it's been g3 0hc as in Ben
Greenfield 30% human charger Ben G 30 HC
and you get 20% off
I love cool things that you can stick
into your body that make your life
better go where you want with that and
this definitely falls into that category
so check him out human charger comm /
Ben used code Benji 30h see
well when you mention something that
increases free radicals anything that is
Pro oxidative is gonna increase free
radicals and so there's a you know a
classic kind of relationship between
oxidative and antioxidants therapies
because you want a lot of oxidation of
glucose within the cell and you know in
the particular areas appropriate to
increase ATP and cellular energy and you
want to not be oxidizing cell walls and
you know other other structures so are
people wanting to increase oxidative
bandwidth or increase antioxidant
bandwidth in it's both right it's a very
dynamic homeostatic relationship between
both of those and in different areas and
different tissues and almost everything
works like that whether we're talking
about pH we're talking about redox
interactions we're not trying to just
move the needle in one direction we're
trying to increase system resilience in
both directions simultaneously yeah yeah
it's it's it's cool stuff though just a
total rabbit hole compared to what I
actually wanted to talk to you about
today which is nootropic compounds
because I know that's kind of like your
your area of expertise and and like I
mentioned like I have I have a bunch of
the actual brain nutrients that you
helped design circulating in my body
right now I woke up this morning and and
I have these two bottles one's called
step one and one it's called step two
this stuff is called qualia q qu a li a
qualia and I was first introduced to
this stuff and and I might ask your
permission for this first Daniel is it
completely completely off-limits for me
to mention that God pill the black label
version of this stuff obviously it's not
completely off-limits nothin okay
alright so the god pill is as you were
calling it not your name not ours is
basically stuff that we work with in the
research lab but is not available for
sale because we haven't gone through all
of the FDA and testing we need you for
that but is on our product road now yeah
I kind of did stuff backwards meaning
that I had no clue what neuro hacker
collective and who you were
I had no clue about this qualia stuff
that I'll get into in a second but
someone at a random health and fitness
conference that shall remain unnamed
handed me this pill and it was in the in
the on the morning of a particularly
difficult and rigorous day on which I
was to speak I was to do a whole bunch
of signings and talks I was to be
attending a late-night party that
evening and he handed me this pill and
he said I want you to try this and I
said what is it he said it was a it's
the god pill there's a little black
package and I open it up and I'm like oh
you know I'm I'm one of those guys who
if it's if it's relatively natural I'll
try it and and I took a quick glance of
the ingredient list which was an
extremely comprehensive list of mostly
stuff I was relatively familiar with but
I'd not actually taken all at the same
time you know all these different
nootropic compounds so I took it and and
I did literally feel like not trying to
be blasphemous God the rest of the day I
mean everything was was firing on all
cylinders verbal fluency memory recall
the the ability to form relationships
and connections with and understand and
be empathetic to people all sorts of
super interesting effects even like you
know reduced procrastination and reduced
anxiety you know unfortunately this this
effect stayed with me until about 4:00
a.m. in the morning but I was like I
want to quit writing articles and go to
sleep at some point but you know very
very similar to almost like modafinil
without actually you know kicking my
liver into the ditch as modafinil can do
and so that was my introduction and
later on I discovered that there there
is actually perhaps a slightly less less
intensive version of this stuff called
called qualia and so that was what I
took this morning for example I want one
in the one bottle that you take in the
morning on an empty stomach in another
bottle that you take with with breakfast
or with food in your gut and so that is
what I want to delve into into this
quality of stuff so in terms of qualia
first of all why do
you call this specific nootropic a blend
that you make qualia it was a fun
process when it comes to naming quality
is actually a term coming out of
philosophy of mind which means the
quality of what it is like to be you so
your subjective experience is the
physical universe is made up of
particles and four fields the subjective
universe is made up of qualia thoughts
emotions sensations and so rather than
just enhancing memory or digit span or
arithmetic processing capabilities we
were alluding to the idea of optimizing
one's experience of existing subjective
experience of existence so if someone
happens to know philosophy of mind then
they like oh cool they use the
philosophy of mind term and if someone
doesn't it's just a cool sounding word
that sounds kind of like quality okay
got it makes sense all right so you've
got one two three four five six I
believe seven different kind of like
categories of nootropic stimulants in in
the ingredients of this formulation and
that kind of returns to I guess what
you're talking about before how you
don't want to just focus on one specific
area of brain enhancement you want to
somehow get all the parts to to interact
and so if I could I'd like to ask you
about the difference between some of
these things because I think some people
may not understand what all needs to be
in a a complete brain compound so first
of all and one of the first categories
that you have in here are are nootropic
compounds what exactly is a nootropic
compound yeah loosely the term is
generally used to mean some chemical
that can enhance some aspect of
cognitive function beyond someone's
traditional baseline without meaningful
side effects so it's in Contra
distinction to smart drugs which would
enhance some aspect of cognitive
function but might have some side
effects or brain nutrients which aren't
gonna enhance brain function beyond
baseline they're gonna make sure that
you don't drop below baseline or if you
already are helped bring it back up but
they're part of the kind of normal
process and so of course we're
interested in in neuro hacking in
all of those categories but that's a
general way to think about what a nut
tropic is and that term arose from the
scientists that develop piracetam which
was the first racetam and kind of the
beginning of the major family of
chemicals and then there are other
families of chemicals and Perkins and
other things that are part of what we
usually think of we think of nootropics
okay so so nootropic in general isn't
something like you know vitamin B to
replace some things that you're burning
through and you're thinking or or like
you know choline or something like that
but these are actual chemicals that
would do things like assist with cell
membrane formation in the brain or
cerebral perfusion or the neuro
endocrine regulation or something like
that something like that okay got it now
one of the things if I want I want to
target in a few kind of kind of
interesting nutrients that I wasn't
really familiar with in your compound
and and one of the things that you have
as part of the the neurotropic blend in
here is called hardening HCL am i
pronouncing that correctly yes toward me
okay what what exactly is hor Dineen so
cordoning is interesting it is a barley
grass extract so it is actually not
synthesized as it's an extracted
compound and it is a fairly selective
mao-b inhibitor and so you've probably
used or at least heard of saline Deborah
Nell which is a fairly selective
chemical mao-b inhibitor that is as many
people have associated with
life-extension as well as probably one
of the the best know tropic smart drugs
and then there are other chemicals in
that category that are newer like reseed
Joleen this is a herbal version of
something like that less potent in the
dosage that we use and specifically so a
MAO inhibitor is inhibiting an enzyme
that breaks down certain
neurotransmitters so the
neurotransmitters can actually get
across the synapse more effectively
mao-a and then they OB are going to
protect different neurotransmitters more
selectively mao-b
is an MOV inhibitor like this is going
to protect
primarily dopamine and then some of the
associated catecholamines norepinephrine
epinephrine and phenyl alanine and the
main reason that we include this and we
include a small dose is phenol ethyl
amine which is a minor mono Ameen that
category of neurotransmitters it's one
of the most it's one of the primary
active ingredients in chocolate and in
blue-green algae that gives the
psychoactive effect that it's usually
kind of a euphoric effect but it has an
extremely short half-life and so it
usually degrades in minutes and so it's
been a very common stack in the
nootropic world the neuro happen world
to stack something like cordoning there
are many other natural mao-b inhibitors
but to stack that whiffing lefel amine
so that it actually has a longer
half-life and some of the positive
psycho stimulatory and euphoric effects
actually last longer and so it's also
obviously going to affect dopamine which
we're addressing through a number of
ingredients and pathways so that's the
gist with that okay okay got it and in
addition to that that's that's blended
with a bunch of other things that I
think some people may have may have
heard of before like phenyl ethyl amine
which is you know like like a
neurotransmitter I know it's also known
as the the love drug but it increases
like euphoria and an arousal and an
excitation phosphatidylserine is another
one I think a lot of people know about
as a way to like increase mental
processing speed I've talked about one
that you have in there before called
vinpocetine which they actually had some
really interesting research on in in NFL
football players to reduce you know
speaking of TBI a lot of the issues with
traumatic brain injury and NFL players
in a study I think that dr. Daniel
Heyman did a couple of years ago
huperzine which of course Tim Ferriss
made made popular in the 4-hour body and
theobromine from chocolate and and DHEA
which you mentioned and then another
part of that
that nootropic blend that you have that
I wanted to ask you about is that you
have a you have a little bit of caffeine
in there it's not it's not a lot of
caffeine by you noted that you that you
bind the caffeine to something called a
serous stilbene what why do you do that
yeah so we don't actually bind that we
get it from one of our partners called
chroma Dex that makes a patent product
called pure energy pure energy is
pterostilbene which is a antioxidant
that comes from the primary antioxidant
in blueberries and certain other natural
compounds and they're binding that to
caffeine and specifically there are many
companies that make pterostilbene this
company chromatics has a version of it
called peat taro pure that they've got
good clinical trials on showing its
effectiveness in as a cerebral
antioxidant it's very similar to
resveratrol pterostilbene is a few of
the reasons that it is preferred to
resveratrol often is that it has a much
longer half-life in the blood and it
crosses the blood-brain barrier to be a
cerebral antioxidant more effectively
and when caffeine is bound to
pterostilbene the the pharmacodynamics
of it are very interesting so it slows
the rate of caffeine into the
bloodstream and elongates the half-life
pretty significantly it along gates the
half-life of caffeine by that 25% and as
you look at you know multiple having's
that means that after about six hours
you've actually got 50% more caffeine in
the blood than you do from the same
number of milligrams of caffeine not
down to pterostilbene which means that
you have both more of a delayed onset
more gradual slower and longer taper so
you've got more consistent peak plasma
levels of caffeine and so we wanted
something that had both a longer effect
and less of a crash afterwards and less
of a you know stimulatory peak and this
particular delivery mechanism for
caffeine was
the best one that we've found for this
purpose and you get the additional
benefits of the pterostilbene which
there there are many benefits of it but
primarily this antioxidant is the main
reason that's interesting you know I've
been genetically tested for this and I'm
a fast caffeine oxidizer which means the
caffeine is typically in and out of my
bloodstream pretty quickly and that is
one thing I noticed about this is it
seems to like lengthen the half-life of
caffeine like like without me getting
like the the up and then the down I'd
never actually had caffeine bound to
something like Sarah still being before
but really interesting effect and then
for those of you who have tried caffeine
all on its own I would recommend that
you you see what it feels like when you
get it bound to this caffeine especially
if you're a fast coffee metabolize or
like I am um but before we delve into
some of these other things you know like
like neuro vitamins and choline donors
that you have in here kind of a bigger
picture question for you Daniel what are
some little-known effects that something
like a nootropic can have that people
might not know about I mean I mentioned
for example when I when I took that that
god pill all of a sudden I had zero
desire to procrastinate like I just I
was ready to jump in to do anything you
know I know for people who are you know
progressing doing taxes or writing that
article or cleaning out the desk drawer
or whatever you know it seems that
nootropics may have an effect there but
are there other things besides limiting
procrastination that are that are
lesser-known effects of nootropic
compounds sure leavening procrastination
is actually really fun example because
it wasn't one we intended when we were
originally developing this formula and
earlier iteration to the formula it was
one of the positive side effects that
we're like well that makes sense and
it's cool and particularly limiting
procrastination on things that you know
people found dreadful and odious and now
they had just much more emotional
neutrality and focus etc in them and so
there's been a very interesting process
to both hypothesize what things we would
expect to be affected and then see what
actually shows up and obviously it's
going to depend on the particular
nootropic and the person so say we're
looking at
something like aniracetam versus phenyl
piracetam they're both gonna have
increased memory verbal fluency through
their effect on acetylcholine and the
nmda complex but aniracetam is gonna
have more anxiety decreasing Enzi lytic
effects and phenol press attempts and
have more psycho Simula Tori effects
based on their effect on other receptor
sites so you know it depends
Hooper's ein a for instance the
acetylcholine esterase inhibition in it
can cause lucid dreams and so a lot of
people will take that on their own or
take you know something like quality and
notice that they start having a lot more
vivid and lucid dreams that some of the
I would say positive side effects that
we were most interested by is people
feeling less emotional upset less what
they would call drama emotional upset
that really is not helpful or warranted
without feeling numb so they actually
feel more capable more available to
positive experiences and negative
feelings like you know sadness around
authentic things but not being upset
unnecessarily by stories they're
generating because they're actually
thinking more clearly and so much of our
emotional process is not the result of
what's happening it's the result of us
not thinking through multiple different
people's perspectives and generating
negative meaning and as someone simply
able to think more quickly and more
clearly then they don't get poor
thinking generating unnecessary
emotional drama and so I would say
that's proven one of the most fun
experiences people have reported yeah
and I should know by the way when it
comes to like vivid dreaming and lucid
dreaming I don't recommend at least I
personally wouldn't take this stuff in
the afternoon because I found that it
really produces a very intense
wakefulness effect what I have found is
that later on in the day after it you
know you would think it's out of your
system I still get a very intense amount
of lucid dreaming and vivid dreaming on
the days that I use this stuff so you
don't you don't have to take it right
before bed you know for example I know
like alpha brain for example is a
popular new topic out there that if you
if you take it before
bed it can cause some pretty intense
lucid dreaming but this stuff seems to
cause it even if you take it in the
morning yeah many of the compounds are
gonna you know last in the bloodstream
for a meaningful amount of time and or
they're going to affect some processes
that last for a meaningful amount of
time so this particular acetylcholine
esterase inhibition has a meaningful
half-life on it yeah interesting okay so
so you've got nootropic compounds you
know like like the like the hardening
that we talked about and the sera still
being bound with the caffeine and the
then post up team and the huperzine a
but then you also have these things you
call neuro vitamins and what's the
difference between oral vitamin in a
nootropic yeah so like we're saying
earlier neuro vitamin basically we're
just talking about vitamins that have
some effect in the nervous system either
in converting amino acids into
neurotransmitters so specifically b6 +
b6 in the phosphorylated version
Paradoxal 5 phosphate and vitamin C are
both critical for converting a phenyl
alanine and tyrosine into dopamine
converting tryptophan into serotonin and
so these are as for the definition of
vitamins these are things that one has
to get dietarily the body can't
synthesize them and they serve some kind
of cofactor role in in some kind of
process right some protein or chemical
synthesis so we've got vitamin D having
so many important roles throughout the
whole body but particularly for the
brain things like myelin synthesis and
we have a particular version of b1
called a benefit I mean which has a very
meaningful neuro protective function and
specifically in peripheral neurons and a
version of niacin which is another B
vitamin niacinamide which helps with
blood flow and cerebral perfusion but
specifically nad production and b5 s
role in acetylcholine and adrenal
hormone production etc so these are all
vitamins in particular forms and doses
that are oftentimes
the limiting factor in some of the key
processes that we're seeking to support
okay gotcha so so a lot of like the
vitamin B compounds and in specific
forms that I know are designed for their
there are neuroprotective effects or
their anti-inflammatory effects for
neural tissue or cognitive impairment
but in addition to the vitamin B complex
I notice you've got the vitamin D
complex in there but it's not just
vitamin D it's vitamin D uniform called
micro encapsulated cholecalciferol what
is that so cholecalciferol just means
vitamin d3 that's the scientific name
for vitamin d3 and micro encapsulated
micro encapsulation is a process in
which you have some kind of chemical
payload that is put in some kind of
encapsulation that's designed to only
break down or release at some target so
maybe it's trying to get through stomach
acid like an enteric microencapsulation
and release in the intestines or move
through a particular pH or whatever so
it's a delivery mechanism and because
vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin
oftentimes it'll be actually in a fat
base but because we're these these for
manufacturing reasons these particular
capsules are powdered then we needed to
be able to take the d3 and and stabilize
it make sure that it would deliver
effectively so the micro encapsulation
is usually something like alginate
particular extract from algae or
cellulose that's simply going to help
better absorption and delivery of that
nutrient so it essentially helps to take
a vitamin that would mostly be fat
soluble and allows it to be someone
water soluble in this particular case
yes okay interesting all right so so
you've got your your nootropics and
you've got your neuro vitamins and then
you also have something in there like a
class of compounds called neuro
anti-inflammatories and antioxidants
obviously it's not rocket science to
know what would an anti-inflammatory or
an antioxidant would do in the brain and
and some of them they're relatively
familiar again like care Seaton for
example which I know has some really
cool neural
affective effects and curcumin which
I've talked about quite a bit on the
show before in terms of its
anti-inflammatory effects especially for
neural tissue and in DHA and green tea
extract
and even bio pairing or black pepper
extract which I which I know can help
with the absorption and utilization of
curcumin there's one in there also
though called bio pqq um what is bio pqq
yeah so pqq is a active version of coq10
and so it has a number of important
effects as a krebs cycle intermediary
and support and ATP production and you
can use coq10 you can use ubiquinol or
you can use pqq they're progressively
more potent for certain processes so
we're using peak EQ and bio pqq is
simply a patented brand that has had
good clinical trials done on it so in
general if there are companies that have
made a nutraceutical and have patented a
process on it that has strong clinical
trials already done we will use that so
that we know we have quality control and
can reference the clinical trials and
you know that we're done specifically
and so pqq does a number of interesting
things it's involved in recycling
glutathione it affects some growth
factors it like nerve growth factor
synth assists but the primary reason
that we're using it does have
anti-inflammatory effects and cytokine
modulation primary reason is ATP support
okay got it so you've got that in there
for specifically for ATP support I know
for example like that's that's the same
stuff that's in the is it called the
upgraded upgraded anti-aging formula
that bulletproof makes a pqq I think
that's the one that is that other
upgraded anti-aging or they're upgraded
aging formula is oxaloacetate okay
that's right then at the unfair
advantage which is to buy an unfair
advantage that's right unfair advantage
called bio pqq and speaking of which
like I've talked about this before I
mean some of these names
you know and and I love you know I love
the products that bulletproof makes I'm
a huge fan of their stuff I use their
their brain octane and I use their their
chocolate powder and their bars and all
sorts of stuff but also you know when
you look at words right like catchy
phrases like unfair advantage or I mean
heck even that the god pill phrases I
threw around earlier there's definitely
an eyebrow that gets raised in the
scientific community with stuff like
this with claims like that so I'm
curious um in terms of like clinical
research behind some of these
ingredients that specifically be like
combining all these greens into it into
a cocktail like you guys are doing at
neuro hacker collective is there actual
clinical research behind this stuff yeah
great I want to go up for one moment and
describe the process of why we brought
these particular compounds together in
these doses rather than other things and
is it simply a you know throw in
everything but the kitchen sink because
you mentioned a kind of trans
reductionist whole systems approach the
first thing we did when we were looking
at development of an entropic like this
because we were doing specific nootropic
chemistry with people in integrative
medical clinical settings where we had
their genetics and we had a huge amount
of blood chemistry on them and could
customize things like if they were under
or over meth laters and which
methylation gene mutations they had and
you know etc this obviously a very
different process we wanted to see could
we could we provide some aspect of that
kind of benefit at scale that is a
formula and there were some things that
were so specific like the way we would
address the folate cycle and many other
examples that we just really couldn't
work with those axes without custom
customized input but we found really
happily to kind of are surprised that
there were many things that we could
work with were the people who kind of
self-selected being interested in
something like cognitive enhancement we
had a very high percentage of people
that reported and on different
performative tests responded very well
and so that's what this is but what we
started was saying when people are
seeking cognitive enhancement what are
they really seeking
they probably don't care about
arithmetic processing or digit span by
themselves they care about a whole
complex of cognitive and psychomotor
things that come together that lead to a
certain set of experience or states and
capabilities so it's like how do we
induce creative productive flow States
neuro chemically much more effectively
and so it involves focus and
concentration and task switching and
fluid intelligence and various aspects
of memory memory i/o and long-term
memory short-term memory digit span etc
along with things like Drive and
emotional resilience without creating
irritability and anxiousness and etc so
we're looking that whole complex of what
side effects are often created by some
smart drugs from the tropics when people
are pursuing some of the effects and
what's additional effects are actually
needed for a synergy of being able to do
really meaningful work and feel
optimized in the process and so we
started with that kind of cognitive
modeling and we looked at for each of
those psycho-emotional cognitive states
or capabilities how they map to
underlying physiology what's known about
which neurotransmitters which hormones
which underlying aspects of neural
structure etc are are associated and
this was from any various field of
integrative medicine or neuroscience etc
so we started to model out the
physiologic processes that mediate those
capabilities and then started to look at
which chemicals affect those physiologic
dynamics and then start to explore
synergies between them and etc so we
developed a nootropic database of about
500 chemicals that affected the pathways
we were looking at and so when we
narrowed it down to 42 in here obviously
we're including a lot of things we're
also not including a lot of things we're
including very specific dose ratios
forms and so most of the ingredients
have clinical trials showing the
specific things they do and then we have
a specific kind of process of hypothesis
generation of
we are seeking to effect positive
synergies and then we've done about
three years of you know preclinical data
where we don't have where we haven't had
formal placebo control etc and we're
just moving into doing clinical trials
right now we have a partner in the
neural biology department at Stanford
that's helping with it and a number of
other great science partners outside of
neuro hacker as well as the team inside
of neuro hacker and so we're just
engaging on our clinical trials we're
also developing an online assessment app
that can assess various cognitive
capabilities like you're mentioning
there's a few apps that do but again
we're going for comprehensive 'ti and
the can assess psycho structural and
psycho kind of emotional states so that
people will be able to use that app to
test how this is working but also that
they could test anything they could take
other nootropics they could start
meditating exercising and just really be
able to have a available resource for
tracking psycho cognitive effects better
right right so it's basically like like
a whole bunch of ingredients that have
pretty good robust empirical basis for
support and various degrees of
laboratory and clinical research
supporting their safety and their
efficacy but in terms of like putting
all this together I mean to be frank it
sounds like it's still you know I
haven't actually taken this and put it
through like you know double-blind peer
reviewed research quite yet you're just
kind of going off of each of the
individualize ingredients yeah we're
like I said we're in the beginning of
doing that but we haven't got all the
results back yet but it'll be soon our
first pilot trial will come back soon
what we did in the you know in the
preclinical phase was we had several
hundred people for a few years going
through the trials where they again this
was not properly blinded but they were
using quantified mind or Cambridge's
online cognitive assessment or various
cognitive assessments like that as well
as structured subjective reporting and
so we did get input on and specific data
on what was changing and in what
percentage of people and that was enough
to develop it to kind of the place that
we have and now moving into formal
clinical process okay got it cool well I
can speak
an N equals one experience that it it
seems to work quite well for me and I
suppose anyone else could try it as well
oh and by the way again I'll mention the
show notes just so you guys know that
I've got a phat discount on this stuff
over in the show notes just go to Ben
Greenfield Ventus comm slash neuro
hacker that's Ben Greenfield fitness
comm slash neuro hacker uhm I'll go
ahead and pick because you just said N
equals one this is one of the
interesting things we asked about
clinical trials in clinical trial says
does this particular chemical compound
process therapy do something across some
randomized database more than the
placebo does it's a it's a meaningful
test but obviously some people are on
one end of the bell curve effect and
some people are on the other end and
there's a whole bunch of variables as to
why that are just statistically averaged
into that bell curve and when we're
trying to do personalized medicine where
we would or personalized optimization
where we would do something different
for you than we would for anybody else
then clinical trials are not there's
still an important part of the
overarching process but they're not
adequate for N equals one optimization
and so quality is our first product to
go to market but more personalized
versions of it moving towards full
personalization and then not just
quality but many different kinds of
neuro technologies coming together our
goal is moving towards being able to do
appropriate synthesis of all the
biometrics and psycho metrics that
someone has to gain better insights into
what's going on in their system and
personalized optimization recommendation
which is an underlying AI problem and so
that's really what no hacker collective
is all about is how do we synthesize the
entire space right vet first and then
synthesize the space of everything
that's actually meaningful to be able to
affect people's cognitive psych
emotional mind brain interactions and
then based on the have about what's
actually going on for them personalize
those recommendations mm-hmm got it cool
I like it I'm all about mini testing as
you go through the stuff and again like
if you've got access
- to some of those neurofeedback
software or the the muse headband or you
know and back training or CNS tap test
or anything like that it's fun to play
with this stuff in that vein as well um
neural minerals you have neuro minerals
in there as well like lithium orotate
and magnesium three and eight and and
zinc picolinate
um one of the things I wanted to ask you
about Daniel because I used magnesium
you know I've used it in the past for
you know helping with sleep before bed
or helping to have a nice smooth bowel
movement the next morning you've got a
form of magnesium called magnesium three
and eight in there and most mostly what
I've used has been magnesium citrate why
have you used magnesium three and eight
as your primary form of a mineral and
then kind of a bigger picture question
why minerals in general as an inclusion
in this compound yeah so magnesium three
and eight is magnesium bound to
threonine and just like magnesium
citrate is bound the citric acid there's
many different forms that you can bind
magnesium to that will either have
better or worse absorption overall or
more specific absorption targeting some
of the many different things that mag
needs and this would be true for any
mineral and so mag teen which is the
first connect patented version of
magnesium three and eight had very
interesting and very unique trials
showing increased brain levels of
magnesium specifically cerebrospinal
fluid levels of magnesium that were
tested in terms of double-blind placebo
control and actually for this since we
were we weren't testing subjective
effects they were testing specifically
cerebrospinal fluid levels and placebo
didn't matter that much but contesting
it against other forms of magnesium and
found increased elevation of
cerebrospinal magnesium levels that no
other form of magnesium tested had been
able to show so when we're looking
specifically at magnesium's effect for
neural health magnesium three and eight
seems to be the best form magnesium
currently known for increasing
cerebrospinal and brain levels of
magnesium now that doesn't mean that
magnesium citrate or other forms of
magnesium won't have additional benefits
we think that topical magnesium
magnesium
oil is really beneficial because you've
actually got rate limiting factors in
terms of just GI absorption of magnesium
in any form so going through other
mechanisms is good but this one is is
very interesting and it seems to be from
everything we know so far unique and
it's neurologic benefits yeah and so
minerals in general are basically to to
do things like modulate you know some of
the cytokines and the e okosan oit's
that are created during neuro normal
neural processing and I know there are
there are other things that are
necessary for like redox reactions and
cellular neural metabolism and a lot of
the other things you'd mean minerals for
I just don't see them in a lot of
nootropic compounds and especially this
form of magnesium I'm totally on board
with you I use in addition to the
magnesium citrate that I mentioned like
a transdermal topical magnesium
especially on sore muscles but I think
it's interesting that you guys have
magnesium in this compound as well know
not to get too too nitty gritty but I've
got a couple of other questions about
ingredients than like a usage question
for you amino acids you you have a whole
broad spectrum of amino acids in there
and I don't think it's it's much of a
secret any longer that amino acids are
used as neurotransmitter precursors and
so if you're low in protein low in amino
acids especially if you're vegan or
vegetarian and I know amino acids are
crucial but then you also have something
in there called choline donors choline
donors why is it that someone want to
include a choline donor when they're
taking something like a blend of amino
acids and minerals and nootropics and
things of that nature
right so there's a number of different
things we're trying to affect here so
neurotransmitters are one of the
significant effects specifically for you
know the immediate effects and affecting
things like ngf and BDNF for us
neurogenesis are some of the longer-term
effects there's many different pathways
we're trying to affect one of the
neurotransmitters that's very
meaningfully involved in memory and
cognitive function is the acetylcholine
pathway and so we have various choline
donors which are actually providing the
coal
that gets acetylated into acetyl choline
you'll notice we also have acetyl donors
both in the acetyl carnitine and the
acetyl tyrosine where the amino acid has
its own benefit and we're making sure
that the acetyl groups aren't going to
be the rate limiting factor for
acetylcholine production and then the
the rest of that acetylcholine pathway
involves things like you know b5 is
involved in the actual production of
acetylcholine the acetylcholine esterase
inhibitors like huperzine a make sure
that the acetylcholine and the
presynaptic neuron can actually get
across the synapse effectively and then
the NMDA modulator so new pepped in
particular but there's a few other
things increase the postsynaptic neurons
ability to receive and process the
acetylcholine all of this is part of
what we call a comprehend see the
choline pathway support and the various
different choline donors so you've got
like city choline and alpha GPC and
central Phenix seen but also things like
uridine uridine has a number of
interesting effects but it one of them
is that it does convert into city
choline we have this blend because
you've got various peak plasma times and
you when you want a more kind of
consistent peak plasma over a longer
period of time you factor that and
you've also got kind of differential
delivery where both alpha GPC and city
choline are gonna affect peripheral
nerves more than central phenoxy ins
effect on central nervous system and so
this is all part of what we would call
acetylcholine precursors and support
okay got it so so it's the same reason I
mean you you hear about things like
choline turnover and about how you can
get excessively fatigued if you try to
get your brain to fire too quickly
without replenishing it with things like
alpha GPC or choline and all you've done
is you've taken a whole bunch of
different forms of choline like the side
of choline and the central Phenix scene
and the alpha GPC and put them all
together in there so you're essentially
just like covering all the choline bases
although all that would be called the
cholinergic bases
right now there's obviously many famous
forms of choline like dmae or
phosphatidylcholine or whatever that
we're not using in here for various
reasons and then the specific doses
you'll notice that the city choline or
the alpha GPC are lower doses than if
people were using those by themselves
because we're looking at the entire
choline load to not make people over
cholinergic factoring all of them so yes
this I would say it's 101 of no tropics
to look at the acetylcholine pathway and
whenever someone starts to do a racetam
of some kind or racetam like compound
that's going to be a NMDA modulator for
a single choline uptake the first kind
of this principle of stacking is usually
have some form of choline donor that's
bound to it so something like central
phenoxy NAND new pep together is a very
classic stack but then as you start to
add
uridine and b5 and huperzine a you just
get a more comprehensive effect right
and I know in many cases you know people
will like to consume you know a
nootropic compound like this with a
fatty rich meal you know to help out
with some of those choline precursors
and absorption in general you know like
have it with eggs or have it you know
like in my case with out with a little
smoothie with some coconut milk and
seeds and nuts but the interesting thing
and I think kind of the unique thing
about this qualia supplement is there
are two bottles that you get when you
buy it you get a what's called a step 1
and a step 2 and only step 2 is to be
taken with food I'm curious what why'd
you why'd you switch things up as far as
as far as the bottling goes in the need
for step 1 and step 2 yeah it wasn't
originally that way in terms of before
it was productized and we were in
development but as you notice there
there's a lot of ingredients and there's
significant quantity on a lot of the
ingredients so there's there's a lot of
total grams so average dose being three
step one and five relatively large
tablets of step two now that was just
what it actually took to get the
kind of effects we were looking for and
so part of the reason that we split it
up it has to do with GI absorption
specifically so there's a number of
compounds that actually absorb faster
without food because they're not
competing for absorption site in the
intestines and they're the compounds
that are going to start producing the
immediate effects that people usually
want to notice quickly so most of those
are in step one and step two are things
that either absorb better with food or
could otherwise create nausea if not
taken with food and so when the whole
thing was combined you either take it
all with lower absorption on the things
that are in step one and slower
immediate kind of effects or run a risk
of nausea taking it all not with food
and decreased absorption on something so
this was the best way that we could
support absorption of the whole stack
okay got it so you take basically the
the rule is on this stuff and then this
is the way diving usually works
perfectly you know I I know that the
dosages vary widely you guys have dosage
recommendations on your website and on
the back of the bottle but I've been
taking four to five of step one when I
get up in the morning and then later on
with breakfast anywhere between
depending on the the day's level of
activity three to five of the step two
with actually I think it took four this
morning because I knew I'd be talking to
you and when I talked to smart people I
I need some kind of advantage to be able
to keep up with with with you guys so so
yeah that that's interesting the one-two
combo approach the doses are obviously
going to be very different based on
people's sensitivity based on their body
weight based on the desired level of
effect they want to have based on if
they have used other know tropics or
stimulants and in the past where they've
actually you know maybe created certain
kinds of dependence so there's a lot of
factors that are involved we have a
ratio that is based on if it wasn't
split into one and two if it was one
stack what would it be and so three of
step one and five of step two represents
that ratio and kind of average dosage
and people can either start there and
adjust accordingly or if there are
sensitivity concerns to start on the
lowest side and then progressively move
up as they feel comfortable with it and
one of the reasons you might use less of
step two is that many of the coaling
donors are in there and there are some
people that are much more sensitive to
getting over cholinergic and so this is
one of those aspects where you really
want to get into personalization some
people really don't need much than weave
calling donors at all and other people
benefit from higher doses profoundly and
so one of the things that we are working
on and we'll be developing and releasing
soon are before we get to full
customization based off of genetics and
clinical chemistry we are going to be
doing kind of phenotype specific
versions that look at in general under
or over methylating under or over
cholinergic under over catecholamine
Uruk and this will provide better
effects for more people but these are
steps got it got it I'm in a couple of
the questions is this okay like if if
somebody competes in like a sanction
Organization sport like like a wada
sanctions board or you saw the sanction
supporters sent you know something
sanctioned by the world anti-doping
Association or you know the Olympics or
something like that um there's a there's
a whole like cocktail you know whole
shotgun of stuff in here um is it
actually safe like is acceptable to take
if you're competing in a sport like that
very possibly not so for instance
there's a small dose of DHEA and I know
DHEA is on the banned list for a number
of organizations and sports it's fine
for other organizations and sports so
this is not something that we keep an
updated list on on our website so I
would say anyone who is being tested
should look at what the banned list
ingredients are for them and then check
to make sure this is right for them
again we will in the future have
versions that don't have DHEA don't have
caffeine but when we were wanting to
release you know an initial product that
would be the most well tolerated and
effective across the largest
number of people this was the best
starting place so this is not going this
is not going to as far as we would have
any reason to believe show up on any
kind of illegal narcotics drug testing
there are no illegal narcotics but as
far as anti-doping one should look into
that themselves yeah I actually think
it's kind of sad because like DHEA is
it's not an anabolic steroid it doesn't
act like an anabolic steroid it's the
free of side effects it doesn't produce
any of the negative side effects of an
anabolic steroid and I still don't
understand why wada would would ban
something like that that you find in
freakin like raw butter and cod liver
oil and red palm oil and pumpkin seeds
and ghee I mean it's it's kind of
interesting that they would that they
would straight-up say something like
that when I know they're trying to keep
people from using a cocktail of
potentially dangerous anabolic agents
but to me that the DHEA part of things
is a bit silly especially when you know
folks can can wander into Walgreens and
get you know enormous amounts of DHEA
just right off the shelf and make a lot
of a lot of folks don't really realize
that sometimes sometimes the the Olympic
anti-doping laboratories in the world
anti-doping agencies and you know some
of these agencies they they they paint
with a really really broad brush and
annoyingly broad brush sometimes so it's
kind of interesting but I'll go ahead pH
a is the precursor in terms of the
endogenous steroid pathways and a block
steroid pathways the precursor to most
of the androgens testosterone and other
androgens and so I don't know what their
process in coming up with including the
HEA was but if it was simply just saying
this is part of the you know conversion
pathway to testosterone you know you can
see how they would come up with it but
yeah I agree especially in terms of dose
dependence we see various degrees of
adrenal fatigue so commonly and there is
this pregnenolone steal preferential
shunting of the precursor to both
cortisol and DHEA the hormone
pregnenolone moving to cortisol whenever
there is you know chronic ongoing stress
which is
almost everyone and so elevated cortisol
to DHEA ratio is common enough and
damaging enough that some DHEA was
included in the stack for general HPA
support yeah yeah interesting I mean I'm
I'm all in favor of it as a supplement
but you know like like for me for
example because I know I know now people
are like jump with you the microphones
asking you know how I can be competing
and using something that has DHEA in it
you know with good conscience the fact
is I would never use anything that
contains a bad substance leading up to a
race and in many cases you'll see that
things that are banned for in season
competition are taking right before a
race are not banned for things like like
offseason use so there's that that
consideration as well now obviously 42
different freakin ingredients in this
stuff so it it's it kind of returns full
circle to what we talked about in the
very beginning Daniel how a big part of
this is to rather than just putting
caffeine in your body or rather just
putting say like Mon daffodil in your
body or rather just than just putting
like you know coleus forskohlii or silt
up or oxytocin or any of these other
things in your body basically you're
developing more of like a full systems
approach but one one more kind of
big-picture question I have for you is
it seems as though neuro hacker
collective your website is kind of like
poised to go above and beyond just
creating some kind of like a like a
super powerful nootropic and if you were
to name say like the the biggest one or
two things that you have coming down the
pipeline that you think are going to
kind of like flip the industry on its
head when it comes to cognitive
enhancement is there anything in
particular that you guys are developing
and your deep dark secret Batman
laboratories that you want to let people
know about
yeah we're working both internally in
terms of our own R&D department as well
as externally where we work with various
universities and research labs that are
doing things we find really interesting
to both kind of support them in their
science development as well as look at
synthesizing multiple technologies
together so working on many different
technologies our goal in neuro hacker is
to be able to curate the cutting-edge of
applied neuroscience through a complex
systems framework and progressively
support better personalization of that
for all kinds of secular optimization
goals for people and so you know we're
working on some some very interesting
things in terms of Delta sleep induction
right now and how to increase the
efficiency and effectiveness of Delta
sleep working on some very interesting
things in terms of how to prevent and
reverse some of the brain processes that
are involved in cognitive decline and
Alzheimer's dementia working on more
scalable Diagnostics where people can
actually be able to assess more
different biomarkers and psycho metrics
less expensively more often to get much
better quantified self data you know
lots of things lots of things I would
say the underlying key thing that we're
working on that we're most interested in
is a complex systems AI artificial
intelligence processor they can look at
all the people's biometrics and
psychometrics not just in regards to a
specific reference range but all of them
in relationship to each other and look
at why are these biometrics the way they
are in causal relationship to other
biometrics and the psycho metrics what's
actually causing what what are the kind
of complex Cascades because you know
like when you were asking about TBI
earlier someone can have an event where
there's some you know mild traumatic
brain injury from a car accident or
whatever it doesn't show up on a PET
scan they are told they don't have brain
injury because it's not
structural right it's funky right
afterwards there are there's any number
of symptoms that could occur so say
anxiety is one of the possibilities
based on which neural networks are
affected but someone could also have
anxiety from a gut brain access disorder
from a from a parasite or a pathogen
that affected their microbiome or from a
methylation disorder or from exciter
toxicity from mold or and so there's to
us there's no such thing as anxiety in a
meaningfully treatable way there's many
different pathways that can lead into
that set of over excitatory neurologic
processes and to be able to have a
better set of insights of how would you
do differential Diagnostics across all
those things to see what is most likely
to be most supportive for someone and
we're interested in the non-medical just
wellness optimizing direct-to-consumer
space as well as the integrative
medicine you know medical space and
we're in in deeper phases of some things
later phases of other things but what
interests us the most is not just
developing specific technologies but
being able to really curate that and
synthesize the entire field ongoingly
and make that otherwise unmanageable
amount of information meaningfully
accessible to people hmm cool I like it
well the website I will link to in the
show notes just go to Ben Greenfield
fitness comm slash neuro hacker if you
don't know how to spell neuro then you
should probably be taking nootropics
but it's an e uro hacker Ben Greenfield
fitness comm slash neuro hacker and when
you go there I'll link not only to
Daniels website but also what I'm
including in there is a supplement you
can do your or a supplement a a discount
that you can use to get 15% off of any
of these these nootropic compounds the
quality of stuff that you'll find over
on over on on Daniel site and also
linked to a few the other little things
that we talked about like tDCS and the
international light therapy and
meditation headbands and some of that
other fun stuff you can play around with
and in the meantime Daniel I want to
thank you for for giving your time and
come on the show and sharing all this
incredibly interesting / mind-blowing /
neuroplasticity developing information
with us then when I mentioned that we're
seeking to not only develop technologies
but to beg curate synthesize them I see
that is exactly what you do and do it
through an informational framework and
you know also a curatorial framework in
you know the whole bio hacking and
optimized wellness space and I just have
a huge respect for the service you
provide to so many people so it's
honored to be here with you well thanks
man
I appreciate it and folks are you
listening in try this stuff Ben
Greenfield fitness comm / neuro hacker
take advantage of that very cool
discount code that Daniel set up for us
and also when you go to Ben Greenfield
fitness comm / neuro hacker be sure to
pipe in with your own questions comments
feedback anything you want to contribute
to the conversation and either myself or
Daniel will pitch in and reply to you
and so until next time I'm Ben
Greenfield along with Daniel I get to
say his last name one more time
Smok dan berger signing out from Ben
Greenfield fitness comm have a healthy
week green fields with this podcast
Oh to Ben Greenfield fitness.com for
even more cutting edge fitness and
performance advice