it came up that you mentioned Young's
attitude towards psychedelics was overly
I think restrictive I think he had you
know he wrote some famous letters I've
actually released some videos on this
channel a video on this channel that's
been watched over a hundred thousand
times regarding what Jung said about
psychedelics it was something that
caught on and people are very interested
in it and you read those comments and
some people you know resonate with the
wisdom of the words and other people
like young and really missing missing
the point here and of course he was
writing before there had been of Gordon
not even the psychedelic Renaissance
even the actual the the sixties
themselves or at least we couldn't see
them in in hindsight things were still
in development and he talks about
mescaline and what-have-you and while
his view I think is fairly too
restrictive and although from also from
the anthropological sense as you as you
mentioned there is a sense that the one
of the key issues he speaks to is the
importance of well if you're going to
sort of touch the sphere where the paint
is made as he turns it if you're going
to take this rocket ship to some of this
material then there's a certain amount
of responsibility in terms of you better
be prepared to have to really integrate
this in a way that's not going to be
destructive of you fundamentally and
right as we as we've mentioned this this
integration is something that yes of
course takes place within and we can do
inner work and in a practice but this
also takes place in relationship and in
relationships of context and part of the
issue was with the sixties is that well
yeah we can say certain things about
Timothy Leary and then and sort of an
inappropriate kind of crack down as
motivated by whether economic reasons
like stupid political reason like a
whole bunch of stuff there's still a
sense in which we were as a culture sort
of quite cut off from an integration
with those traditions of our history
which could be though
context which could help ground the kind
of appropriate integration of this
material and so mm-hmm sure having a
kind of spiritual traditionalist
framework the sort of ritual and you
know often maybe shamanistic but sort of
the initiation framework and cultural
containment that comes with traditional
practice yes yes yeah and I'd like to
sort of presents that the the frame of
that as in this house party you
mentioned there's a certain like that
the moment we find ourselves in is one
that I think opens itself to a lot of
there's a clearing there's a lot of
available energy there's this important
need to to integrate that which has been
broken apart and there's a kind of Wild
West nurse to some structures that that
may come may form now we have loads of
wisdom traditions the lessons in the 60s
in a way right well I mean in some ways
as you alluded to there was more
conventional structure but as regards
this stuff the 60s had an extremely Wild
West kind of approach right I mean
that's that and that was the kind of
critique of the the D contextualization
and the dis embeddedness of psychedelics
in that period right not respecting I
mean you know that a notion of set and
setting but like there already was set
in setting that was back there it's just
like you have to ask you know the mass
attack or something what they were doing
with the mushrooms yeah but I agree with
you there's a lot of available energy
and it's it's extremely open yeah yes
yeah I I hear you on that so an
interesting question I have for you is
and maybe it might be worthwhile to
speak to alchemy a little bit and the
kind of mystery that alchemy is shrouded
in and of course Young took a great
interest in alchemy I myself have found
such incredibly helpful and instrumental
and continually
right possibilities but found in the
phrase solve a at coagula which of
course maps so well on to you know how
we could think from a cognitive science
perspective and so there's the alchemy
piece and then there's the shroud of
mystery of that I'm interested in the
relationship between young and mystery
societies and I'm also interested in
that frame being something that can be
helpful II brought into this and ongoing
conversations which can help us
understand how to appropriately relate
to mystery now right and what the so
yeah I'll stop there yeah yeah yeah so I
think that actually does really usefully
tie together and for the psychedelics to
I mean you know when we talk about there
having you know having an appropriate
cultural context in which can sort of
interpret one's you know spiritual and
initiatory and psychedelic experiences
it's true that having something to do
that is highly effective right having
something that allows you to to construe
what's happening to you and and a way of
making use of it and so on and so forth
right but the tendency very often for
people that make that critique I think
is to then lapse into a kind of you know
sort of retro of shamanism right it's
like what we have to do is is go back to
the original indigenous model now that's
not to say that the original indigenous
model isn't a good one right it might be
highly effective but like at some point
somebody made that up right like it's an
experimental process that somebody made
up some humans made up or you know I
guess if you have a if you have a
different sort of metaphysical frame
maybe it was delivered to them by by
being or beings but the point is like at
some point they didn't have it you know
at some point some humans got into
Mexico and the ate mushrooms for the
first time and when they did they
started figuring out what the hell they
were going to do with what was hitting
them right there was a real time
experimental interpretation that means
that we should
ignore the practical wisdoms of the
humans that have come before us they
weren't stupid right they just didn't
know some things that we know in the way
that we don't know some things that they
knew right we have a different base of
knowledge but the fact is they weren't
dumb humans are smart they do smart
things and they do effective things
which is one of the reasons why I'm so I
really like to thump the pulpit about
magic because it reasons me off when
people treat magic like it's a bunch of
superstitious Buncombe and they don't
understand that what it is is a highly
honed sophisticated set of psycho
technologies that have been developed
around the globe for millennia right in
order to do certain things and we ignore
it at our peril but anyway okay so these
the indigenous practices around this
stuff were tinkered with they were
experimented but they're modeled like
that's how we develop things
correspondingly right we can draw useful
insights from that but that doesn't
necessarily mean if we stop there now
the Western ethos a lot of a time
unfortunately around these things is
what I like to call a fast food atom
bomb ethos right so in the Andes they
chew coca leaves by the quitter have tea
and it invigorates them and a combats or
altitude sickness and whatever right and
that's good but no we concentrate it
down to a white powder and then further
turning into smokeable rocks like we
love reducing things to their poisonous
essence and then consuming them that
fast food is the same gig it's like we
took food which is good for you and
concentrated into a thing that tastes
better than food and it's more
nutritious than food and is vastly
deadlier than food right we saw the
Bliss point as they call them in the
food industry right so we love doing
that kind of stuff that's kind of that's
the core of the instrumental
technological impulse in sort of the
Western ethos and that run out of
control within the framework of
initiation of spiritual advancement is
going to be a problem that's kind of
sometimes how it gets and you get hints
of that in sort of the Silicon Valley
micro dosing culture which is you know
the joke right and it's it's not a fair
caricature in some ways but like in the
sixties it was
turn on tune in drop out right leave
society and now it's like take small
doses of lxd to increase your
productivity coding for Microsoft or
whatever you know so there are lessons
to be pulled from the original context
that's what I'm getting at but that
doesn't mean that innovation stops there
it means that we respect those models
and then we innovate and we combine them
which is what humans do and what we have
always done and that's especially so
when you consider that like it's all
well and good to go and consult
indigenous models for you know ayahuasca
or for you know psilocybin mushrooms
right but what about LSD it doesn't
exist in nature does that mean we can't
have a relationship with it does it mean
that it's not a useful tool do we just
use the same tools since we would use
for a natural component like the answer
is we have to make it up and we have to
make it up based on what we already know
and some good inferences and an
experimental mindset right we have to
kind of experiment and make it up and
the reason that I bring this up within
the alchemical framework is that one of
the things that I love most about
alchemy as a kind of counterculture
expression of spirituality within the
whole period in which it's operating
because it's always it's never the
dominant right alchemy as always
hermetic could tell the sidelines it's
always Gnostic it's always the weirdo
spirituality but it's also deeply deeply
experimental intrinsically inherently
and not that you you don't discover the
alchemists secret recipe and then follow
all the steps right that's amateur
cooking is following the recipe cooking
is about learning what the components of
the operations are you want to learn how
to cook in the kitchen you learn how the
functions of ingredients work you learn
what it means to be sour and what salt
is good for and right and you learn
after you learn how to sautee and you
learn how to braise and you learn how to
that you learn operations and you learn
things and then you just get in there
and sometimes you turn out a meal and
it's frankly it's dog share because
you've overstepped yourself and put in
too much tarragon or something but like
its intrinsically experimental and
transformational in the way that like
cooking is
alchemy is like that except what you're
cooking is being and when I say when I
say that alchemy and cooking I mean I
really mean that
you know a lot of people have taken up
baking in the pandemic and I thought
that was really interesting symbolically
interesting as a neo Union but also just
like really interesting when I took a
baking 1517 years ago what really threw
me was how alchemical baking really was
you take a bunch of garbage that
basically isn't food and stir it
together in a bowl and then mysteriously
there are magical invisible things in
there that produce gas or something I
don't know you have to punch it a few
times when it gets too big and then
eventually you put it in under some heat
and it comes out as perfect golden light
spongy things that resemble neither
flour nor water like there's something
deeply magical when you get good at
making when you could goose like
pastries and stuff that's just pure
sorcery
right now alchemy similar
that's formation all kind of approach to
things and you can see it because yeah
chemical defects are difficult to
translate in part because they're
records of experiments written in an
idiosyncratic symbolic language yes
they're borrowing from the previous
masters but basically what they do is
they get a few core precepts right they
get Solvay at Caligula and these things
are heuristics they're guidelines they
just like try to remember right you get
the axiom of Maria prophet ISA right the
one baguettes the two the two baguettes
the three which gets the fourth that is
the one and it's like you could sit all
day and contemplate what that means you
know you get some of the you know you
get salt you get sulphur you get mercury
you get the four elements you get the
various sort of astrological things like
there's a lot of stuff you can absorb in
operations but at the end of the day
what you're doing is experimental an
idiosyncratic you start out and you know
if the goal is to turn the primal
material the base matter into
philosophical gold right it's like well
question one what's the base matter
well what's most base and then people
find all kinds of things you know
dirt dead bodies lead you know what's
most base like and that's a
fundamentally it's like starting from
this weird thing it's like having a
formula but not knowing what any of the
components in it mean right so it's not
imitative it's not imitative in the
ritual sense that absorbing a standard
catechism or something is imitative you
go to church you learn it wrote wrote
like I'm not Catholic but my mom's
Catholic so I went to Catholic Church as
a kid and I consider Catholicism quite
beautiful I lift I wish they'd stuck
with the Latin but anyway um but you
know you learn the routine you learn
when you stand up you learn when you sit
down you learn when you shake horns you
learn when they open the book you learn
when you go up and eat the bread like
they're right and that's a certain kind
of spiritual ritual thing but alchemy
isn't that there are some rituals in it
maybe but then after that it's deeply
fundamentally experimental and if you
believe Young's account the core of
alchemy at least in this particular form
because for sure there were people that
were just doing chemistry experiments
and they produced lots of the dyes and
glassblowing techniques
they had important contributions science
and technology and there were the people
who really just thought that they were
actually gonna get for real gold out of
it and they also did all kinds of work
and got good funding from the king of
Prague and right so there's almost
people at various levels of control but
for the people who are the like deep
imagistic spiritual alchemists there's
always this microcosm macrocosm aspect
which is that in some way altering
myself alters the world and the way that
the world alters myself and you can
treat that you know you can step back
and scoff at it from a modern
perspective and treat it as though
that's like I don't know some kind of
dumb superstition or like you know weird
unverifiable or you can kind of and say
well what would that mean charitably and
if you start doing that I've had good
luck using cognitive science could do it
I try to sort of inhabit what would that
mean and like if you do that it's just
obviously trivially true like of course
we project ourselves into the
environment people project all the time
we take it as a matter of course right
we have to you know I'm I often say to
my students for instance right I'm
fascinated by people's responses to
movies right so we go from moral panic
in for a few years around violence and
movies are kids seeing too much violence
I don't know why I grew up on the most
violent gory sex-filled
swearing it imaginably failed films I
don't seem to it well I mean I'm that's
crazy
but actually maybe I've just explained a
lot anyway but what I mean is I don't
think it's damaged in burnable way and I
sort of I'm puzzled when people suggest
that even though it might be sensitive
right there are some kids who are gonna
be really sensitive to it you don't want
to freak kids out but anyway um you know
so would people get into fiction okay
when you're watching a movie and you're
following along and you're invested okay
you know it's not real but who is it
who's the you that knows that it isn't
real on one level you know it's not real
but on another level you clearly don't
because if you did you wouldn't
experience emotional reaction
to what was happening right like that's
just it's just really obviously true
it's one of the best arguments for the
psychodynamic hypothesis that I can
think of and it's like yeah on one level
if I turn to you in the middle of the
movie and I say are werewolves real you
will say no werewolves are not real
although who knows really but werewolves
are not real aliens are not real right
Marvel superheroes are not real and yet
you are you will experience highs and
lows of emotional connection and notably
the predictability of that stuff doesn't
matter either right stories can be
highly predictable a good
well-constructed rom-com always has the
same structure boy meets girl boy loses
girl boy gets girl back and the thing
that the beauty of that structure is it
works every time if you do it right like
we just like we just like that and we
like that structure so your investment
in a story right and some people will
say things like well movies today are so
realistic your brain can't tell the
difference and that's horseshit it's not
true because if I go to the park and I
watch Shakespeare in the Park
right where the here in Toronto we have
a large Park High Park at the edge of
the city edge anyway we have this big
park and there's sort of a natural
amphitheater and they stage Shakespeare
in the summer so you can go and sit on
the limestone and watch them put on
these Shakespeare productions I can get
emotionally invested in Shakespeare in
the park and maybe he can tell me that
that's because my brain is mistaking
what's happening on stage for reality in
that sense it's not because it's so
realistic I can't tell the difference
lissa preposterous it's obviously not
realistic what I'm emotionally invested
right why because some other part of my
mind takes that very seriously okay so
that's projection in a nutshell same
thing you know you have a shitty bearing
you take it out on your partner or your
friend projection somebody who
constantly berate other people for the
flaw which they obviously possess but
don't seem able to note projection the
person who keeps getting into the same
relationship over and over and over
again and don't seem to notice that
they're dating like the same person and
the relationship was blowing up in the
same way projection
like these mechanisms are operating all
the time and it would be hard if you say
that they're not like I would you know
right so the idea is given that this
projection exists the essence of the
alchemical project is projection in
alchemy classical alchemy your
psychological contents and symbolic
contents are taking as the canvas of
their projection chemical interactions
and so as they happen you're perceiving
what occurs in symbolic terms to
chemicals mixed together they turn white
that you has a certain kind of magical
spiritual significance right the albedo
white may or whatever but anything can
be a substrate theoretically for the
kind of projection and so when I think
about alchemy I don't necessarily limit
myself to the idea of beakers and
bottles and fluids what I try to do is I
try to look at what are we actually
talking about if we take at face value
charitable face value the sort of
description of the alchemists that
they're manipulating things outside
themselves and thereby manipulating
things inside themselves and in changing
their internal reality changing the way
that they perceive the world and
therefore the only universe of the
experience right so changeable oneself
changes the world and in changing the
world you change yourself right through
a projective mechanism well what does
that mean
so can I tell you a good story jeez okay
so so we talked at the outset but I
don't know if it'll make the cut that
I'm an old-school role player so
role-playing games like Dungeons &
Dragons I've been playing these things
since I was four or five and I've been
running games as a dungeon master which
is not primarily an S&M kink thing in
this context since since I was like 10
since I was like 10 and I'm not a I'm
not a forever DM as they say but
certainly I run a lot and have run for
many many thousands of hours my actual
if I if I had to say that I had one sort
of field of practice that in my life in
terms of hours spent it's probably
role-playing I've spent more hours
playing role-playing games writing
role-playing games running role-playing
games that I have virtually any other
activity and deeply infuses the way that
I think about other things the
role-playing games are interesting
because the DNA of things like Dungeons
& Dragons has come to be in the past of
the years deeply influential on other
aspects of recreational culture
it definitely informs mass cultural
phenomena like the popularity of Lord of
the Rings right not the book which
precedes the m.d. right and is an
influence on but the way that that
catches in the culture Game of Thrones
right there there are so many things now
and like the the broad adoption of geek
culture they start dominance in fact of
geek culture in the pop culture sphere
right that it's super heroes and
monsters and space aliens all that stuff
was just pure geekery one of the ways
that it's also inflected is that the
language the mechanical language of D&D
has spread out so like Pokemon how many
kids in the world have played pokémon
while Pokemon have hit points HP that's
the nd they've got levels that's the
empty being be innovated a lot of these
things that we now think of a central to
the kind of game play where you were
adopting persona where you're not just
pac-man who it's I'm not sure what pet
men's motivations are right instead you
have this a customizable person and you
want to live in their life I reach out
recently because of lockdown had the
pleasure to finish the witcher 3 which i
don't get a chance to buy a lot of
videogames but i have to say it it's a
maybe triumphs in the human spirit is
strong but it was very compelling right
280 hours I put into this thing right
and I got other things I got to do like
it was that kind of compelling and where
it was compelling it was compelling
because it borrows these structures from
conventional tabletop role-playing okay
so so the story I want to tell so I run
a lot of role-playing games and I run a
lot of different kinds and there is a
game that I run for a bunch of my
colleagues at the University which is
called godlike and godlike isn't sort of
hunting monsters with swords the the
basic setup of godlike is superheroes in
world war ii okay so if you can imagine
the first Captain America movie except
with all of the Avengers and you're
fighting Nazis
that's godlike so a bunch of profs and
people right these are people who have
often Akemi and
in history and superhero films get
together and we've been playing this
game for five years right try to get
together every once in a while and they
battle Nazis across across Europe with
super heroic persona I don't want to
name names because I know some people
are are concerned about the impact that
this might have on the perception of
their career so I won't name names but
the point is this in the second act of
this long game and like five years is a
long time the players have been going
through this is going someplace where
the players have been going through a
long thing where they were going through
the Pacific and the crux of it turned
out that the villains were a group of a
breakaway sect of apocalyptic Buddhists
okay who we're trying to cleanse the
world by dragging it into the lowest of
Ichi Hill that's what it turned out the
big plot was that doesn't matter that
much they work their way through the
Buddhist temple and finally they come
across these sort of doomsday device
that these apocalyptic heretical
Buddhists have come up with which is
called the black Buddha okay and so they
come on it's this massive black statue
which is composed of kind of liquid
agony as I described it right which
they've been drawing out of people to
create something and the idea is to
create a kind of singularity of so much
suffering that it like drags the world
down to hell and cleanses okay so fine
so the day that I was supposed to run
this game this final game where they
dealt with the black Buddha I was not in
a good place I was depressed and and I
was experiencing really deep waves of
nihilism and anxiety and depression some
around the environment some around
politics some around my own aging and
the imminence of death like the sorts of
things human beings deal with but I was
having a pretty bad run and I was a bit
burnt out with work that didn't help
I felt like I was pointed the wrong way
but I had been going through a really
bleak stretch and I had cancelled the
game the last time because I felt so
terrible but again it's coming out to us
like I can't just keep canceling like I
have to get out there and do this thing
right so so first off in the morning I'm
like I can't handle this I'm life's not
just in a good place I can't I can't get
out and perform
in this way I can't do spontaneous
storytelling interactive storytelling in
this way and then I made this decision
and I was like no I am gonna go I am
gonna go and what I'm gonna do is I'm
going to pour myself into this thing so
here's what happens they get to the
black Buddha and they at first they do
all the things that players do basically
in these kinds of games they shoot at it
and that does nothing so embrace this
pass this over to rebel you can't you
can't shoot existential horror to death
so but then gradually because they're a
smart bunch and they're concerned with
this sort of thing somebody finally
realizes right oh the only way to
transform this thing is from within and
so one after another players are like I
jump inside of it and they jump their
characters in and at this moment I I
began to run a kind of I don't know like
psycho-spiritual gauntlet on them which
is to say that I started to issue this
like stream of consciousness for grind
which was partly based on the concerns
of their characters right because their
characters made for a few years their
characters have well-developed
biographies and stuff right so it
started by drilling into some of the
deep concerns of the characters like one
of the characters wife had recently left
him for a dentist and so I got at that
character by questioning the reality of
love but I mean I did it not just is
love real I did it with the full force
of everything that I could bring to bear
in terms of philosophical nihilism and
materialism about love just being
chemicals and reproduction of robots and
right all that stuff love is not real a
blast oh another character right not
just the character but also the player
is deeply concerned with questions
around enlightenment right and around
spiritual alignment and I blasted that
character with enlightenment is a lie
it's self delusion it's brain rotting
masturbation it's just your meditation
it's disturbing yourself off and
checking over the world and like I
brought everything I had to bear and
watch them sort of twist on the pin and
the responses that the players gave in
those contexts they rapidly figured out
the game here the game is I'm going to
vomit I'm gonna vomit the worst
blackest things that I can imagine right
and your job is you are going to summon
from within your character right and and
your own experience something to counter
that and that's what they did they
started giving you the counter-arguments
well no love is real because dead know
like enlightenment and wisdom a real
thing and gradually they sort of shrank
the black boot away until eventually it
evaporated and then their characters
walked out quite stunned and I think
we're apt to the scene shortly
thereafter the players themselves look
shaken right and they were a couple of
them contacted me afterwards and relaxed
what was that like
right but notably they really felt that
there was something powerful that they
had gotten from that there was a kind of
ritual participatory transformative
experience that goes way beyond
like I don't want to give people the
idea this is what's happening in every
D&D game I'm a weirdo but but right
there was this powerful thing that they
participated in but also quite notable
for me was that I left feeling better
and feeling transformed and why because
rather than sitting in the dark and
wrestling my own demons I put my demons
on the table and bodied them and I let
my friends fight them and I couldn't
have just done that if I had just sat
there crying at the table and going
everything seems bleak we've all had
that experience where I feel like
and our friends are like well it's not
that bad but that's not what I did
instead right and I'm not saying this is
like some genius war move it was mostly
intuition but the observation that I had
after the fact was right i externalized
it into something that was symbolic and
then symbolically speaking my friends
banded together to take the demon on
with everything they had and I in turn
was the devil's advocate I spoke for the
demon and not just blasting what the
characters believe or what their players
know sorry what their characters believe
but also the players what mattered at
them now you got to be careful with this
kind of stuff that would be down tree
crossing in lots of contexts right like
it almost gots the line with therapeutic
techniques and I'm aware of that but at
the same time I think that marks are
really powerful it points at something
and I think it's something that it's not
yet well understood but it's very
central to my understanding of alchemy
and projection what I call narrative
alchemy the idea that characters are a
much better substrate for inner
transformation ultimately speaking than
chemicals chemicals are predictable but
so are characters to some extent and
characters absorb our projections more
easily that's what we're sad when the
Harry Potter books end and it's why it's
why people pestered Sherlock Holmes or
Arthur Conan Doyle to bring back
Sherlock Holmes but they couldn't take
the idea that this fictional person and
it's why indeed fictional resurrections
are so powerful that they're the
dominant spiritual feature of huge
slices of the planets idea about what
religion and spirituality
characters so anyway sorry that was kind
of a that's kind of a long tour but but
but what I'm saying about alchemy is you
know it's easy to get locked into
looking at alchemy in its previous forms
right as this set of things but the real
key is to dig into that stuff and figure
out phenomenologically what is this
talking about and then to use the best
science you've got because the alchemy
is the alchemists were using the best
science they had and young intern is
using the best science he had but it was
a hundred years ago almost in some cases
we've got some serious advances and if
you start putting this stuff into
dialogue with that right
so like Solvay at coagula it's a good
example right just dissolve and bring
together I take that as an alchemical
thing and I take it to mean right
differentiation and integration it's all
dayit coagula but i also take that
further i think about it in terms of the
patterns of structural dissociation that
we see in regular brain functioning in
neural connectivity that there are these
constant areas that are integrating
together and the way that they integrate
together changes our entire experience
of consciousness in the world
I mean basically right if you look at
the neural mappings of you know
something like psilocybin for instance
right so radical changes in your sense
of being and potential and reality well
you know it shuts the default mode
Network off and then you know things
have to write differently and so you get
synesthesia whose areas that aren't used
to communicating suddenly are
communicating and right so it's kind of
a weirdly considered house party you
know and and so all of a sudden you've
got a whole new world right and like a
stroke of insight sometimes people have
a sudden you know like a brain in salt
or something sudden that can reveal an
entire dimension to their experience my
procedures which have been linked to
religious experience in some research
right same thing you know some
electrical event things are connected
differently
see everything differently things
connected differently so this constant
flux and flow of the inner landscape in
a way I see alchemy as being trying to
understand the phenomenology and the
mechanisms of what's happening there and
cognitive science is a brilliant tool
for that but cognitive science needs
from
nology to attach to to sort of
understand the inner experience of it
and then in turn to use that to look at
the works that people have been doing it
from this problem for you know a hundred
thousand years and see what the hell
they've been doing and then look at that
and say great that's a pretty good idea
now how can we improve that or how can
we refine it or how can we streamline it
you know and that that's sort of my
vision of it yeah you know and and it's
something that applies not just to your
work because when you do in our work
that caches that outside of you and some
inner work is about your relationships I
mean that's the whole jam with therapy
it's like well one thing you're gonna
have to accept is that repairing your
relationship with your mother is going
to affect you but also right it's going
to take you doing things with your own
inner model of your mother and that's
actually when the locus of work is
usually and it's just hard for people to
wrap their head around but yeah sorry I
kind of went off on a bit of a tear
there but I get enthusiastic no I
appreciate it and it's really good stuff
so some particularly powerful themes and
here I wonder if we can weave in mmm
let's see if it might be possible to
weave in some themes relating to the
Philosopher's Stone relating to the
cycloid relating to the illness mundus
and that's your job but I'm going to say
something okay and also a mercurius
we're getting the heavy the heavy deep
esoteric stuff okay yeah but but it but
I want to ground it in this because
you've if I think service dust here with
with and like a real live example of a
five year journey of deep play and
transformation through play that was
this five year five year story that you
participated in creating culminating in
at least this particular chapter with
the this event of the
liquid agony and an opportunity both for
you and for your fellow players to
relate on either side although both of
you relating to both sides because of
dynamism of that relationship of how we
come to terms with and ultimately
transform through be that which is
before and be that which is after a
confrontation with all that within us
might struggle against various
vicissitudes of being and struggle
against the the void of meaninglessness
we we can face as existential finite
beings and yet still then feel into and
touch together that which can ground us
in its groundlessness a kind of love a
kind of a meaning in being here together
and a deep appreciation for that whole
process so truly alchemy as I've heard
you define and how resonates very much
with me this way as the art of
transformation and so with this as a
framing what what strikes me is that the
alignment of the characters and you
yourself as sort of hold her in this
space but importantly the structures of
that game that's been created that in
the alignment then is not only that
inner alignment to be found within the
individual but that there was an
appropriateness of relationship which
yes blurs the boundaries but
appropriately looks to blur the
boundaries between this kind of what
could be a therapeutic environment but
then also a kind of deep play but
something transformative you know such
subtlety and mastery required to utilize
this boundary appropriately is
particularly for the kinds of world
building and culture making on the cusp
and in front of us right now because too
much therapy and we're doing something
different but without coming from that
appropriateness of developmental
capacity capacity what is proximal to
the developmental Kopacz
capacity of everyone it's so crucial to
being able to participate fully and to
really bear up with what
is the the the the fullest kind of what
is what is the truth of that to then be
presence but then to dissolve that hey
like how can we bear up in alignment
with what we have and then let go
together but to bear up again as
something that is you know more
integrated able to withstand the
Maelstrom surrounding and be a kind of
beacon that can extend a hand and
together kind of come into an alignment
which is both internal and external so
this is a beautiful launchpad we have
here and it's an eye and I invite you
know our listeners to consider how this
kind of deep play which which in which
in a deeply important sense is a serious
kind of clay right it was within a game
but this is not this is no joke this
kind of liquid agony hey this is no joke
at all it's fun and it's a very strange
find kind of taxing fun and you know my
players you know will often say but like
I take this stuff seriously my My
partner my girlfriend Ariana often says
she's like I'm amazed at how much work
you put into these things and I'm like
well you know not work effort right but
yeah effort because yeah you've got to
like give it you have to really invest
and you know what's the line from it's
almost sunny in philadelphia laughs are
cheap I'm going for gasps well like
there's a it's like it's one thing
getting people to laugh at a table is
easy but yes serious play dolt delving
into things that are deeper drama and
touch us personally yeah anyway
seriously absolutely yes so before us is
a grand need to realize together the
creation of novel games that are not
entirely departures from those games we
have created previously and no entire
departures from the very characters
we've created in ourselves which can
step into novel territory but this
clearing that we're a part of the harken
back to earlier parts in the
conversation I think it it um it begs of
us
it begs of us to create something
together which is capable of attending
to and transforming artfully in relation
to the chaos that's swirling around us
and through there there's so much
opportunity for genuine thriving and
creation but also something that can
hold as well the reality of this
requirement we have to be together also
in our suffering now okay so there are
let's let's say there are errors along
the way there are paths which may be
real paths to walk but that do
importantly do not further and we might
need to wind our way back to something
that is more wholesome and degenerative
and moving towards let's say the light
but to hold that an appropriate relation
and something which can appear as though
a mirage there to differentiate them
between mirages and the real water in
the desert hey I wondered the role that
Mercurius could play in this kind of
thing like this because what we're also
touching if we are touching that that
echo of our time which stands before us
hey like through the liquid agony then
connected it to the game that which
makes possible that transformation and
movement toward something it's
directionality is moving together we are
also as well speaking in the landscape
of the self the landscape of of God and
the sacred as we as we encounter it and
what what can happen is that we can that
that's a relation to hold very much
appropriately right this relationship
between ego and self and the
constellation of these archetypes these
alignment of players has to be such that
they bring their appropriate skills and
talents to bear in a certain formation
with certain timing knowing that they
are playing roles and are over the whole
but do not necessarily write they do not
stand for the whole absent their
relations and they're just so the part
they play their part and I'm interested
in this
of the trickster and I I could say much
on this maybe for further conversations
but how and and I interested in linking
this with the kind of philosopher's
stone which you might have to give an
articulation of but what what is it we
have to be wary of or what's the kind of
playing we can do that ultimately plays
with ourselves in such a way that
prevents an appropriate revealing of
water and can be instead mirages yeah
right so I'm writing a book which I've
been sort of collecting chunks on and
planto sort of earnest over the summer
which which relates to a bunch of this
material and the working title of my
book which is a bit tongue-in-cheek but
not that tongue-in-cheek which is maybe
a good metaphor for serious play is
shape-shifting a practical guide now I'm
really trying to tap into something
about Mercurius and the way that I I
mean to talk about my curious okay
what's more curious my curious is this
funny intercessory or bridging figure
within symbolism you sometimes encounter
and with dream but the idea is that he's
curiously another male nor female and is
possibly you know sort of the Son of God
and the devil sometimes expressed that
way he has a paradoxical quality and the
shifting quality this right he's
mercurial he's more curious but more
than just sort of mercury the speedster
or Hermes the wise he's got this trick
story twinkle and as I smirk you know
kind of thing going on he's an
interesting figure and we could talk
separately at some point about the
appearance of this figure in dreams if
people are interested a really cool
account of my curious you should track
down there's a comic a dream comic by
Rick Veidt
called rarebit fiends which has been
published since the 90s I have I've been
collecting it for years
but in the last couple of years he
issued issue 22 and 23 where there was a
20-year gap in producing this comic when
he came back it turns out he's hardcore
Union and so this is a awesome comic
book of his personal explorations into
this material and he's
to encounter mercurius in his dreams as
played by I don't know Benedict
Cumberbatch I think in his dreams which
is really funny Benedict Cumberbatch is
an awesome mercurius let me say so
mercury assists this figure and macarius
stands as a kind of like you know not a
guardian and not a messenger exactly but
something that accompanies you and the
threshold to deeper levels so one thing
you have to consider it is right for us
at the conscious level things are almost
necessarily intrinsically polarized and
aspectual okay so we tend to see through
some pairs of opposites and and in some
cases we are incapable of seeing past
differences so if you look at like that
famous picture of the duck rabbit you
can see a duck or you can see a rabbit
but you can't see a duck rabbit at the
same time not really you can kind of
grasp the like nan thing but like
there's something you're picking and it
tends to be mutually exclusive the more
open you are the more open you're going
to be to flipping it around and you will
find that delightful like a Necker cube
and the less open you are the more that
ambiguity is gonna piss you off and
you're gonna want to stabilize and
solidify things and I'm generalizing but
that's a pretty consistent finding in
personality psychology right low
ambiguity tolerance people tend to get
rigidly angry and punitive when things
stop following the rules and this is
something you see in the anomalous card
task and a bunch of other interesting
experiments we can talk about that stuff
at length I actually was just on another
podcast awhile ago a Ben voices podcast
we did an episode I talked a bit about
anomalous cards so if people are gonna
check that out and a bit about some
other experiments let's fans but the
point is okay
that's your conscious level you get
these polarizations and the way that
things seem opposite is you're capable
of switching construal on that so you
know man and woman are often presented
as some opposite pair but in what way
are they opposite are they opposite like
black and white or opposite are they
opposite like positive and negative or
opposite what doesn't seem like it like
they've got probably 95 percent in
common in terms of structure and
genetics there are some differences and
the differences are just enough that
they cause misunderstand
right routine misunderstanding but
people also exaggerate those differences
men are from Mars and women are from
Venus what the you talking about
that's in my opinion just not true right
there's much more in common the same
thing those for other kinds of identity
differences between humans you know I
had an Irish friend when I lived in
Cambridge England who an American once
mistook for an English person and she
hit the roof she hit the roof I'm not
right and I thought at the time that was
so peculiar until somebody told me they
loved my accent and I said I don't have
an accent and they said yes you do you
have an American accent and I said I
certainly do not you know I have a
Canadian accent at best I speak standard
newscaster anyway it's right so like
tiny differences but the differences
become the point of differentiation so
man and woman in what sense of those
opposites well you can treat them as
cosmic opposites you can treat them as
where THOG and almost like you can
relate them in different ways but some
people treat them as exclusive opposites
that's the realm of consciousness at the
other end at the self whatever that
means the deep ground from which
consciousness emerges but that is not
itself contained within consciousness
right the fundamental sub structures of
our cognition the things that are pre
ago ik pre-conceptual pre grammatical
pre right that that substrate that that
cognition emerges from and that are
being emerges from is also pre aspectual
and pre polarized it contains all things
and all possibilities right it's like
the dowel or something it contains all
this stuff it has all that stuff in it
it's right ultimate reality without form
or something right well so what's in the
middle between regular-ass polarized
existence and completely dissolved there
are no contradictions and no duality is
like what's in the middle and the answer
is Mercurius mercurius is a funny
paradoxical figure who dances down the
fractal line between the black and the
white and winks at you while it's
happening to be like I am NOT the final
answer
and yet at the same time I'm going to
sort of show you psychically how there
can be an admixture of these two things
polarization and non polarization which
themselves seem opposite so that's how I
think about my curious it shows up in
lots of ways but one of the big things
about him is he's got that
shape-shifting quality and he predicts
of that because if you think about it
it's like if the ground of being
whatever you want to mean that to mean
philosophically speaking and or in terms
of physics or in terms of neuro
cognition or however right the ground of
being is a lot of potential and then
your actual state is a lot of actuality
right and so necessarily it's the case
that the state of potential is a
shapeshifter right it contains an adult
the plan that an individual organism
like a tiger is an instance of
evolutions action but natural selection
is a process occurring through a field
and it can produce lots of different
things in different shapes it is change
itself it is the the engine through
which things are transformed right and
we have that engine inside of us natural
selection is operating within us as well
right that's why our brain can
reconfigure so fast on the fly we
internalized evolution in shape-shifting
our brains are little shapeshifters
that's that's the joke we're a machine
made of machines that can make new
machines so we're curious in that sense
is that is that shape-shifting and that
paradoxical that Winky capacity but how
can that go badly I mean play I think is
integral to the kind of work I'm talking
about because play necessarily
participates in what I call the as as
not right I may be borrowing that term
to be honest I can't remember but that's
what I was taught Diaz as not and what I
mean is that you know like we talked
about the films you look at the film and
I ask you are werewolves real and you
say no but also you take them as real if
you don't take them as real at all
you're not interested you have to be
able to suspend disbelief that's why
your cat doesn't care about what's
happening on your TV unless the frame
rate is really high now they can see
stuff because we have 4k and right but
before that it's just it was just
nothing they didn't see anything so they
didn't care right why would they there's
nothing for them to get invested
likewise if I watch certain kinds of
cinema because I don't know the grammar
of the cinema right I've Bollywood films
are difficult for me to track because I
don't know the symbolic grammar of the
cinema I don't understand or I'm just
old enough that I find some of the
conventions of anime hard to track
whereas lots of my students and friends
and loved ones right like anime like I
was speaking to some siblings of a
Chinese friend of mine a few years ago
and I said something and they did this
they went like this and I went blank and
I was like what are you doing and they
went like this again and eventually
their sister said oh they're making the
cure drop symbol which is an indication
you've said something embarrassing
they're imitating animate okay and when
I watch anime it's just that much
farther I mean I grew up on enough
Western animation that I look and I
don't I can't track facial expressions
and stuff I don't understand what the
conventional is it's like looking at
kabuki masks I don't know what I'm
looking at you know so okay so you got
to be able to get invested but then you
know play that as as not play is central
to all this stuff ritual is play
metaphors are intrinsically play they're
both themselves and not themselves
that's what play is when we talk about
play we talk about animals prance around
and pretending acting as though they are
threatening but they're not threatening
that's the point they're practicing but
but they have to be they have to take it
seriously you can't half-ass right same
thing I mean play is so essential this
is Vygotsky but play and imitation are
so essential to internalization and
development right because we imitate and
take in other practices and that's so
essential that that we will do things
that other animals won't do so do you
know like the chimp box no okay
cool experiment so they they take a box
and it's got like cranks and wheels and
whatever and what they do is they put it
down in front of that chimp okay and
they turn the crank and they push the
button and they do the whale and they
pull this little tray and there's a
peanut inside and chimps like peanuts so
they do this a couple of times and chips
are smart they'll watch a couple of
times and then they understand the
sequence and they'll do the thing and
get the peanut and you could do the same
thing with toddler human toddler
right you could show them in this box
you turn the crank you do the thing you
do the operations you pull the little
trail there's candy and the kid will eat
the candy you do it a couple of times
the chimp will get it the kid will get
it okay fine then the second phase the
experiment is you do the same thing in
the box the mechanics of the box are the
same except it's transparent the box is
transient you can see through and if you
see through you can see that the tray is
disconnected from all this mechanism the
mechanism is totally superfluous to the
tray so then you do the same thing you
turn the crank you pull the thing you
open the little tray and then you go
back and what happens is the chimp looks
at this looks at you like you're an
idiot
pulls the tray up and then eats the
peanut because it's just like what are
you dumb but the kid will continue to go
through all the operations and eat the
candy even once they have seen
transparently through the box now the
sort of short form interpretation of
that is Wow
kids are stupid right he's like chimps
are smarter than toddlers it would be
the low-grade but that's deeply mistaken
because that's wrong the fact is that
the kid has internalized the behavior
because humans have intrinsically and
this takes us back to the Gosling's
right the geese and the Gosling's humans
have a capacity for imitation of what
that kid is doing is making a bet a bet
that although they do not understand the
actions that you the adult are doing
that there's a reason for them but
there's a payoff to imitating you even
though they don't know what it is and
you can see that with kids all the time
they do their little tea parties and
they'll imitate adult actions they
cannot possibly have an understanding
but they mean my eldest niece she was
the only child in the mix for a while
with the whole period of time where
every time she sat down on the couch she
would go and I couldn't understand this
until I realized that she was a bunch
around old exhausted adults who when
they would sit down would go ah and she
just picked it up we love this stuff
when kids do it it's like Oh a kid said
but the point is they're internalizing
things and they're making a bat and play
is all about that internalization and
play is essential like it Brides a fine
line think about this
tickling tickling is an interesting form
of play because if you're walking home
from the puppet three a.m. and somebody
jumps out of a dark alley and grabs your
ribs you do not experience that is
tickling yes you experienced an attack
if somebody that you don't like puts the
hands on your ribs you don't experience
it as tickling you experience it as an
attack tickling is a thing that happens
when somebody threatens you but they are
not threatening you trust them and so
then you experience this funny
paradoxical feeling tickling is weird
it's unpleasant but also it's kind of
pleasant right
that's a very pure instance of play in
its paradoxical nature it's as as not
it's a threat but it's not a threat its
pleasant than its unpleasant that's the
space that mercurius operates that's the
space that symbols operate in it's the
space that writes symbols and metaphors
operate in it's a space that ritual
operates in and ultimately speaking
right that's the transformational space
as far as safeguarding that relationship
against the pitfalls of transformation I
can speak to that but yeah well is it is
it the way the way I'm seeing is going
maps one with my own experiences if
there are figures which embody this kind
of archetype then this as not this play
that's so deeply serious that the
pleasure and the pain are all in this
very delicate relationship on the cusp
of transformation in this clearing of
transformation then if someone becomes
aware that there's a certain power then
if there's a certain power that's just
my camera but we're good if there's a
certain power in the orienting impulse
and the imitative impulse in people to
follow them along the edge then unless
they start a call yes that's where I'm
going
Addison I'm trying we're going very
gently in terms of understand what is
the kind of because because it seems to
me that um yeah that there are real
failure conditions of how these deep
zones these deep dynamics these deep
alignments temper
of transformation set up and there's a
certain kind of guru type dynamic where
someone decides that satsang you know
divine presence is to be found in
relation through me and only me in some
sense and it's not to be realized as a
centralizing but D centered right
dynamic and who knows I you know I'm not
an expert in that so it may be the case
that there are you know whatever but
personality and Groo driven systems that
are perfectly good right you know so
Vajrayana often has sub traditions where
it's like the word of transmission it's
not even meditation driven it just like
the transmission is what's relevant I'm
wary of that for reasons akin to what
you mentioned which is that charisma can
become wildly dark and out of control
and and right and especially dis
embedded from its context right the
number of you know gurus that come from
an original spiritual context and then
they get mixed up in North America and
what happens they end up having sex with
their followers exploitative Lee you see
it over and over again now that's not a
variable but what's missing is the
question how does that go off the rails
and I think that's really revealing of
both what is required in the inner
component and what is required in the
relating component to make play not
become malignant and the guiding
constraining ethos right that the
constraining factor here or that is say
yeah right is appropriate love I know it
sounds corny but appropriate love and
and that's it that's it's important I
mean that's a fine grain thing
appropriate love because they're forms
of love that are appropriate in forms of
love that are inappropriate but like
step one love of and power are basically
right basic love and basic kind of power
drive stuff are mutually exclusive to
the extent you have a power relationship
with somebody you don't have a love
relationship with them and that's a
thing that you see turn up all the time
it's why parents often make the mistake
of trying to demonstrate their love by
controlling the purse strings and
thing to force development on their
children and this is a mistake
because it's a power thing and what you
want is a love thing now love doesn't
mean that you let everybody do
everything they want to run around all
the time you can love somebody and do
something because you love them although
people justify horror in the name of
love but like legitimate real authentic
love and then you have to hit like well
but what kind of love you know if you're
having a relationship with your child
you don't want to have erotic love that
is not an appropriate form of relation
that is good for a child's development
even if you don't think of that as being
like sex right the radical of is
consumptive and acquisition all right
it's it's it's right and sometimes
parents do have that form and you can
see it right they want a child to
complete them it's an object which is
designed to complete them to fill their
their own narcissistic void or something
okay you also can't necessarily have a
relationship of Phi Leia friendship with
a child people want to do that too I'm
best friends with my kid well your job
isn't to be best friends right your job
is to be the parent right but the same
goes in other domains right although it
its although agape is an appropriate
relationship to have to your child right
the love of parent for child where you
are forming an imitative matrix for them
to model and to test and whatever right
you are giving them the love that
creates beings it's also often
inappropriate it's not that is not an
appropriate model have with your friends
you know what's super obnoxious with a
friend somebody who keeps trying to
label agape on you like stop trying to
drive my self-development it's really
it's condescending right we don't like
it why because relationship between
friends is fine like it's meant to be
equal if there's a slope in that at all
friendship has poured out a little bit
and there are friendships sort of like
that where really there's a power
dynamic built in and like one person is
the lower friend in there and that's
always creating a certain kind of
tension there's something I was a little
unhealthy about it right variably
friendship is about a relationship
between equals so figuring out an
appropriate form of love is the best
safeguard love and humor
are probably the two desk safeguards
against malignant sort of malignant play
and there is malignant play right people
can use play malevolently they can use
play and charisma to manipulate people
right and that's a thing but also it's
the case that the trickster figure
itself can be quite dark I mean yes
sometimes it's Bugs Bunny and it's
taking dynamite to the overstuffed right
self-important structures of authority
but sometimes it's the Joker and like
when I say the Joker I have a friend my
friend Bruce Barnes who's a union
analyst and he sort of one of the big
focuses as if his work is on the
archetype of the trickster and he I
remember said quite seriously the first
time we were talking about it he was
like the the dark trickster killed Heath
Ledger and I said I'm not sure how
figuratively I should be taking that
statement like what do you mean and you
know he was like look he method acted
himself right method acting is just
dressed up shamanism as far as I can
tell right like you go and you try to
embody the state in this really radical
way and have it the life right it's like
role playing on steroids so you know he
moved into the space of a dark figure
and when you think about Heath Ledger's
Joker that performance right is just
radically magnetic and compelling and
what's so compelling about it because it
was more compelling in my opinion than
Markham Phoenix who's doing a different
thing but his is a joker of pathos and
Heath Ledger has no pathos in his
character he's a character who has
looked into the howling of the abyss and
come up the far side dedicated to the
idea of tearing everybody down he's
right which is like Bugs Bunny except
sometimes things need to be torn down
and it doesn't when sometimes things
don't so you can get malignant forms
malignant is heart but you can get dark
forms of an archetype an archetype can
get overextended so how do you guard
against that well I have been in my own
writing this month I've been thinking
about a lot of the sort of quasi Latin
and Latin terms that John has been using
to talk about some of the central
personal stuff and so you got your
religio and your right so on and so
forth
I thought for my own work and for a book
chapter that I'm writing for a book that
he's editing I have in part started
writing about sort of the importance in
this sort of work of of hilarity as an
under related thing Alera toss and
hilarity ass is just things being funny
deeply funny this is a binding force
between people humor is attractive it
plays a massive role in an attraction of
all kinds it plays a massive role in
friendship and there's a reason why
right and if you really start plumbing
it you start to like having a shared
sense of humor is almost essential to
being closed it's like musical tastes
but more so it tells you not just that
somebody is quick and like one of the
great under underrated pleasures of life
is having clever funny friends who say
clever funny things it's wonderful right
I'm blessed with a lot of clever funny
friends and so all day long I don't do a
lot of social media I don't have
facebook and thing but nevertheless all
day long I'm bathed in my friends saying
funny things and it's wonderful and
they're quick and right so celeritas is
is an aspect of this kind of building
and also it's a safeguard I mean good
belly laugh is one of the best banishing
rituals you can use you want to monkey
around with demonic forces that's fine I
mean you got to deal with them at some
point so you might as well but then at
the end of the day you want to ground
out like eat something and then have a
good laugh and a good laugh a good laugh
shatters the self seriousness right
nothing is nothing is funnier than
having a good laugh at somebody who's
too busy pretending that that the king
of the universe and being able to take
the piss out of them we all know that's
why the Jester has got a special role in
the court as role is thumb is knows a
little bit at the king and why because
the King knows that that's important so
appropriate love and hilarity an
appropriate love has that like friendly
down so the same thing goes for your
inner landscape if you're going to
encounter parts of yourself you have to
do it with the right kind of
orientation you have to try to befriend
them I said he's not about dominating
them it's not about possessing them it's
not erotic in that way which is one of
the mistakes we make we chase we chase
the parts of ourselves in an erotic
fashion or we try to hammer ourselves
into self-development grow up we say to
ourselves which of course was the thing
that we got told that screwed us up to
begin with half the time mm-hmm right
but friendship the friend yourself and
befriending somebody is not an easy
thing sometimes I mean sometimes it's
really natural but like defending people
who you might not be inclined or who you
have block against requires a deep fund
of charitable 'ti you have to be able to
see them and reframe them in an ongoing
sense right and yet if there was any if
if we could master one skill on this
planet that would bail us out of our
problem would be friendship
we're shitty at it and it's kind of a
lost art mm-hmm but right if we could
befriend the components of ourselves if
we could befriend ourselves and get
those things into a friendly
relationship friends don't almost have
to agree my friends I don't agree with
about all sorts of things but we can
have a friendly debate you'll note that
that's what's missing in political
discourse these days nobody can reach
across the aisle because they're not
friends anymore
yes yes and I could disagree with my
friends I do disagree with my friends I
get into heated debates with my friends
I had a friend go off about climate
stuff at the start of the pandemic and I
just did not have he was sort of going
into well I guess we'll find out if
climate change is real and I just had no
mental bandwidth for this right so I
just run him back and I said man I love
you but I spent all week trying to
convince people covered 19 is real so
can we wait to have this argument when
like when we can scream at each other
over a bottle of wine within hugging
distance yeah and he laughed and he said
yeah okay
yeah I do and that's friendship and if
we could cultivate that within ourselves
recognize that there can be differences
and yet you can still be friends you can
deeply respect somebody and think that
their role
that you can respect some of these
choices and recognize that they're not
yours right and that you can recognize
that that what they're doing is in some
sense in all but the smallest cases
their best stab at the best way to live
given the damage that they have we've
all got damage we're all traumatized so
yeah so yeah celeritas and friendship is
my prescription for how to make this
stuff fly and that's why I mean the
house party the interfaith dialogue is
an interesting metaphor but it's very
abstract and the goal in the interfaith
dialogue presumably is to create
friendships because that's when people
are going to want to talk about stuff
yes yeah let me let me add a few things
in here I mean I I really really
appreciated that I think it's I think
it's tremendously wise and unnecessary
my sense is that there are a couple
things to to flesh in there much of that
we've already covered that would there's
a bit more for it to create them the
necessary and sufficient because yet to
sketch yes and and the humor critical
right relationship obviously with love
critical horror as well critical though
I don't want to go down that path
there's there's something about so it's
a where interfaith dialogue the product
of that being a kind of friendship yes
but then there's a sense there's this
deep trust we we have to have this
capacity to trust in the extend that
dignity yeah extend the dignity of
unique participation and irreducible
value that can only be bestowed through
that through that other and dignity of
that the opportunity to live and and
co-create it strikes me that beyond the
the trickster and say hey we said the
breaking through but to add a few pieces
because ended in the story that you told
this game you've been playing for five
years and created there's a sense in
which it's a gathering among
friends but at the same time there's a
symbolic structure and a structure
that's being created which has
differentiated kind of hierarchy in it
for example you have someone who's the
dungeon master and they're playing a
certain role and so the friends give
permission
give permission so it's quite
complicated in that sense it's it's a
form of play partly because this is a
thing that people misunderstand if
they've never played the the
relationship between the dungeon master
or the game master the person running
the game and the players is not
adversarial mm-hmm it is merely
apparently adversarial but it must be
apparently adversarial this is what I
mean
they each play a character I play all
the supporting cast which means I also
play the antagonist I play the bad guys
right and like you know you tend to play
sort of genre stories they're fairly
action-oriented because whatever that's
just when it comes out of not that there
aren't other ones there's some really
great games that just do romance but I
can't get my players on board with them
anyway but there are some really
interesting ad designs which is said
it's not all just about violence but
very often it has a kind of action right
but there is an apparent adversarial
thing which is to say that my role is to
embody the adversary right so think
about me and have it in the black Buddha
I'm doing my level best right in the
same way that if you're playing a chess
game with a friend right it's not that
they hate you it's just you want them to
play hard you want them to play against
you if you're engaged in a debate you
want the person you're debating against
to come with his best shot if they flip
over just give in or cave in it's very
unsatisfying same thing if you're
playing you know I don't know tennis or
something right look you want the other
person to play hard now if they're
vastly better than you that's that's not
great usually right you get kind of
crushed on it sucks but I have a friend
who's big in the strategy games who's
one of my gamers and he plays a lot of
strategy games with his brother and I
used to play with them occasionally I'd
get him find it over and I'd get
destroyed and never won never because
they both have STIs like these like
astoundingly sharpened tactical Minds
and they understand the the structures
of these games and they've
million of them so they can just analyze
strategy immediately so I never won but
my friend won about maybe charitably 1/4
of the time and his brother won 3 crew
so finally I said to him at some point I
don't get up man like you take such a
beating every time and you come up with
a strategy and it works once and then
your brother comes at you like the Borg
from Star Trek and it's just like I've
assimilated your thing and now I'm gonna
beat you with it and I said I don't
understand like how is that fun and what
my friend said made a very deep mark on
me he said you don't learn anything when
you win you don't learn anything when
you win and I blinked cuz I was like oh
my god like you're right you're right of
course like when you win it's just
confirmation you don't really pick up
additional information what you learn is
that your opponent is not you know if
you really track somebody you just let
your opponents not up to snuff if you
want to push your game you need somebody
who's going to match you so it's that
apparent adversarial so when low unlevel
they're my friends my own level best to
create the appearance that I am you know
out to get them and in younger games I
run games for a high school so a group
of high school kids and they have less
experience and so they all paint me as
though I'm an adversarial monster right
Anderson's gonna kill us all and what
they of course don't understand they
don't seem to fully absorbed is I have
the ability to kill them anytime I want
buddy in the game if I say you all get
crushed by rocks the end and walk out
that's it that's the end I can do that
anytime I want to the rules do not
preclude it right but that's not the
point that would be extremely boring for
me and for them the point is to keep the
game rolling and to make it satisfying
there has to be a tension same thing we
watch a movie we know
boy meets girl boy loses girl boy gets
girl back but there has to be a
satisfying interplay and conflict
present in that you know what I mean so
there's this importance than in a shared
commitment to the value of playing the
game and that is I would suggest then
fundamental to the bit that is that is
as fundamental as
it's a constituent part of the
transcendental conditions that the self
stands to enable right and so we have
this condition other language when
people because transcender like what are
the conditions of that must be in place
to enable the game making this deep one
being a deep affirmation and extension
of the dignity of the status of player
to another and that this can be realized
at both a rational level but a deeply
mystical and interdependent and
interconnected level it's beware of
those tricksters who do not
appropriately extend the dignity of of
playing the game hey to everyone yeah I
mean there are things that I look out
for you know when you know beware of
false prophets you know it's like there
are people who can have very powerful
abilities in this domain and powerful
personalities but but I often I mean you
know you look to them it's like are you
doing the work you know and or are you
you know sometimes people are selling
easy answers right you know here are the
rules well guess what there aren't rules
that's the if there were rules we would
figured this whole thing out a long time
ago right it's just not that simple like
their guidelines but guidelines aren't
rules it's not the same thing
you know um likewise you know I look for
people that are exploitative you know I
look to see and you know you look for
little things you know I have a very
finely tuned antennae for cruelty when I
sense cruelty in people right cruelty in
their humor or cruelty in right and
there's a difference you can be like
pretty you could be pretty dark in your
humor and I will still laugh but I've a
sense cruelty Indian humor I don't I
won't hold with that I cruelty to me has
no utility it's one of the few actually
I would say like hard to place
there are basically like two things I
can figure in the universe that as far
as I not I not managed to discern the
use of yet
cruelty and rudeness I don't know what
they're for
I don't know what good they are root I
just think there's never a reason to be
rude that doesn't mean you shouldn't be
confrontational sometimes you get
confrontational you can even tell them
to off and that's not being rude
but like rudeness and cruelty I don't
get I look out for those things for
other players hey they're signs for
other players this person is not yet
willing able and ready to enter into a
certain kind of game making that's right
yeah you know and you can look for other
kinds of shorthand I mean I used to make
the joke years ago that if I really
wanted to know when I started dating
somebody how they might be as a sexual
partner I would watch them interact with
pets cats specifically because if you
can get on with against some people hate
cats and this is a bit of shorthand but
this is the thing I used to say it's
like if you can figure out how to please
a cat then what you were good at is
you're adept at interacting with a
nonverbal entity that's a bit cagey
about communicating its own pleasure
right but if you can like figure that
out if you can read a cat then you know
how to read on this subtle level what
the house medics work out and that and
you're willing to be a bit you know
you're willing to be experimental
typically another cat cuz they're not
all the same and you're bound to get
scratched you're willing to take risks
you're willing to be experimental like
obviously that's it's a slightly glib
shorthand but nevertheless it's in some
ways a useful shorthand and those sorts
of things
how people behave with how people behave
with children dreamily telling to me
right how people behave with the with
their parents right how somebody treats
their parents it's often very telling
how somebody interacts with their their
lover their partner is very telling how
people you know comport themselves in
debate is telling and all these things
you can look at you could be like what
does that mean what what could I infer
from that - playing the big game the
game the great work so like I used
somebody who I want to be involved in a
sort of at the spiritual level as right
and the answer its most of time yes but
like you need to know you know what
you're getting into
yes right yeah before you befriend
somebody all right so we've been going
for three hours and it's been a
beautiful conversation I would like to
ask one final question if you could take
us home sure or I can try yes
yeah well I'm sure there will be some of
the journey remaining so there were a
few things I had jotted down here kind
of notes that I was interested to hit
and we don't have to hit them all but I
am interested in given how much we've
brought into this dialogue so far we've
got an available language here together
I'm interested in how like first I'm
interested in a brief articulation of
the Philosopher's Stone from an our
chemical perspective which is the kind
of like the in some sense a deep goal of
the of the whole project and I'm also
interested in the cycloid and the unas
Mundus and I'm I'm seeing because for me
imagistic lis what's appearing is that
it's like there there's this sense of
alignment within without between each
other and it all together a kind of
right relationship of orienting toward
and from a from and within a clearing of
possibility toward the kind of
establishment of a structure a
communication structure and a protocol
for being within it which is the is is
the is the combined co-creative zone of
proximal development for relationship
building and vitalizing relation with
the world ourselves each other and that
in that is wrapped up with you know it's
not so much it's about extending
lives it's about involving ourselves in
something greater than ourselves which
can stand and serve as structure to
guide and afford the developmental
capacity and participation in life and
the realization of that potentiality of
those younger and those on different
parts right all the different parts
along the way is centralizing movement
toward establishing that which can
afford this co-creative developmental
possibility a loving possibility and I'm
interested in the metaphysics of this
and I'm just wonder how you sort of
understand Jung's later work his later
blurring of the boundary between the
psychological and the metaphysical in a
way that I take myself to be in some
sense seeking to gesture to from a place
that's resonance with how it is we are
really connected Hey right and the
mystery of that so these times then yeah
please okay so so okay so maybe I'll
speak from the practical and then bridge
up okay the metaphysical so okay you
know the whole thing you're talking
about this kind of right the the the
clearing and the you know the agent sort
of arena space in which we're creating
whatever this distributed cognition and
communication and how friendship plays
into that you know what does that look
like it looks like this right like I
like you this was fun thank you right
but but that's important like what do we
do we traded conceptualizations and
language pieces tax some of which we've
absorbed from common sources some of
which we put on the table right now to
try to talk about some that we're
interested in and about right about
ourselves and about our past and about
where we're going and about where
everybody's going and and it was
interesting it was interesting just we
both brought different things to the
table and it was cool and we could see
how those things click together and it
opened more questions than it closed
right it looks like this and you know a
thing I'm gonna talk about this much but
I have a close relationship with John
for Vickie
and you know he was something of a
mentor to me but I I took classes with
him late enough in life that like I was
in my late 20s by the time like because
I was a high school dropout and I had a
number of other career arcs in the
middle so by the time I kind of came to
do school in that way by the time I
reconciled myself to institutional
education I was I'd done my own tour and
I'd done quite a bit of my own work and
I had done a lot of conceptualization so
I knew actually John from way back
friends mine had him as a prof and
weirdly he was my best friend's
therapist totally disconnected from that
back when he did that but so when I
reencounter John partly what I what
resonated with me was that he had a
tremendously developed language I mean
John the thing about John is he's not
performative right I'm sure there are
people out there who think he's a faker
but but John is just like if John if the
University exploded tomorrow John would
do exactly the same thing as he did the
day before he would continue to work on
this stuff because he he lives it it's
just who he is right and that gave an
acuity and Ana clarity and stuff like
he's sharp and so taking a class with
him I was like ah I have language around
this there's lots of things that I have
that I've worked on in this area but
there's an articulation that you have of
these issues that's really right and yet
I can still see there are places where
it's like well you're not really getting
this you know I fight and I think you
could benefit from right and there was a
sense of simpatico there's a sense of
alignment so John was my mentor in that
sense right and he's he's been in some
sense an academic mentor and then we
became collaborators so he's a peer a
co-worker right we've worked on projects
together we've operated a lab together
for seven years the see wsl the
consciousness of wisdom studies
laboratory at U of T but more
importantly than those things and
informing them very deeply is that
friends and in some ways because of that
rich inter connection more than friends
like like John is my spiritual brother
and
disagree about a lot of things there are
ways that he approaches things that are
not how I would approach them I'm the
wild child in the relationship no
question and I get to believe in nine
weird things but John doesn't have to
deal with yet but gradually that I get
to introduce him right which which has
been one of the joys alright and and
having kind of an ongoing conversation
it took me years of conversation with
John before I could get him to take nos
nos Gnosticism seriously at all and and
then it and now he's like I don't know
probably one of the world's leading
experts as far as I can tell which is
one of the fun things about being
friends with John once you get him into
something he outstrips your knowledge
rapidly and I known us that's pretty
well but like he gets encyclopedic fast
so what am I getting at what I'm getting
at is that there is something
fundamental that goes deeper than the
outer layer of the transmission of
information as a scholar and even the
production of knowledge within the ethos
of the Academy that is just our
friendship and the fact that both of us
are approaching this not because it's
something that we do to pull a paycheck
but because it's just like it's just
like the most interesting problem in the
world right and in the friendship the
friendship is important now and so
similarily like the conversation that
you and I are having we obviously don't
know each other very well although I'd
love to do this again and if you want to
appear on my show I would be honored if
you would appear on my show so yeah you
know there is a sense in which and it
seems like YouTube is sort of passing
some kind of funny threshold in the last
bunch of years where there is like a
WebWork happening where communities are
beginning to gel in a way that they
didn't quite it's coming into its own as
a medium distinct I think in a way a bit
like the podcast to develop two distinct
from radio radio was a broadcast medium
right as per McLuhan but Dan Carlin of
hardcore history was talking recently he
was talking about the way that the
podcast is intimate it whispers in your
ears it's fundamentally bound up with
the headphone and so it's just somebody
talking gently like velvet directly in
your ear is something so intimate
personal but it's different than rady
right it's different similarly podcasts
are beginning to form this community
stuff and we get we get into the
personalities and lives of the people
who present in a way that television
never let us do right so this thing that
we're doing where we where we create a
language to talk about the that we
want to talk about right and to also
encounter each other's beings as people
to whatever extent we are capable of
authentically expressing in a limited
format bla bla bla bla bla all those
qualifiers this is the game this is how
we do it because none of us are going to
solve this alone we can only solve it
collectively and the fact is that
nobody's got the answer it's just not
how it works you can't do things that
way you but instead we can co-create a
structure of meaning with which we can
all participate so that's the practical
level okay so but your question was
metaphysical I just wanted to make sure
I tied that off question was
metaphysical so Yunus mundis so the
unit's monk this is the Union term for
the one world it's an old term you know
sort of you know RiRi deploys it or
appropriates it depending on your
perspective and what does it mean well
it means the fusion of spirit and matter
or mind and matter right so it's like
we live in a sundered world
we're philosophically speaking it's very
difficult this is the hard problem it's
very difficult to conceive of how
consciousness and the properties of
consciousness and the mind attached to
the mechanistic quantifiable measurable
properties of matter it's just we can't
figure it out and people think people
want to hand-wave it right which is why
sometimes you'll get people to get the
archaic response they're like we just
have to forget about all this nonsense
we've been concerned with but I think
there's something people mistaken about
that it's like no if you understand the
power of these arguments they are not
just tricks that are being played there
constrain was wrong right it's not just
about letting the fly out of the bottle
instead these are real problems now the
thing is I don't know the answer
obviously I mean I've done a bunch of
work on consciousness theory so I have
some ideas right that John and I and
Richard woo wrote I have some ideas
about how this stuff might connect but
even still I think there's a deeper rift
maybe deeper than a soluble and
sometimes I think to myself well that's
an epistemological limit of human beings
right the smartest dog in the world
won't solve this problem so maybe the
smartest human won't either and
sometimes I think sometimes I think no
it's soluble we just have to work really
hard too long and sometimes I think
maybe it's fundamentally insoluble like
maybe this is maybe there exists
problems that are really actually
fundamentally insoluble and that's one
of them the connection a minor world
maybe it's a fundamental mystery I kind
of deep rift with no bottom that cannot
be right maybe and this is the way I
think it's like maybe it's this maybe
it's that what do I know
so sometimes I think that sometimes I
think sometimes I think that no there is
a deep metaphysical truth to be pulled
and and our intuition that there's one
thing which is a driving intuition and
science that things should reduce down
to the one say right which is an
assumption maybe it doesn't right
is one of the problems in current
physics we have quantum and we have
relativity and we can't make them really
talk to each other it's like they we
won't sort it out right and there's an
assumption built into that which is that
it should be reducible to one consistent
thing and that's an assumption it's an
assumption built in a science that our
descriptions of reality should be
reducible in one consistent whole with a
unified factor and maybe that's not true
maybe we live in a multipolar reality
maybe reality isn't monotheistic it's
polytheistic and principles operate
differently we don't know and who knows
right it looks like there are some weird
you know physical constants maybe
different to different places in the
universe that - we'll screw our
conceptions of how stuff works right as
a brief note on that one of the examples
I use with my students all the time is
like towards the end of the 20th century
there was more or less one big remaining
problem in cosmology okay it was the
question is the universe gonna keep
expanding forever get more slow and
eventually freeze or is it going to
wreak lapse into a Big Crunch right so
it's like Big Bang and or Big Bang and
drift and the only thing you have to do
to figure that out is calculate roughly
the overall total mass of the universe
right and in if there's enough mass it
reca lapses from gravity and if there
isn't it drifts apart and gradually
freezes right the so-called big freeze
it's a Big Crunch or big freeze so
finally they take a whole lot of
detailed observations of speed that
things are receding from each other in
the universe right and they compile this
data in the late 2000s and do you know I
don't know if you tracked this stuff do
you know what they find things are
accelerating away from each other oh yes
yes
so this is dark energy which is just a
fancy word for we don't know they're
accelerating so we think it's either
expand but slowed down and gradually
drift and freeze or rika lapse but no
accelerating the gas pedal is on which
means we don't know and so it's
important to remember that we have this
assumption that things are going to come
down to a unified and consistent whole
but that is an assumption and it's
nothing other than that
and it would be beautiful which is why
we wanted to we want it because it like
oh and then everything will come but
maybe it won't now
metaphysically the unis mundis when I'm
on board with the unis mundis the idea
that mine didn't matter ultimately have
a continuity it's a no small part
because I mean it seems pretty obvious
that my mind seems to affect the world
in some way and that the world has an
effect on my mind and so if it is two
worlds
it seems weirdly redundant hard to track
somedays Wednesdays mostly I'm an
idealist and I'm like aha the trick is
there's no material world like what do I
ever experience except mental events
none like now I'm backing myself
into solipsism hmm can't do that okay
and then the problems of idealism right
and sometimes I'm inclined to look at
some experiences that I've had unusual
experiences that if I'm in a scientific
materialistic frame of mind I throw a
ton of statistical and probabilistic
science and cognitive bias study and
whatever to convince myself that it
doesn't matter but sometimes I think
about experiences that I've had that are
weird this is what the onions refer to
as synchronicity and the fact is when
you start getting into this work weird
things happen now what's the status of
those weird things I don't know and I
approach it sometimes with an eye to
like maybe there's a neurobiological
explanation and sometimes I'm like no
maybe it is what they say it is that
this is a signal it's a message that
your mind and the world are connected
much more deeply than you think right
that there and that maybe maybe it's not
the case that every story that gets told
and every ounce of meaning that you
bring to bear
Rex and that the universe is ultimately
meaningless and does not care about you
maybe maybe it's more complicated than
that
maybe stories do matter and at some
level they do they do because they
organize reality that the story of
Christ has been organizing matter into
churches all over the world for quite
some time and a few years ago in a
small-scale
small and mystical experience I was
wandering down the street and I looked
at a Catholic Church and I suddenly
realized that what I was looking at was
the state religion of the Roman Empire
it was an embassy of the state religion
of the Roman Empire it was like it was
like watching a mastodon wander out of
the hedges I was like this is a leftover
piece of something that's 2,000 years
old right and yet the story of Christ
has been faithfully operating to
organize matter quite consistently did
it long before I was born and it will do
it long after I'm dead
which means well it's operating the real
world right it's not actual in the sense
of being material and expectable but
like it's creating organized patterns
what one else's reality
so maybe stories have more impact than
we think
maybe they play a role that we're not
quite getting because we're too small to
see it right except insofar as we
participated in and sometimes pantomime
it to get something from it which is
very much what we do with archetypes
sometimes I think that sometimes I think
you know so the answer is I try to
remain radically open because I don't
know and to pretend that I did know and
some final sense and I'll tell you this
a game I like to play it's a strange
perverse game but I like to get art
rationalists drunk and when they're
drunk enough to ask them the weirdest
thing that ever happened to them and
what you get you get some funny
confessions you'll get people talking
about things that they would never ever
talk about and then you're like so
what's your explanation they're like I
don't have one and it's like so what did
you do about that and they're like
nothing I stuck it in a drawer
yeah and I think that's wonderful
because I'm a mystic and a provocateur
so but but you know so the world is
weird
and so the metaphysics of it the unis
mundis it seems like mine didn't matter
must be connected and it seems like
sometimes when you get on the road of
the quest that you get nudged that
Mercurius winks at you across across the
river and suddenly you're like wait how
how does that work and it violates your
sense of what the rules are you're very
limited sketchy primate sense of what
reality is right hastily constructed in
a three pound ball of meat in your head
and so you get these winks where the
universe seems right that's what it
seems like and who knows is that an
internally constructed reality is it an
issue of construal is it some part of
you that acts in a you know helps you
appropriate your own self-development
and guides transcendence who knows right
young had ideas I have ideas this is not
a settled question but it does sometimes
seem like that is sort of how it is and
sometimes when you're in these mystical
States and psychedelic states are
legitimate mystical States but there are
lots of ways to get into altered states
you have glimpses right you have
glimpses of something that is not it's
just not where you normally live I get
the sense that you can't really stay
there right and that's that's kind of
the that's the typical trip but you get
glimpses and you're like oh right and
the striking thing about it in my
experience is how there's always a sense
of familiarity it's not shock you know
you don't get you're like oh my god
right you get it you're like oh right I
remember this and in a way I mean I
don't know if mine don't matter are
continuous like then this is where the
thing the universe is doing I mean this
is sort of like elementary pothead l and
watt stuff in a way right but it's like
we're the universe looking at itself
folks and like that's just really true
that's not that's not dumb sophistry
it's just simple and so well what does
that
No okay so the Philosopher's Stone hmm
and then we'll close out the answer is
I'm gonna tease you on that because I'm
releasing a whole series on this okay
well you saw it it's it's I I look
forward to your series yeah since I'm
getting that accords with you know the
development of my own thinking and as a
student of John's and as a student of
whiteheads Bergson's Young's notably in
the modern world Forrest Landry quite
remarkable philosopher this the
importance of relationship the that the
the orientation of worship if we were to
have worship with an trans Jack tivity
of course just to speak the trans Jack
tivity that the patterns of relationship
themselves the tending to the gentle
courageous and caring committed stance
toward the development of relationships
that seek to you know what I can't put
it my friend had a DMT trip once and
yeah he came back with a particular
image that stuck with me and that's a
conversation I would love to have with
you by the way because we can get some
launchpads through this but to be
handled with care you know and
responsibility but the image was of a
group of friends holding hands in a
circle
and above them was this sort of
impending void you know but something so
beautiful about that camaraderie and
being together you know that there's
something about the sacredness of
relationship and orientation in
relationship which is the something as
fluid as that something that requires
our participation in it as that does
that an ethics and a higher art of
realization to be realized through that
that that is the appropriate direction
of worship and that we mistake the fixed
thing for that to be worshipped and so
I'm not so much and of course the
Philosopher's Stone is a metaphor and I
I've very much await your your thoughts
and I look forward to them you're
getting sort of the advance you getting
the advance pitch right so I released a
for our alchemy video yes and then it
was like oh my god it's four hours and
realized I had to put out part two and
when I attempted to do that it began to
undergo converted toriel explosion on me
mmm and that rapidly led me and like
okay I'm not going to do this justice if
I just try to cram another four hours
what I need to do is to record it so
you've got the early scoop here
relatively forthcoming I will be
releasing a multi-part series on these
sorts of subjects which is titled opus
after the alchemical opus so hopefully
that will be dropping soon and I'll be
dropping some teasers and stuff but yeah
people are interested in this material
they can certainly check that out on my
You Tube channel thing all right well
Anderson thank you for this wonderful
conversation I really this this has been
a great pleasure thank you yeah listen
just do it again
if you've ever been in the deep desert I
imagine you have or right because you
really there's a giant desert right in
the middle your continent you should get
in there