welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where equal hear and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
I heard everyone it is time to steal the
culture
akira it's for the heroes
because command i'm a talk talking with
the person who gave us the gpna gave me
blue church jordan all and part of that
is this idea which is the religion
that's not a religion and coming and
trying to come up with a post religious
faith because here's the idea this is
finally the moon in some ways my most
radical idea i want to do what like
Augustine did as the roman empire's
he was falling he laid the foundation he
believed the cultural cognitive drama
for entirely different culture and the
culture
adulteress
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
the appeal system at some point clamp
down again but nevertheless we shifted
we shifted out of antiquity we shifted
to a different world
[Music]
in terms of its grammar give it the best
scientific tools for engineering the
practices and the ecology of practices
I basically want to steal the culture
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
I see myself doing with a lot of these
other people that's what I'm trying to
do right now that's when I see myself
doing with a lot of these other people
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
can't win by playing the game that's my
way of trying to understand what it is
to not play their game and to shift over
to an a totally different game to shift
the culture is to steal that much the
only thing I can get from history that's
been able to do that are religion but
for reasons that I've articulated I
don't want it's not personally I mean in
terms of the functionality I don't think
the standard model the axial age model
of religion is going to do what we need
in order to scale the culture as deeply
as we need to steal
[Music]
all right well done so that was steal
the culture with a kir that Don and John
Verve a key so welcome to stole everyone
I am Peter Lindbergh the Stewart of the
stoah and today we are going to talk
about stealing the culture so in John's
first appearance at the stoah he said
something like Joe in this room I think
asked them a question and then he just
like went on a fire and then he said
this steal the culture phrase and I
never heard John talk like that and I
just got like goosebumps and then you
know I just like do mos was filled with
Lumos and the steal the culture has been
sort of like the official motto of stoah
and then I sent that to Kira and Q has
been a fan of John's for a while and he
just loved it as well so he created that
beat so yeah what we're gonna do today
John and Akira are gonna talk or they're
gonna jam for about 20 to 30 minutes
about the song and about the concept of
stealing the culture and then we're
gonna have some questions QA so via
inspired with any question throughout
the session I just throw it in the chat
box and I think you know the drill if
you've been here I'll read it on your
behalf if you don't want to be on
YouTube just indicate that otherwise
I'll call on you to unmute yourself so
that being said I will allow John and
Kira to unmute themselves and I'll hand
it over to you guys how are we gonna
steal the culture yo this is very good
question what even like why here's the
thing people keep hitting me with since
I've been playing that in my daily gigs
on the internet cuz that's how we get
down now in the future we have gigs on
the internet every day steal word or
hijack or reclaim or have everyone who
put it still is a very specific word
because what I'm trying to get across is
that there are powers that be that act
and try to convince us that they have
ownership of this thing called cult
but our political and socio-economic
means and then there is a framework of
discourse I'm thinking here a lot of
Chomsky's manufacturing consent in which
we try to operate that largely thwarts
us as we try to pursue our goals within
that culture especially the goals that
I'm particularly interested in which are
the goals of being able to respond to
the meeting crisis and as long as we
stay within that cultural cognitive
grammar that game not to use a metaphor
that Jordan Hall likes to use which he
got from bacon Stein ultimately the
language game I believe where we're
we're always going to lose and so we
have to break the rules that's why I'm
using this provocative word and we have
to break how do you break the rules when
you're challenging someone's
inappropriate claim to ownership
well you steal that's that's what it is
you steal the culture that's what came
to my mind as the primary metaphor and
I'm trying to take some models from
history of the kinds of revolution that
we want to bring about now I I don't
usually use that term because it's so
loaded on since the French Revolution
with all kinds of associations you know
the reign of terror that has seemed to
follow every one of these political
revolutions and so I hesitate to use
that words I'll sometimes say that I'm
after something more like what the axial
revolution brought a vote or what
Christianity did in the Roman Empire
where it built bottom-up communities and
new ways of being and interpreting and
seeing and relating new ecologies of
practices that percolated up through the
culture and new psycho technologies
purpie percolated up through the culture
and the COG you know and and the group
and the cognition of people and the
consciousness so that when there was a
break in that culture when it's
established structure was challenged by
conditions and perhaps were in such
conditions now then a new culture was
ready to emerge and to take to take
center stage to steal and I think that
you occur
I think the danger right now is the the
wrong one gets in I wrong as the right
word but a creepy one but ending it will
because the one that's currently doing a
good job of going in the I don't know
what you would call it but the one that
we're seeing unfolding all over the
place this redemption lists godless
religion that's doing all the stuff
people do in religions and it's sort of
it's bowing and scraping and getting
together and trying to get all those
things that people have in religions but
ultimately it doesn't seem to have the
redemptive and creative aspects mm-hmm
right yes and so I mean we see a lot of
secularized religion right now very
powerfully and that's because there are
I want to be very careful here there are
important goals that need to be pursued
and I'm not trying to criticize the
pursuit of those goals but if you'll
allow me an analogy I was brought up in
fundamentalist Christianity and had it
had the noblest of goals which was to
save my soul from eternal damnation and
in the name of those normal goals it
framed meaning in such a way that was
deeply traumatizing to me as it tried to
pursue those goals and so we have to not
get overly fixated on the goals that
were perceiving to the exclusion of the
way in which for framing the pursuit of
those goals I talked a lot about that in
my series how do you frame a problem is
way more important than how you
immediately try to solve it and so I
think you're right I think that we
should be putting a lot more emphasis
I'll pick up on your word to cure of
you'll allow me we should be putting a
lot more emphasis on practices that
bring them about Redemption or what I
would call transformation or self
transcendence or allow people to aspire
and if you take a look at the movements
that are extant right now which have a
particular version of politics and
they've can also try to convince us that
that's the only version of politics that
means politics if you took a took a look
at those the the practice they basically
offer
political sort of conflict a
demonstration the seizing of power
mm-hmm and if you allow me one more
thing and then I'll pass things back to
you I mean I've done quite a bit of
history in university and i centered a
lot on political revolutions and I came
away that with the conviction that the
political revolutions the French
Revolution and the Russian Revolution
Chinese Revolution they always promised
that their their one main transformative
action the revolution is going to bring
about the new man the new human society
the new human being the new wave and
inevitably that fails those fail whereas
things like the axial revolution or the
combination of the Renaissance and the
Reformation and the Scientific
Revolution brought about profound
transformations that literally and I
mean it's very strongly altered the
cultural cognitive grammar so new ways
of being are possible and I'm more
interested in what you might what Zac
Stein has labeled and he actually
attributed this to me in a recent
conversation I had with them I'm
interested in the meta political level
I'm interested in the level that makes
new forms of cognition culture
communitas character building possible
for human beings such that the way in
which we undertake our political
endeavors for our political goals has a
more viable chance of escaping the
structures that basically strangle it
right now and so that's that's basically
what I'm trying to propose so I have a
question for you which is how did you do
what you do I mean that's and I'm asking
you now almost like a cognitive
scientist because I'm really interested
I mean I do a lot of work on insight and
creativity and you know and you're
familiar with my series so you know I
I'm really interested in how people move
from propositional through to
perspectival
right down to participatory knowing and
man when you're listening to your song
you can like feel it in your bones right
and then so it's just exemplifying so
many things aren't
knocking about and you started with
basically just me uttering about a
bathtub of propositions and you've
turned it into this transformative thing
like what like how did how does that
happen like what does that look like
inside and I'm not asking this in a
fish's way I'm really I'm really curious
yeah I guess when I was listening to
your work you you were kind of
describing a lot of what I've been doing
and you know when you you kind of go
through the kind of the history of
consciousness and how this led to this
and how this led to this and how this
there to this is the same sort of
building books and it's kind of like a
macro version of the process I have
undertaken on this journey of kind of
creating this form to the point that I'm
I'm calling it a psycho technology
because that's what it is and you gave
me the the language to describe what it
was because it was specifically trying
to do something I had ascertained from
early like I quit school when I was 16
but her last exams I did too the only
revision I did was reading my notes over
ambient music and playing that when I
went to sleep hmm as I was aware of the
the power of music to deliver ideas and
words and embed them you know so I've
been on that from from a very long time
and in developing the meaning wave thing
I was basically wanting to make complex
ideas sticky in a way that you know they
could be and it's similarly and also
that they could I could transmit I'd
trance new ideas into the subconscious
because I was very acutely aware that
most stuff was happening on a
subconscious level stuff in there and
program that subconscious to be doing
what you consciously want to do and I'd
got that from chaos magicians like comic
books years ago then years before I then
heard people talking about you know like
prayer and affirmations and things of
that nature in the same sort of way like
what you're actually trying to do that
and I was making music and I was very
aware of the power of music to do that
and I was like what if I try to put
ideas in a way that could communicate
there so then you're doing that and then
you're listening to speech
and you come across Jordan Peterson once
said something about reading the Bible
and come across across a passage that
glitters yes and it's like that when I
find something that I want to turn into
a song so when I heard you say that it
glittered mm-hmm it was very apparent to
me almost immediately what it sounded
like like what the sound of that was a
song and as a full record like whenever
I'm doing anyone like I'm listening to
them speak and I can hear what the music
the compliments that would be in the way
that would you want music that sounds
like the person and what they're saying
and what the intent of the words is
because music can describe things that
words cannot so there's no there's more
than just the words when you hear a
powerful bit of speech it's more than
just the words because if somebody read
out those words on a piece of paper it
would hit differently it could be a
completely different thing there's way
more than just the words in that
communication right so and I'm kind of
ensuring this because I've got in this
habit I decided to do this experiment a
couple of years back two and a half
years ago of you and you talk about this
stuff the whole flow state the being in
the zone thing he talked about that
quite a lot yes yes I'd observed as a
music journalist many years ago that
people would often have a brilliant
first album and then their second album
would suck and the singles around that
first album the b-sides all the records
they wrote around that period they would
all be wonderful second album would suck
and I figured it was because I figured
it out it was because they were in the
zone essentially they were in this flow
state they're in their basements in
their bedrooms and they Garrity's every
day and then the record hits and the
record label sends them out and saw and
they fall out of that space right and
then they try to get back into it but
they don't know how to get back into it
and they're different now they can
barely remember what they were before
and it's multiple pieces as well so it's
not just them it's like them and their
friends and all this type of stuff and a
lot of times they can never find their
way back there ever and sometimes people
do it takes years and so on and so forth
so anyway I thought what if I got in
that place and just didn't leave and
just stayed in there and just kept
getting deeper and deeper and deeper
into there
like how sort of magical could it get
and I've been doing that for like two
years and five months at this point and
every time I sit down and make a new
record it's more and more powerful and
closer and closer to what I see in that
first moment when I kind of listen to
the thing and I try and get the fullness
of the view of what that Orchestra would
that would that sound what that record
is that makes what ciri than that but I
want to sit here just like jabbering on
for hours in this in slightly mystical
language well it's actually very
consonant I'm you know because I've read
lots and lots of firsthand reports of
people in flow state people having
mystical experiences people experiencing
she and of course I've had these
experiences myself so what you're saying
is very resonant and consonant with a
lot of that material so it sounds to me
and this this is actually you know
central to it the sort of topic at hand
it sounds to me like that and I don't
like this adjective but it's it's the
it's the other adjective we know I've
decided to use right now this sounds
like a very spiritual practice for you
the way you just described it like
you're trying to set up he's trying to
create a psycho technology and
supporting practices that keep you in
this state of flow so that it doesn't
sort of grind to a halt but is always
doing you call the deepening I call it
like this reciprocal opening it sounds
to me like that's how you're organizing
basically your entire life in a lot of
ways and your sense of who and what you
are is that is that fair yeah and I
found everything you know started with
that but then the whole life kind of
gets pulled into that vortex know
everything that becomes that way and
everything becomes thus more magical and
powerful and serendipitous and
ridiculous like a part of it is this
indescribable sort of I'm using
synchronicities as signposts right more
synchronous disease I see and the deeper
ins of the thing I get the more
the more ridiculous everything is just
absolutely improbable synchronicities on
every level and the more there are the
better the thing is and if they start
reducing I can tell that I'm going kind
of off the path or what have you and
I'll readjust something and then I'll go
deeper in again and it really does seem
- well I don't you know is one of these
you're a scientific individual and you
just you know you like to work out why
and so far I've just been kind of going
with it deeper into it and deeper into
and I figure some of the smart people
will figure out exactly what's going on
yeah oh that's really cool I mean that
that is actually that's interesting
because it's both it puts one one of my
feet into a scientific literature it's
triggering lots of thought about
implicit pattern learning and intuition
formation things like that but it also
puts another one in the world because I
lead a mindfulness Sangha or a
meditation contemplation and they often
ask me how do you I know what I'm doing
it right and I give them a version of
something or like what you just said
don't look so much introspectively in
yourself and you're like look in your
life look for the patterns that are
disclosing them and other people and
that that's the place you look and I
notice how you even use that that way
you you said I noticed when that starts
to you know dry up there oh and then I
step back and I sort of start reframing
so that's I I think that's exactly right
I think that's one of the central
insights of a lot of these wisdom
traditions that has been lost not by
sort of kind of a egocentric romantic
framework we've now attached to most
spirituality that you know the core is
to look deeply introspect inside and
find the true self
whereas mostly what's been happening
what I hear you saying is no no I got
this sense of how to be connected to the
world and then when I stove into it the
world started to close disclosing itself
and when I veer off that pattern of
disclosure dries up and then I really
and I keep tracking and tracking and
tracking it sounds like much more of a
navigational thing that an introspective
thing is that fair that is because it
because it is I liken it to
those high-speed racing video games and
the faster faster you go and you pick up
the bonus thing and then something you
can do no wrong in you but if you think
about it for a second then you're done
yeah you have to keep moving you have to
completely trust that instinct and Trust
that connection because you do always
know but the second you pull yourself
out and you question that's when you
fuck it all up
mm-hmm-hmm talk about the I keep saying
this the synchronicities a signpost
thing and the the trusting through ish
and you always write when if you as your
intuition ever been wrong depends what
you mean I mean the problem we have
about the word intuition is that we use
the word intuition when it's right and
then we use bias and Prejudice when it
goes when the same machinery goes wrong
that very different do you mean it looks
like it's coming from a completely
different place you know you told me
more about what the difference feels
like to you well one of them it's a bit
like the system one system two you think
about the subconscious conscious thing
whoever you want to put it one of the
thing is just you know and the other
thing you think so the one strikes you
if you allow me the language the one
strikes you almost like as a proposition
or a representation or a belief where
the other strikes you more is a sense of
being coupled to the world in the right
way connected to the world right way one
you feel another one you have to kind of
consider one of them comes from down
here somewhere and another one comes
from up there somewhere I for me up in a
very distinct I do too I guess I would
use the terms a little bit differently
but the terms that the way you're
describing that is the thing you're
referring to I agree with I think that
people's sense of how their propositions
are going right is a very different
sense for how they're participatory
knowing their sense of connectedness is
going right and what I think you're
putting your finger on if you'll allow
me to give you a suggestion is that and
this is this is borne out by the flow
research and other such things
it's that participatory sense of
connectedness that is where most of our
sense of meaning meaning and life is to
be found and that's why I'm also
critical of
of framings that tend to orient us to
sort of a monolithic mind where we're
just in our propositions and we're just
talking to ourselves in a monological
fashion what I like about what you're
doing is it shifts us out of that it
gets us into the perspectival and the
participatory and it's an inherently
shared thing we're all listening it
together as a cake yes it key and I
think that's the big key for going
forward I think that's the big key for
all of all that the issues we're facing
it's this we used to be a participation
culture mm-hmm now we are not yes you
stir all sing and dance together we used
to all tell the stories together
everyone had had a fucking verse of
Beowulf that they knew and you'd all
chip in around the fire and at this
point in time all of our shared
mythology has been bought by Disney and
the only way we can participate in it is
making memes on Twitter and complaining
about and making videos complaining
about what Kathleen Kennedy has done to
Star Wars or whatever it is people are
so desperate for connection so there's
being shared myths and all they're
allowed to do is kind of let rage from
the sidelines yes you can't participate
in the cup create in the co-creation of
our shared cultural mythology and that's
been the issue and I think going forward
that's a big part of how we move forward
in a useful fashion and do what you're
saying you want to do well that's that's
that's exactly I proposed because you
think about you know the spread of
Christianity and you know and it's
offering its offering agape and new ways
of community forming new ways of being
new ways of achieving personhood to
people that had in the Roman Empire had
been literally had been marginalized as
you said pushed to the side and all they
could do is suffer periodically rebel or
rage and then the Romans doing how did
you deal with all of that expertly well
and crush it and turn it against itself
and divide and conquer you know the
Christianity came up with a completely
alternative way that just the Romans
kept trying to get their hands on it and
they couldn't and eventually it just
permeates so much that the state gets
overtaken by the emergent culture
the emerging religion you can't you
can't plan a culture you have to afford
the conditions for its emergence yes
yeah is that angry um I see and this is
that's exactly where we are currently
we're at that point of being smashed at
the size constant division divide and
conquer bla bla bla bla bla but the
emergent technologies which are moving
faster than anybody can control and
faster than he got buddy completed have
got all the tools necessary for a
complete
integration of participate sorry culture
yeah
they and this is a point that Jordan
Hall has made in a conversation I had
with him recently some of the work he's
doing that we're out of potential divide
in history that we and it's a real
potential because these media if we can
improve them because they're still not
up to the way more cognitively demanding
that in-person communication but if we
can improve as we pick and and and and
the the culture that goes with them and
by that I mean a set of enabling and
affording psycho technology we have the
we have the potential to have the
synergistic effect of participatory
communitas without having to have people
actually living physically close
together we can actually it used to be
that we had to have people very close
together and and that's that's one of
the driving forces of cities cities
afford the synergistic interaction
between human beings civilizations are
built on this idea of cities the problem
is cities could take a horrible toll on
us biologically socially and especially
environmentally and there's that to the
point now where you know that conformity
of thought and action has kind of been
hijacked completely now so you can't
have these new forms come out of a city
physically yeah because people aren't
allowed but you now have a situation
where like you know my seven-year-old
son's best friend
to Canada and they play Minecraft
together everyday and create worlds
together and a completely in sync and
haven't seen each other like a year now
and now they have other little homies
from across the world coming in and
they're all networked together and
they'll building together and playing
together and each one does the bit
they're good at and they don't even have
to discuss it they don't have to say
you're good at that you're good at that
they work it out and they all play
together and build together and create
together and they expect that that's
normal it's completely normal to them
yeah I saw my son's grow up with exactly
the same thing and so it's possible that
we could have the most dynamic
distributed cognition system in the
world you know like the kind of
participation we're having now well when
people wouldn't have to live in the
toxic proximity exactly we might be able
to yeah really
next week I'm moving out to the country
in Texas a week from today so that my
son has room to run around and play and
isn't yeah we've talked like a lab rat
in Los Angeles and I'm not worried it's
all because he will be connected to all
these people they'll be other paper
friends play with in real life but in
the other with your life exactly so
there's the possibility I mean this was
a science fiction novel long time ago by
Clifford D Simak actually entitled city
about how what was going to come after
the city and he foresaw this in kind of
a brilliant fashion because we could
live physically you know at a level that
is very conducive to our evolutionary
heritage you know much more ecologically
and socially structured in a way that is
conducive to our psychological and
environmental well-being while still
having all of the benefits that used to
accrue from civilization and the
participation in a lot of this
collective dynamic so it's interesting
the possibility that you know just like
there was a fundamental reorganization
that was happening towards the end of
the Roman Empire after the collapse of
the broad age Empire so when so in
socio-economic structures were being
dramatically altered and then you also
had new culture emerging we have maybe
the two of them possible I mean I don't
want to be too
ballek especially that with respect to
my own work but the possibility of this
kind of religion that's not a religion a
healthy and redemptive to use your term
version of it being organized with a new
way in which human beings can actually
inhabit the world biologically and
socially and environmentally I mean
that's a that's a real potential for the
kind of change that I'm interested in I
mean I've also you know quite a bit of
work on the really toxic effects of
urban sprawl on human beings and the way
they live and how much was lying on me
think about how it affects the mind and
you really clearly you know your window
you need to see some more fucking
concrete you see another building that's
about as far as your mind can go you
know if you look out of a window and you
can just see you know niceness for a
long you know that's as far as your mind
oh yes that's well so be that simple
yeah there's a deep relationship between
what we can see in the world and how we
internalize it into our cognition I
think I mean cars you know if you have
been to the UK or been to a council
estate but like there's a reason grime
music sounds the way it does it sounds
exactly like a council estate harsh
ragged ugly sort of desperate nihilistic
sort of bitter grey thing which is
brilliant because it perfectly reflects
what it came from
I find it up in the way music often
sounds exactly like where it comes from
like west coast g-funk hip hop music
sounds exactly like what Los Angeles
looks like this bizarro like beauty
crossed with all that urban decay this
one you could look up and there's a
beautiful poetry and you look down and
there's a guy shooting up smack on the
floor yeah hey guys I'm gonna jump in
you were jamming for about 30 minutes do
you want to pivot to the QA there's some
good questions coming up or do you want
to continue jamming I just I just wanted
to ask one more thing from Acura because
something just came immediately to mind
and was very salient or glittery as he
might say to me it's out there could you
describe what the music you're making
that it's psycho-spiritual geography is
actually from an emergent culture rather
than from a particular geographic
location do you think is that an
interesting way of thinking about it
we've been talking about this a lot on
my streams since Tom Hanks disease
kicked in
I've been streaming every day and doing
sort of gigs and we've taken with this
these sort of memetics kind of emerged
when you're doing things every day and
you have your community and first it was
this church of meaning thing and then it
became this autonomous the meaning way
of autonomous zone which became the city
of Mars which which is this place that
we all come to and we all inhabit and
that's the space between us and that's
that's all of us in this digital space
and it's what we all bring to it and is
this shining beautiful city that is like
the combination of our parts and what we
bring and all of all of that that
everyone brings together that doesn't
exist in the physical world but we're
that we all coming together created this
thing and that's more the space when I
think about it
which I never really did before I would
just do it it was less you know no like
I was saying I'll Zone in on the
individual person or the voice or the
message but then the sonic landscape of
meaning wave is a combination of all
this and it's what is in the heart of
all these people and all these people
seem to have in common is a love of
truth and beauty and humanity and that
spirit that has driven us forward for
all this time you know that optimistic
adventurous spirit of humanity
there's taken us from well from from
where we were as you described so
beautifully in your series and has is at
this incredible juncture where it could
all fall apart or we could reach forward
and grab that that next epoch sort of
complete transcendence for everybody
moment in human history which is where
we are the own or nothing
that's so interesting to me because the
place we've gotten to is very similar to
where Augustine was in 410 we wrote the
City of God because he's comparing the
physical city of Rome hmm the City of
God the the new civilization built on
the kingdom of God which of course
wasn't any particular geographical
location but a whole new way of being
that was coming into existence so that's
really cool that we've gotten to this
point well I was watching my little
brother cuz I remember before the
internet but my little brother doesn't
yeah and I remember when you weren't
allowed to like hip-hop and rock music
and those kids set on different sides of
the the court you know
and now the Twain would meet but my
little brother he would be listening to
Japanese reggae and thrash and like
pirate music and rap and he'd be talking
to people all over the world and they
didn't see any differences between them
their nature the geographical thing
didn't matter than they existed together
in in in cyberspace you know and like in
that jared lani a dream world which
philip k dick spoke so much but that
thing's real we already live in it we're
already there that's the thing mmm but
we're in we're in that as Peter talks
likes to say liminal space we're in that
in-between world currently because much
of what governs us is still in that old
world yeah yeah the proper the proper
thing to do in the liminal space
according to women Akkad is to play
serious play and this is why I keep
doing these Alan Watts records yeah
is that his main thing yeah and people
do you forget that because it's so
serious and we have got serious problems
and there's you know the barbarians are
at the proverbial gates and all that
business you know there's like the Ross
is within and without and so on and so
forth and there is danger everywhere but
you know the purpose of life is to play
well said well said I'm human a right
now if you want to okay yeah yeah baby
there's a delicious question related to
that just want to confirm we have like
about 15 minutes scheduled till the hour
are you guys cool to stay
fifteen minutes or 30 minutes or
anything like that or would you have to
either babyís my stream is at 6:00 I'm
groovy so 6:00 okay John I can stay for
a bit longer
okay cool Tyson you had a question it's
related to it cured you said you want to
I meet your self in asking yeah thank
you all right so my question was what
role does danger or knife's edge miss
play in creating a beautiful culture or
riff on other conditions that might
allow a beautiful culture to emerge well
I mean I think it depends that you
wanted to find danger but the only time
I make anything good is when I'm
teetering on the edge of danger so
that's why I always make sure I'm
introducing new processes and
technologies and approaches every
project I do
I'll introduce like a new instrument or
something I don't understand so I'm on
the edge of my ability to actually do it
because the second I'm comfortable then
then the work becomes comfortable and
greatness doesn't come from comfort ever
so you want to be kind of on the edge of
ultra danger at all times when you're
creating so I suspect it's probably the
same if you're trying to create you know
a whole beautiful world and we are
really on the edge of danger right now
so I think this is the perfect time to
create that that beautiful thing what do
you think John I think that's excellent
I think that if we pay attention to the
conditions that are conducive to flow
one of the things that is an important
predictor of the flow state is the
importance of error error has to cost
error has to matter and so if you're in
situations in which error doesn't matter
and I guess that's one way of describing
danger danger is a situation in which
error matters then you're not going to
get into the flow state so I I try to do
the same thing when I'm talking with
people or
I'm lecturing I try to put myself into
situations where that can matter and in
connection with that we know that
disruptive strategy strategies that
disrupt our normal pattern of thinking
are conducive to insight so that's why
so many cultures have used disruptive
strategies sleepers bring themselves off
roofs yeah yep exactly
or cycle is why psychedelics can work if
properly set and setting so if we mean
by danger error matters and destructive
strategies are indispensable
and finally that means the environment
is always demanding more from us then I
think it's it's central to trying to get
into the patterns of interaction and
participation that will afford the
emergence of a new culture yeah when I
was DJing I would always make sure in
the outside world in the long long long
ago of pre Tom Hanks disease I would
always make sure I had a whole bunch of
new records to that I had to play that
hadn't played before but I wouldn't know
what deejays often fall into this habit
of just playing the same songs that they
know work if I play that then that girls
go crazy boom they just do that and then
it becomes boring you always have to
have this element if you could complete
the clip of complete disaster for the
really magical moments the transcendent
magical moments are always the ones
where you could have completely lost it
all
I agree trying to get into situations
where there's an open endedness what Jim
cars calls an infinite game rather than
a finite game I think that's really
really central and again it's hard for
me to see any other example from history
of people being able to afford this on
the scale and forth you know and also I
don't mean just social scale I also mean
through time cross-generational I don't
see anything being able to do this other
than things like religions and so I I
have no I hope I I have no illusions or
pretense
you know this project although it's
urgent and the changes rapid this isn't
going to be accomplished in my lifetime
or anything like that that's not I don't
foresee that being the case and I think
you're pretty fast right now or you
might be surprised I might be surprised
and I'm open to being wrong
I'm open to being wrong but I also think
let me express some more as a hope
I would hope that this took at least a
generation or two because typically
cross-generational things matter the
cathedrals took multiple generations and
things like that so that's that's what
so it's a commitment to something maja
we undertake things right now it's it if
we if we're really trying to do
something this significant the danger is
not just or error or demand there's the
danger that we're going to confront and
this is a really existential danger
we're gonna confront the limits of our
mortality in a profound way and can we
keep going can we keep working can we
keep the commitment not even when our
mortality gets in the way I think that's
a really important issue yeah I think we
can but you know I'm an optimist look I
I tend to attend so pessimistic end of
the spectrum but I've been hanging
around with more optimistic people
lately so it's been rubbing off on me
well the balance is very important we
need you focus otherwise you know we'll
be running off hopping around naked in
the trees thinking everything's
wonderful and then getting getting
mucked I'm very optimistic because I pay
attention to the youth and as many of
the issues that we had they do not and
while they're currently trying to get
reprogrammed into them I don't think
they'll take because you know just what
you see on your own life and what
they've seen in their own lives and what
they believe what what they expect what
kids under a certain age does expect
from reality it's so completely
different to what
we did with regards to their potential
with regards to their ability to create
with regards to their ability to
manifest what they imagined in the world
and like how powerful that is we don't
even know yet the fact that your average
seven-year-old has the creative
capability of Steven spielberger is
prime with regards to what they can put
into the world with regards to being
able to like manifest their imagination
like every 7 year old on the planet can
do that so what that what happens when
that they have influence in the world
boggles the mind you know if we can do
our part and if we can all go 100% and
stop wasting time and start fucking
about and fire on all flipping cylinders
by the time they're ready to step up
there will be the framework for them to
do real magic so I agree with the
potential that you said but I guess I
also see because I'm an educator and I
see the fact that in many ways these
called these kids also don't have
they've also lost a lot - yes they've
lost a lot in terms of cultural
cognitive and collective machinery
distributed cognition machinery that's a
big part of what we have to be right now
yes that's what I was going to say and
so I think I mean this is where I agree
with Zack I think that you know what we
have to really start blurring the lines
and this means giving up the way that
we've given sort of the market sort of
has become the de facto default deity
for us and what we have to do another
way the challenge is we have to we have
to blur the lines and this is we're
doing it right now between education and
inculturation and a profound and
comprehensive way and I think that's
also part of what needs to be going on
here
and I even like the genre that you've
created around there Sakura precisely
and I mean this as a compliment because
it blurs that line right you know it's
music and
in in the right side of the word it's
entertaining but it's centered on also
presenting ideas and meaning that the
line between enculturation education and
entertainment has been blurred and I
think - very very good effect I think
that's a very important thing like I
think the genre in addition to the
particular products is an important
thing
thank you and I agree I agree
who's the thing that needed to exist and
now it does and lots more of that sort
of thing you know will be popping up all
over the place because now we have the
tools previously only a few people got
to decide what was done with that
technology yes eyeko technology with
that potentiality the combination that
no one talks about that the power of
music and how incredibly powerful it is
incredibly persuasive is nobody talks
about that you take the music out of a
film the film is less than fifty percent
I mean music is more you know it's like
when you cry in a movie it's not because
of what you saw is because of the sound
and what you saw but moreso the sound
because you could the music could still
make you cry you could close your eyes
and you still cry so yeah it's
incredibly powerful and there's loads of
you know this and I'm just scratching
the surface of what's of the potential
of it with regards to the way I'm
working with it the Lord knows what
other potential entities there and then
when we start integrating the really
powerful visual stuff and we start
putting that in a in a sort of augmented
reality or virtual reality space and
when people start interacting in that
kind of world and it becomes this more
participation thing they the potential
is epic baby I'm very excited when you
said that a Nietzsche quote came to mind
for me he said that life would be a
mistake without music yeah yeah that's
that's that's true was anything I didn't
think good maybe we could take another
question now Peter sorry she here and I
keep riffing off of it
he's a very very electric person a Chris
you had a question about magic yes thank
you
gentleman has been really magic brought
up just a little while ago I'm curious
to know what role you see magic plane in
this emerging culture
John I mean I have thoughts on magic
I'll be interested member had you met so
I did I generally don't use that word
precise you're gonna say that well it's
because it's such an equivocal word yes
so it can mean that you can bend the
laws of physics with your mind or you
can top into some forces that can never
be made consistent with physics or
something like that
and it's just what you call stuff you
don't understand yet right that's
technology that he done there high
worship candy or I mean that's the
arthur c clarke definition which is also
another definition there's a more
anthropological definition which i find
valuable which is precisely when people
take patterns of meaning and identity in
distributed cognition in religion and
here i'm making use of daniel O'Keefe's
idea of the social theory of magic right
and then what they do is they they
individuate it and they create they do
sort of riff psycho technologies off of
those patterns and use that in often a
subversive fashion and that that magic
affords people often recapturing both
individually and in some sort in some
kind of subculture small-scale
communities right access to experience
into development that has been shut off
to them by the overarching religion and
then what magic tends to do in that
sense and the line between magical
states and mystical states and ritual
states and meditative States is all very
blurred but what that typically does is
if they survive because of course that's
a dangerous thing to do if they survive
that will typically have generated in
it's new cycle technologies new
practices that then get reabsorbed into
the religion and so there's this sort of
dialectical relationship between
religion and magic and so insofar as
human beings are taking taking
established patterns of meaning making
and doing that sort of thing with them I
think an anthropologist and I've done I
did anthropology in graduate school
would call that magic I don't like the
term because like I said it has its the
excuse for sloppy thinking it's the
excuse often for narcissism
it's these the Buddha once said this is
how you will know somebody is not one of
my disciples if they offer to perform a
miracle so all of that stuff I think and
and there's good mythological warnings
against across many traditions that the
pursuit of magic is the thing in this
pejorative sense that is is the biggest
form of bullshitting that will steer us
away from the cultivation of wisdom so
that's why I tend not to use the word I
tend to reserve the word for its
cultural associations you know magic as
that supernatural ability so but I tend
to instead use the word ritual now
normative ritual and I'm willing even to
talk about things being sort of shamanic
rituals because shamanism bridges nicely
between psychological and distributed
cognition transformation so I'm happy to
talk about that but like I said sorry
I'm going on and on a sore spot but I
don't like to use the word brand what
destroys magic well see I'll try I'm
trying my best to bridge between science
and spirituality is that such an
equivocal term that it often fudges and
smudges rather than building an
appropriately load-carrying bridge
between the two so that yeah I like that
about what you do I think one should
just you know all of these things fine
what's useful in them take that and you
know and so don't you that the aspects
the only bit of magic I was ever
interested in because it was practical
in it felt like it worked was the bit of
chaos magic which was sigil
magic which I later worked out the
reason sigil magic works is because
you're communicating or feels like it
works what seems to sometimes work is
because you're communicating and ideas
your subconscious quite specifically
it's the same as the affirmation or the
prayer thing or whatever you're getting
your subconscious to work on stuff so
then your subconscious which does so
much of the practical stuff in your life
you are helping to direct that so there
is you know there are practical you
there's practical application for some
of the stuff that is a part of so-called
magic Oh profoundly I think I think
that's exactly the right
I think enacted symbols within ritual
practice to access and activate aspects
of unconscious both within us and
without us
processing cognitive processing that
can't be accessed otherwise and so I
think we often find that these symbols
are indispensable to us the confusion
that we fall into I would argue is that
we confuse that indispensability with
having discovered some metaphysically
necessary structure of reality and I
think that's often a mistake again the
argument that bears against that
metaphysical claim is the massive
pluralism we find in rituals and the and
all of these very different rituals are
efficacious to significant degrees and
that has to be better explained than the
individual metaphysical claim that goes
with each particular set of rituals any
basically needs to have this the is this
there's all these tools and many many
tools that are considered magic are just
tools and the advertising industry uses
them yes and those that would seek to
control us use them and they used every
day it's a great and greater
sophistication it would a state
incredible work with what is some wood
used to call magic oh yes eres magic
from the Renaissance goes right in
through and into marketing and
advertising there is a direct
historical lineage there was a book
written on that it's an excellent book
and I can't remember the title of it
right now I apologize to the author yeah
that's exactly the case that's exactly
the case and so yeah
I think part of what we should be doing
right now is sort of what are all the
tools that are at our disposal
where are they who's got them and how
can we integrate them so that we've all
got them to anything that's being used
against us or what-have-you we need to
have that as well and then anything
that's missing maybe there's some stuff
that that you know that's been left on
the table so I like terence mckenna's
archaic revival concept the thing the
thing I would add I think you would
agree with me on this is gathering those
tools is not separable from gathering
people together into a community there
has to be a way in which people aren't
going to share and co-create tools until
they can this is a dangerous verb but
it's the right verb right now until they
can trust each other mm-hmm well they
can trust each other yeah yeah I agree
yeah next Hannah
you had a question I read I copied it
into the chat box so you have access to
it thanks so much guys this is been
really really interesting so far my
question is for both of you in terms of
navigating to stay in the flow state and
synchronicities how do you balance the
need or desire to go meta especially in
communities like this that are very meta
orientated with the way that going meta
can take you out of the flow State yeah
that is don't think feel thing in it
which is often misinterpreted but you
know the depends what you're doing
there's room for contemplation but in
the actual creation in the actual doing
you really don't want to be overthinking
you don't really really don't want to be
stepping out and then afterwards you can
go what did I make how did I make it
but even you in the process of the
actual doing you don't want to distract
yourself from the doing or or you know
pull out of the doing while you're doing
the doing I would say what would you say
John I think that's right you know in in
the sense that one of the things that
chokes off flow is when people start to
self narrate when they get into and when
they start trying to narrate what's
happening so one of the things that that
is typically shut off and what a bloody
relief it is when it is shut off for a
while that I think that's a fever hunger
of self referentiality that the
narrative that's always going on and on
so one of the things that shutoff and
flow is that narrative image management
machine one of the things I would say is
there are ways of going meta that aren't
ways of that are independent from going
into that narrative nanny in the head
there are ways of moving meta there's a
way there's a way of zooming out and
zooming in and that can also be taken up
into a flow state part of what I'm yeah
that zooming out and zooming in the a
budding thing right up above and
visualizing that and do because that's
what happens yes yes it is
and there's even a way of you know
there's a way of being reflective this
is part of what I'm trying to work out
with Christopher Christopher master
Pietro and with Peter and with guy cents
talking during the whole in dialectic
there's a way of bringing reflection
into this that nevertheless is not flow
disruptive but flow conducive so there I
think two things to be said is we
definitely want to avoid the nattering
narrative nanny but that just like flow
tells you flow shows you that the
central lie of the of that narrative ego
that narrative ego says you can't do
anything well without me and what flow
shows you is that's a lie you can
actually do better without it
incident in it in a similar way another
related lies reveal the line that you
can only go meta by going in
that narrative reflective self retro
Selfridge estate that's also a lie
there are ways of going meta
neoplatonism is filled with them so it's
sort of versions of Buddhism there are
ways of going meta that do not break
flow but actually they do something
interesting they can move you from an
intimacy with way with the task or even
the other people in the task to an
intimacy with sort of the patterns of
intelligibility itself and the flow can
then sort of ramp up the level at which
it's occurring so that's that's how I
would answer that question it's the
difference between flow and awareness
yes yes yes okay that and one can exist
without the other and the other cannot
and that's the thing that people often
get completely backwards I think so I
think so and we have to remember that
awareness we also we have a spotlight
metaphor for attention that our
attention our awareness our just shining
a homogeneous light on something and
that's also a deep mistake you I mean
music actually shows how intricately and
dynamically self-corrective and
multi-layered attention and awareness
can be yeah really the amount of
simultaneously occurring patterns
exactly the high degree of
intelligibility that is being processed
in music yes yeah there you go David do
you had a question yet a few I think
yeah the basic gist is that was just go
with the last one
it's about this trust and I and John
I've been thinking a lot about the
notion of trust as a propositional frame
has one meaning but I'd argue that what
you're talking about accurate with the
kids playing games they have a
procedural trust they know how they know
that space there's something of the
perspectival trust and the participatory
trust where ego doesn't have a foothold
and it's really scary for the
propositional so there's something in
that space and that kind of ties back
into this powder-keg moment we're in
we need that kind of trust we need to
delve deep into the participatory trust
where I have no fucking clue what's
going on
all I know is I'm having an experience
start there and reboot myself from that
so that's the kind of thing you're not
going to talk the way through that son
that kind of practices what can we do to
help engender that kind of trust so I
mean that's why I invoke that term
intimacy and the idea of intimacy being
something that's connected to a virtue
and I've been trying to reinvent few the
word invent EO means the Latin word
means both to discover and to invent it
hangs between those two and so I'm using
that Latin word to try and you know get
to that place that's why I'm trying to
reinvent here this the notion of faith
is exactly that continuity of contact
that ability that trust that isn't
closure it's it's it's faithfulness like
when you're faithful to your partner you
don't try and they're not complete to
you you don't you haven't grasped them
you you never have a you don't have a
closed picture of a final thing in fact
what you're doing is you're trying to
couple your co amor your emergency our
merchants so the your Co emergent
together
it's a faithfulness and that's not the
same thing as certainty and and and this
is another part of the Cartesian
framework that we just got to get rid of
we have had four centuries of
devastating philosophical psychological
social critique of this Cartesian idea
of certainty we have to give it up and I
think what I would be saying I think
what you're if you'll allow me David I
think respectable and participatory
Trust is exactly that that you couple
yourself to another person and there is
this there is that the off there's that
sense of a continuity of contact of
flowing together I'm playing with this
of course in together and that that
course has a life of its own there you
are ultimately in service to and so that
sense of faithfulness and being in
service to
and you know that your emergence is
coupled to the emergence of what you're
in faithfulness to that's what I'm
trying to explore in some of these
discussions around these notions of
trust and it's a different notion than
certainty and it's a different notion
than the popular notion of faith as
asserting stupid things that have no
other evidence right that that that has
got to that's a that's that's a magical
in the pejorative sense of the word
sense of faith that we've got to we've
got to get past those are just those are
just mirror they're just you know
they're just mirror images of each other
they're just locked together and you got
to break both of them at the same time
it's the participation yes it's yeah
outside of the culture the culture is
dictated and everyone is smashed out at
the sidelines in the fucking stores
punching each other in the face when
everyone is engaged in the creation of
myth and the mythology and the culture
together you're too busy playing and
creating to fucking punch each other in
the face as well stirred I go on and on
and on and then you say very very
briefly succinctly
thank you both required but the message
it's fun okay cool maybe we'll do one
more question mimetic keeper you had a
question I think you had two hi John I'm
gonna note here that a my handle
actually mimetic paper it is synonymous
with stealing culture yeah so within my
own thinking the core element of culture
is attention and you see goal-directed
behavior authority theater they're all
ways of structuring attention the
dilemma I think with stealing culture
then is that it because it can become
merely competing in the attention
economy and while attention must be
captured I I take it you believe it must
be transmuted into a different form as
well yeah yeah after you have audience
what's next is spectator culture
pathologic
so again I take very seriously
everything you said which is why I you
know I spend a lot of time on attention
and related phenomena like insight I
think culture is also about shaping
agency but let's just stick with
attention for now I think the thing you
said towards the end there about the
transmutation or well I what I some
cults sometimes call that the excitation
right the transmutation of attention is
essential this is this this goes this
isn't my idea this is iris Murdoch's
idea in the sovereignty of the good that
the central the central act of any
ethical or virtuous or moral life is the
act of attention and giving just notice
the language from David giving things
they're just or do attention is
ultimately the the core act which
strikes many of us as what surely how we
treat others is the Quran but her
argument is everything else ultimately
depends on just attention so I think
you're right we and I've tried to resist
and this you know I failed at times and
I admit that but I you know but I having
people helping me especially amar and
Anderson I've tried to resist merely
trying to capture attention of like or
doing things that would just gather
attention to what I'm doing for the sake
of gathering it and so that I mean it
was deliberate and I mean this seriously
that I presented awakening from the
meaning crisis the way I did it I mean
come on the series is punishing their
hour-long and their complex and there's
50 of them and oh my gosh and I refer to
so many books and you know and part of
it was an experiment on my part to see
if if it could even succeed and then in
what I'm doing now when I'm running you
know I'm building with other people
let's be clear about that
you know Brett's here for example I'm
building a Sangha around people going
through we're building an ecology of
practice in a community of
hating and contemplating and she can
practice and Lexi Oh Davina and things
like this where we are engaging in that
fundamental individual and collective
project of the transmutation of
attention and so it's there and and it's
being recorded and you know people can
join and be involved and they can see so
I'm trying to exemplify so I've tried to
make the way I gather attention
challenging and so that it is ultimately
conducive to virtuous attention and then
I have tried to afford both on a quality
of practices and a community of Sangha
that is exemplifying that transformation
of attention to people that's how I'm
trying to meet I think the very
important point you're making
all right thank you I definitely was not
accusing you of being a clickbait person
you pretty much the opposite of that
well I'm trying to I'm trying to show
you that so sorry I didn't mean to sound
defensive if I did that wasn't my intent
or at least that wasn't my conscious
intent that my virtuous intent was that
I was trying to indicate to you that
I've thought about this a lot and deeply
and these are the answers I've tried to
put into practice yeah I like the
exemplifying thing it's the that's the
only way to bring about a cultural
change if I don't if I don't exemplify
what I'm talking about then I'm just
talking it's just propositional if I
have to exemplify and afford other
people participating or else I won't
reach the procedural the perspectival or
the participatory right that's why
that's why and this I am NOT comparing
myself in any other way but that's why
Jesus of Nazareth is so critical of
hypocrisy to my mind and to
self-righteousness precisely because it
it is not a case of exemplification
the kira did you want to comment
anything you heard there are just
thinking about that that obese woman is
on the health board or whatever it is
the the World Health Organization you
know and yes it's very important to
embody it is it is crucial to embody the
stuff whatever the stuff is actually be
doing it actually be and do it and
practice it and uh no obviously we know
this and again one of the things on the
couch sorry Jager I was just gonna say I
was gonna go back to something you said
when you talked about the power of music
hmm music is a psycho technology that
can bring about that embodiment it
literally we literally embody it when
you were when we went when the song was
being played you know how many people
were moving yeah like why are they doing
that
what's that accomplish it it's not
accomplishing anything what they're
doing is it's not there's no so much
doing they're embodying their embodying
the music because that tremendous power
I you know I've been saying this with
work I've been doing with Daniel gray
right this needs me this needs artists
more than it needs just people doing
what I'm doing that why I had to do what
I was doing yes I was on this journey I
couldn't I had this trilogy of albums in
mind and I did the first two the winning
it the first was about the individual
and being a kid the right of the
individual to be an individual the
second one was when you get a bit older
you start interfacing with the world
you realize you're a part of something
greater the third one I went to make and
then I couldn't make it so I wasn't
smart enough yeah it wasn't wise enough
yeah I lived in a few and at that point
I wasn't your father or this done so I
had to go away and then I realized that
hang on there's all these people who've
been thinking about this ship for forty
years that guy over there has been
thinking about that one aspect for four
years so let's bring him in and then the
other guy is thinking about the other
side of it and then Marcus Aurelius over
there who's been dead for 2,000 years he
had some pretty great stuff to say I
could put those in the song boom then
suddenly you got all these
vast things in you know in that soup
super-powerful delivery mechanism of
music you can just drill it right into
your soul and then is there forever
doesn't leave you know it's not like you
can wash it off you know you're baptized
in it I like that turn of phrase
so chance do you have any final words
before he closed off today he wishes
well I put a song at like the week
before the song with you and I just
sampled something Elon Musk said and he
said if you don't make stuff there is no
stuff just just on what we were just
talking about and that's some real shit
you don't mean if you don't make sure if
there is no stuff and you can sit around
talking about this stuff all day long
but you know if you ain't making this
stuff if you aren't actually out there
creating doing engaging being embodying
all of that and that's what we need
right now is we just need everybody to
be on 100 then we need everybody's light
in the world you know when people are
scared is sharing their light with the
world they get embarrassed or whatever
the fuck it is so they never even
thought about in that context that they
have a light share with the world
everybody does everyone's got a really
important piece of the puzzle everybody
has one of those pieces and so everybody
needs to do to work out what that is and
get themselves to 100% then in
everything in their health in their in
their cognition now ever if everybody
did that we'd be fuckin groovy would be
ranting around the stars like fucking
Star Trek next generation but like you
know I mean already you know it is so
yeah that's it baby
workers share that light with the world
and don't be fucking stingy let's say
you gentleman thank you
well first of all thought that was
wonderful and I guess mmm that our time
together is fading under I just wanted
to I I really enjoyed meeting you I
really
getting to know you and I really I
appreciate your fire and I've often been
I talked him instead of me that I'm a
person that can catch on fire but I
really appreciate yours and I really
appreciate what you're doing and I mean
appreciate in all the senses I
understand it I value it it's it's it's
it calls me to aspiration so I just
wanted to thank you and I I hope you
keep doing what you're doing
it sounds like it's inevitable for you
but that doesn't mean I mean what i find
what i do is inevitable to me but it
sure matters when people also encourage
me so i want to encourage you to keep
going because i think what you're doing
is important so thank you very very much
thank you brother likewise likewise and
yeah yeah I heard you catch but many
signs writing my Eastgate from dancer in
Los Angeles back to West Hollywood come
back everyday listen she's suddenly
going off and we have insecurities
trying fucking Park my East groups right
down that bit of the lecture that I
wanted to sample just keep doing it
every flippin five minutes so thank you
for everything you're doing and I'm just
really excited about the future you know
me too me too and I also wanted to thank
Peter and the stoah for making this
possible
yeah appreciate it very much yeah
beautiful beautiful way to end in a
moment we'll talk about upcoming events
but thank you guys for sharing your fire
at the stoah and inspiring us just
continue to steal the culture know so
yeah I'll pitch a few events we got one
in our wisdom gym that's coming up and
in like ten minutes actually Tyson
you're here do you want to meet yourself
and plug it yes thanks Peter I'm getting
ready right now the event is blowing
unknowingness we start in eight minutes
and we'll be engaging in some serious
play exploring open-endedness and
accessing group flow through music
exploring creative self-expression
deepening our relationship with
uncertainty and I'll see y'all there
very soon beautiful I definitely checked
recommend checking out when I would be
at the nice edge of your comfort zone
for sure yeah it's more we're like a
stacked lineup we have like
three new events what is emerging the
people at the emerge what there's a
video series talking about the
environment the economy that's at 4:00
p.m. Eastern Time then we have the
future of governance and we got stoned
at the stoah with filemaker cafes the
heady breeze gonna get stoned and I
don't know what's gonna happen after
that so you can RSVP on the website and
this still is based off a gift economy
reviewing it as a gift for us to freely
use in this time of need if you're
inspired to write a gift you can go to
the website or you can go dry through
the patreon site that's in the chat box
so thank you so much everyone for coming
out today
[Applause]