good evening good morning my name is
Tomas Tania I welcome you to Grady wolf
a la VT that cast for consciousness in
Kallstrom I'm very happy to have here
pissed me shorten Hall Jordan hello to
revolve Jordan you are here right now
its morning time your time in California
thank you very much for joining really
evolved invited here because you are a
very known thinker in certain circles
for a new complex complexity oriented
understanding of what's going on right
now in the world and you also has a very
particular perspective of something that
you call a meta-crisis a meta-crisis
that's much more than the corona crisis
that we are in I think it's also much
more than the economic and financial
crisis that we aim and you have a
certain insights that I find are very
important just to hear in the discuss
because maybe that describes something
of the background of the situation that
we are in or at least allow us to
discuss the backgrounds of the crisis
between because everyone is very focused
on a virus at this point at the same
time we are very aware that our
financial situation is in a very clear
situation and most of us are very aware
that our ecological crisis has not gone
anywhere but it seems to be that all
these different layers of crisis a part
of one big picture and the term that you
are using meta crisis also talks to that
that there is more than just the crisis
that we see and it would like to have
this commercial conversation started
with the question um when you talk about
a meta crisis that we in what are you
talking about
well maybe it seems to me that the thing
that I would like to try is to is to go
somewhat deep into that question but it
seems to me before before we can go very
deep perhaps we should begin by doing
some small things that are somewhat
easier you mentioned for example that
there seems to be something more
profound going on than just a virus for
example and then you mentioned that
there's some of them seems to be
something more profound going on than
just a financial crisis or just an
economic crisis or the relationship
among these three things okay but Babb
begins to move this from the direction
of the notion of a meta crisis that the
the insight or the premise is that if we
if we scratch at the surface of most of
the the kinds of systems that we tend to
use to make society work things like
education or food or urban design or
parenting and family or money we will
begin to notice that
most of them infected many many in many
ways all of them have
significant challenges which is to say
what I would say is that they are they
are close to they are vulnerable to
being in a state of of crisis and so
that's the first part so the first part
is that that most or all of our social
systems are close to being in a state of
crisis and this fact is is implicative
meaning as we've seen these these
systems are not isolated they are
connected to each other and a an event
that occurs like for example say a virus
that comes in and and hits us at the
medical level spills over into the
financial level spills over into the
political level spills over into the
psychological domain and so the the
fragility the the lack of richness and
robustness in each of the subsystems is
made all the more significant by the
fact of their being so tightly connected
such that what might ordinarily be only
a minor crisis in one area may in fact
become a Christ it's a larger crisis in
another area which then may in fact
spill back to the first so you get
feedback loops in complexity this is
called a cascade failure maybe a little
bit more on that because we can use some
nice visual metaphors if you if you
visualize taking an hourglass and
turning it upside down and watching the
sand fall you'll you'll be probably
witnessed if you've ever done that that
the grains of sand tend to pile on top
of each other and pile on top of each
other and until all at once there's an
avalanche of some magnitude and big
chunks that same will slide down and
then
pile and pile and big chunks of
stainless lie down now if you look very
closely what actually happened there is
a weight building and there's a bunch of
sand particles that are sitting on top
of other sand particles with a certain
amount of friction holding them that's
the energy that's holding up the weight
as the weight hits one sand particle
breaks beyond its capacity to hold its
friction is not as strong as the weight
on it but as soon as it's no longer
holding weight that weight spreads to
other sand particles they break and you
get a whole cascade failure into an
avalanche
hmm that's a very good sort of simple
example of the notion of a cascade
failure now if we return that back to
what we're dealing with we have at the
first level of analysis we have a very
large number of subsystems meaning
things that we could normally speak of
as just being their own thing that are
very linked together in by the way
complex and highly unpredictable ways
it's not just a simple you know linkage
this way it's it's a rich mesh it's
difficult to know exactly what the
implications of I lived in the United
States so I have a much cleaner
experience of what's happening here but
the implications of a of a mass
quarantine okay well what implications
does that have for our food supply
chains very difficult to know then
suddenly oh it turns out that dairy
farmers have to waste get rid of of milk
because x y and z reason wheat seems
unaffected in facts need to be getting
cheaper because oil prices are going
down and slaughterhouses
are shutting down completely this would
have been very difficult to predict
beforehand that's the complex linkages
but then we can go up to a to one level
higher in abstraction and talk a little
bit about why so we can now begin to get
a bit a bit deeper into the inquiry the
notion of emetic Rises and there's a
number of reasons why actually that I've
had been able to discern myself and I'm
sure there's a number more that I
haven't even begun to scratch the
surface on one that I think is landed
quite heavily is hungry call this it's
almost like mono cropping we've been
we've been mono cropping our social
institutions which is to say it that
specifically making more efficient
economic optimisation has been hitting
creasing Li dominant the language I want
to use this from evolutionary theory and
increasingly dominates selective
function basically dominant design
constraint or force that has shaped our
social institutions and so one of the
characteristics of economic optimization
of seeking for efficiency is the
efficiency and resilience tend to be in
tension more efficient I make something
the less resilient I make it the
metaphor that I've found very useful
here is in evolutionary theory the
metaphor of the saber-tooth tiger as it
becomes more and more optimized for a
particular niche it becomes more and
more vulnerable that a small change in
the niche actually kills it
they can't elegantly shift to being a
slightly less saber-tooth tiger because
it's become so optimized for that very
specific niche such is the case for our
global society we've taken things and
we've squeezed out the resilience and
then of course not all of us but as a
dominant theme so one characteristic of
the meta crisis is the degree to which
this dominant theme of optimizing for
economic efficiency has so thoroughly
shown up in all of our subsystems and
this creates that lack of resilience
everywhere which makes the the
connections between subsystems look like
systemic fragility instead of systemic
resilience it's ok to optimize in some
cases but it's a great idea it's
important to optimize in some cases but
it's also important to maintain
resilience in other cases so that it's
one piece breaks other pieces don't
break
I feel like feel like now we may
actually be able to have the
conversation that we're supposed to have
this is deaf frame my particular frame
at the language that I use in ways that
and think about things to begin actually
asking the more meaningful questions now
thank you very much because listening to
you the image that arises from what I
hear from you is that we are in a global
situation there the interconnectedness
of all the subsystems that you are
talking about and even even more so I at
a rate of interconnectedness that we
never had before and this seems to be
something that seems to be a new reality
that we are launching into a already
middle of launching it so the same time
what you're characterizing there's one
subsystem and it's optimization which is
a particular as I understand you
economic optimization that has developed
its own nests in a very monocultural way
and has become a dominant force and
something that has optimized but in
itself by doing this also less the
capacity of the resilient in a
particular ecosystem that we call world
and that we are at a breaking point that
this one system of optimization and the
more and more interconnectedness of all
the systems that we've ecologically in
ecologically I mean also human
ecological psychological ecology all
kind of ecological ecologists that
something seems to be is a breaking
point where as it used to work doesn't
work anymore
because somehow the killing changes is
that what you very much so as you as
you've been speaking a bunch of
different images that popped into my
mind so I think we can go we can go and
go more we can now do more at this same
level this level up here where we put
the object of efficiency optimization
actually one level above it so now it's
we have three levels this is good how do
I say this I'll use I'll use language
from the 1980s actually that tickets
right the dominant paradigm for the
dominant social paradigm and to some
extent the dominant psychological
paradigm has has reached his limits so
let me let me expand on what I mean
there and before I go there I want to
just create another useful tool
so I imagine that most of your listeners
are familiar with the story of
Copernicus and the story of Ptolemy and
the notion of a geocentric the Ptolemaic
geocentric model of the solar system and
of universe and the notion of the EPI
cycle that's why I have a model and I'm
I have the earth at the center and I
have a story that talks about how each
of the planets and stars orbits the
earth and my model works ok but as my
experience of reality shows that my
model isn't quite right I had to change
the model a little bit mmm add an epi
cycle I have to add his flight more but
after hundreds and few years and after
thousands of years we had originally
been a relatively simple model is now
this vast complex machinery that has all
sorts of crazy epicycles flowing through
it it's a very heavy big thing and only
a small number of people on the planet
could even hope to try to figure out how
to make it work at all and probably no
one really knows how it worked ok now
between 1914 and 1946 or 47 the this
sociological the political the economic
and in many ways the psychological
models paradigms that had been
stewarding hell at least the West in
many ways the world was doing its thing
doing human mess had we make food and
how did we heal the sick and what not
had been very heavily destroyed period
between World War 1 and the aftermath of
World War 2 was a period of significant
breaking and change any growth in the
period after that starting in the late
40s and through to the 1970s was a
period of an establishment of a new
paradigm a new mechanism a new set of
tools and most importantly a set of
institutions and ways of creating
institutions so I have an institution
but that's like a way of creating an
institution I have a toolkit for
creating institutions
in an essay that I wrote about five
years ago I referred to this as the blue
church in the sense of the Christendom
the Church of the the Catholic Church
prior to the Enlightenment was a
paradigm part of the paradigm and I
refer to the object that began the more
or less controlled and I don't mean this
in the most negative sense but managed
governed somewhat effectively the West
and therefore largely the world
certainly by the late eighties the world
the blue church and the blue church has
as any paradigm it has
habits it has tendencies it's like a
toolkit yeah so if I have a my toolkit
has hammer and a screwdriver in it then
everything is going to look like a nail
or a screw and as the paradigm of the
blue church over the past 40 or 50 years
has found situations that didn't quite
work well it's had to add epicycles and
it's become more and more complicated
and it's a very heavy
thing that very few people in the world
have any idea exactly how to do anything
with it and probably no one really knows
how to make it work well because it's in
many ways past it's due date and sex
it's like old milk and this this feeds
into the meta-crisis in two very
distinct ways and I think this this is
why I had to tell that story on the
first hand it's what holds the three
ways actually it's what holds the
subsystems that we have as they are so
the notion we think of say finance as
being a certain kind of thing and has
banks for example finance has banks and
as money that works in a certain way and
the education has schools that work in a
certain way and look like a certain
thing
well this paradigm this blue church
paradigm is the meta system that makes
those subsystems look the way they look
and holds them constrains them if I were
to say to you Thomas imagine a way of
doing finance that didn't have banks you
might be able to you're very creative
individual you might be able to begin to
imagine it but imagine trying to
accomplish it you begin running into the
fact that well in ordinary times you'd
have to convince the government to do
that which means that you're now moving
from the finance domain into the
governance domain because the governance
domain constrains what kinds of
possibilities there are in the finance
and it holds it together in a certain
way it's like the scaffolding of what
this space can look like so it creates
the the meta structure that constrains
the relationship in the nation ships
sub-systems one two this characteristic
of economic optimization as it turns out
is one of the most powerful games that
was available in the blue church in the
paradigm that has become our dominant
paradigm and what I mean by that is you
know like when you when you as a child
very very first played the game
tic-tac-toe
it was nearly infinite in potential the
notion that you put X's and not smiley
faces and O's and not squares and that
you could only put them inside the
initially the nature of the game was
quite mysterious
but after little while became very clear
what the nature the game was the
structure became evident and then after
a little while became very clear what
the root what the valid moves were and
of course the game was done kids of
tic-tac-toe well what I would propose is
that in the 50s and the 60s the game of
the dumb and a paradigm that we live in
now was relatively unknown it was open
many people were trying to figure out
what it could and couldn't do the time
you got to the 70s it had become no and
one of the moves one of the the most the
winning moves was money on money return
the move of economic optimization and
and therefore that particular move has
found itself cascading and circulating
through all the subsystems that are
constrained by the dominant paradigm
because it's one of the moves that is
central to the essential meta moves
inside the dominant paradigm alright
does that make sense what I'm saying
and then we have the third I think the
third is what is most relevant to this
particular forum because it has to do
with consciousness and it has to do with
psychology which is to my mind it is to
set a set of consciousness because in
the context of the dominant paradigm
that were in in the context of the blue
church as I mentioned there's a sort of
constraint or scaffold and that holds
together what finance is and what
education is and that constraint happens
in in two very distinct ways it happens
in the level of our of our design
imagination if we try to imagine a way
of accomplishing an objective trying to
do something we will default our
unconscious response will be produced
for us by the dominant paradigm because
it's the easiest answer as adults as
children living in this world it has
been impressed upon us to the point that
just becomes habit that if you want to
get money and go to the ATM machine or
if you want to buy things you give them
your credit card I remember when we
moved from cash to credit cards and
exactly how that shift occurred I'm sure
you all as well and maybe never did
there's a small number of people who
didn't make that change
and of course that that does habits or
even more meaningful when it becomes
larger structures when we think about
where to try to just even imagine when I
said the word education broadly speaking
one cannot help but have a whole
structure imply a whole set of
implications of what it feels like to be
sitting in the chair in the classroom
where the teacher is and what the
textbook looks and feels like because of
course it was your invited experience
and that invited experience of the whole
possibility of what could be was
replaced with the actual experience of
what was and therefore the constraints
and what could what would seems like it
could be if I if I may come in here with
a question because I really like the
comparison with the ku panic returned
and told me in the old view of the
medieval time because it's it's very
obvious the way to describe it
there was a certain baby this all
reality was the earth it was was flat
and they weather the Stars and Sun
around it and it kind of worked and it
made sense
and as he described it became a way of
some irregularities and you can more and
more complicated and became more and
more complicated to hold the old few et
for the new kind of questions we are we
are asking it didn't work anymore it
became very much dysfunctional yeah too
much if I relate this example if you're
bringing because this seems to be kind
of a percenter of the meta crisis it is
it was the epicenter of the meta-crisis
from the medieval time to modernity
where something broke down and something
different opened up which had to do with
a completely different understanding how
reality works what really is about what
makes us think about for the reality
works so oh why a rightist image because
it's very obvious there's a certain way
how this we got to look like in the
medieval times and it's very obvious it
looked different starting the
cooperative's this mutant and decart and
all these people
to look different because they had
different ideas about it and something
changed dramatically and you let me
bring this to what you're describing is
the blue church in the economic system
they establish itself 1944-45 and that
really where it is hide in the 60s and
came well complex in the 70s had some
particular change in the eighties until
tips some really big wall at least 2008
let's put it that way
the question I would like to ask is you
see this how does the world look like
from that perspective of the poor church
how does the world look like even you
see through the eyes of the blue church
and why is this perspective come
becoming dysfunctional right now hmm
well to the figure I feel I want to say
first is that what I'd like to do is
just try to venture an answer to your
question but I'm not proposing what I'm
about to say is particularly insightful
and what I'd hope is that just by
putting something out there it can begin
the process of responding to your
question more fully so the first thing
that comes to my mind is the world looks
like something that needs to be managed
hmm right when I say this is the very
center of the blue church there's a
managerial consciousness mind that
builds the kind of mind that can create
take us to the moon hmm the kind of mind
that can take a problem and manage the
problem break it down into its pieces
understand how each of the pieces can be
optimized build it back up into a system
that we can track and measure and then
gives us more at what it is whatever it
was that we were optimizing for in some
portion of the world this is called a
Six Sigma mind in if I recall correctly
in the last half of theof the American
side of World War two it was called
operational management can't remember
this the story was that inside the War
Department of the United States there
was a small number of people who were
using statistics the study what kinds of
military strategies were the most
efficient and noticed a number of
strategies that seemed like a good idea
actually weren't by using statistics to
model it and you know after the war that
seemed that that insight percolated out
building managerial how would you call
it meritocratic bureaucracy how do you
find the best people and then give them
bureaucratic institutions to manage to
do the best mm-hmm yeah now think about
medicine
the confession of the blue church is to
to manage the problem we want to create
a vaccine we want to create tests you
want to trace we want to track who went
to control we want to know what is
happening we want to build that
knowledge into some system that we can
understand we can control the system
design this system and then we want to
use that to achieve our desired results
that's efficiently that feels like
that's a decent swing at the problem I
just wanted to say I mean particular
when you bring it back now to the actual
corona crisis this seems to be a very
decent way to go about things to try to
kind of these statistics with numbers
with understanding understand basically
what this pandemic is about and find how
this virus works and find a way how we
can count the active areas with the vex
ion and then somehow find a way how to
produce it for a reasonable cost and
then basically hit it and defeat it
right I'm complete that sounds like a
decent thing to do if that's like
exactly the right thing to do it sounds
like to not do that would be obviously
you know so if this is the perspective
of the people Church this let's call it
natural mineral consciousness kind of
like that and I think it makes the point
and institutions and their left us is
called science and the particular ways
of science statistical science and their
institutions who hold that in economics
in universities and in the media hold
this as the perspective and it creates a
manageable world that's helped by kind
of that's my basically I think the world
of church is also good it's held like
kind of a circle of light with people
who need the wisdom of then the
knowledge to do that and create the
trust of the of the trust institutions
but the trust of table of the populace
under they do the right thing and create
the conferences
so the throughout things can be done
organized and found that's technological
solutions for the problems of the world
s victory particularly if we talk about
Corona crisis Lex I'm a sounds it like a
reasonable thing to do but I hear you
somehow that the perspective in itself
has run out of this course why yeah yeah
well but I want to highlight one thing
that was in what you said but I want to
make it more explicit because it's also
a part of what's happening in a very
important way so we said special people
are enlightened people and what I would
say is to something like there must be
an official Authority in this in the
context of managerial consciousness we
must have an official authority there
must be some specific institution that
is responsible for making sense of
what's happening and designing the
choices
ideally it's effective do it's a
competent official Authority but it's
crucial is that it's that it exists so
for example I think yesterday or the day
before Susan the CEO of YouTube
announced that YouTube will sense it
will take down any videos that are
contradicting the official
pronouncements of the World Health
Organization this is a very blue church
there's a very managerial consciousness
thing to do we have an official
authority the World Health Organization
we must fully attend to defer to the
sense thinking in the choice making
about Authority for this system to work
okay
of course that's crucial because well
let me see if I can make this very
smooth mmm how do I say this in a way
that is simple
ah okay one of the characteristics of
the world in which we live is that it
changes quickly and the relationships
that can occur change at a pace that is
just not comparable to the 1950s in the
1960
another characteristic
is it it's very complex
the actual number of relationships that
are is very large and therefore the way
that cause and effect looks low is very
large and again I don't mean to wave my
hands that the word very needs to be
some very nice large many scalable
German word is probably right like super
double plus super massively enormous Lee
large and this is important I think as
extoling said that quantity has a
quality all its own the the managerial
consciousness
is not prepared is strictly incapable of
operating in an environment that changes
at this pace and is at this level of
complexity for example it cannot foresee
the consequences of its own actions you
make a choice
the poor leadership of the United
Kingdom the initially thought based upon
their institutions of understanding that
the right choice was to I think it was
called herd immunity herd immunity yes
right but the right choice was herd
immunity and so they began to make that
choice then they began to discover that
the the exponential growth perhaps by
the way perhaps and the the fact that I
have to say perhaps several times is
evidence of what I'm saying the
epistemological uncertainty of the virus
itself even even up to and including the
possibility of it actually being a
causal agent is enormous
nonetheless we have a narrative that
that their institutions of understanding
came back with a different story
not too long after a week two weeks
later think how fast that is in
bureaucratic time and the entire nation
had to pivot 180 degrees no no shelter
in place no not just shelter in place
but you know all the way to the edge of
quarantine oh but the consequences that
that action includes among the long list
of consequences that the economy
suddenly just implodes which I'm sure
and here's the key
many many people predicted that but
this managerial consciousness is looking
at the world through a very narrow
telescope there's only so many people
who can be in charge at the official
institution it's not collective
intelligence it's a hierarchy that takes
certain kinds of intelligence from the
bottom can only send a small amount to
the next level in a smaller amount to
the next level and tiny amount to the
top the top now is responsible for
understanding all of this and trying to
make choices and cascade out and as the
choices cast get out the consequences
those choices become more and more
complex so the the architecture the
underlying fundamentals of the nature
the design of managerial consciousness
cannot respond to things that move this
quickly can I respond to things of this
level of complexity and generally
speaking creates more trouble than it
resolves by not being able to predict
the consequences of its own actions okay
let me come in here because the very
near you and it's it's a complete
oversimplification but anyway it seems
that basically what is a crisis right
now is a very simple thing the world is
not manageable anymore period and the
crisis as I understand you in the end is
the crisis of sense making any choice
the sense making in choice making in
which that the mental way of creating
stains and choice which you call the
butchart becomes dysfunctional and this
hyper connected hyper complex and and
and also high-speed reality that we AM
needs a complete revolution of sense
making choice making which is beyond the
Silence of the blue church but somehow
self-organized causes of collective self
set sense meeting that we are just in
the process of inventing what it is yes
yes and that maybe this
if it's not the crisis itself but this
is a core part of the crisis but
basically the way we make sense and we
make choices have old habits that you
call the silo habits of tip of the blue
church and then they're very functional
in the 50s and the 60s and they became
problematic formatting in the 70s and
and oh you don't have to go into the
details but something does not work
anymore
and one way to understand what is not
working in the world that comes from a
certain understanding of being
manageable by kind of an elite a process
of sense making that allows a top-down
understanding of what reality is and
then basically pulls it out through the
world and pulls it out to our society
and what this is not working anymore and
what maybe is on the verge of working is
something that cooks in a complete
different way because there is no center
to it it's highly connected it's highly
community communicative and the sense
sense-making works in a completely
different way because it's a collective
endeavor that has no center and we
haven't figured out yet how to rock this
is yes is this something that kind of
took today is related at least with
understanding of the crisis in the
Middle East this is more or less
yes that me I thinking you've said it
very well my nod my head at all the
words that you've said and all the
meaning that you conveyed what are the
things that I feel like I want to add is
our our
the managerial consciousness the blue
church engaged in an unfortunate amount
of what I would call bad parenting
because we should have been learning
this new way in the in the 80s and the
90s the beginning somewhere in the
middle of the 80s we should have begin
the process we should have begun the
process of learning this new way the
Millennials the people are now turning
40 and her youngest 20 should be already
quite skillful at this this should have
been there the developmental environment
should have been this new way mm-hmm but
we were held back we were helicopter
parented by the by the blue church and
constrained into the old way and so
instead of getting skillful when there
was plenty of time to do it in a new way
instead we built more epicycles so we
are unfortunately rather behind the
curve we're behind the 8-ball we have to
mature rapidly in this new approach
quite rapidly perhaps nearly
instantaneously because the pace of
change continues to accelerate and the
complexity of our environment continues
to grow and therefore the the bad
combination between immaturity and
incapacity in the context of the blue
church continues to create more trouble
and and as all of our attention in our
choice making our sovereignty flows
through those channels we are not taking
responsibility which sense making a
choice making and and the sense making
in choice making this being produced for
us is increasingly delusional
increasingly separated from what reality
actually is mm-hmm so that would be the
last piece than what it is I'm trying to
say yeah and this last piece seems to be
related to a different layer of the
problem which is which is also a
generational problem
at a problem of cultural habits the kind
of habits of a hyperlinked reality is a
haptic study just in a process of
learning as we become citizens of a
hyperlink to LD basically I'm talking
about the digital natives who are kind
of socialized in a completely different
reality where the good or the bad things
like Twitter Facebook and and everything
are part of my identity and my all
understanding of learning doesn't fit in
this part of reality anymore and we have
to find new ways and there's it
basically they say old habit that has to
break down that that comes from let's
call it really digital reality yeah yeah
well we go even further so what I would
say is that again somewhere in the mid
80s we should have begun the process of
breaking down analog habits and building
digital habits and the reason one wanted
to bring that up is that the
you
you knew this the stories of Victorian
England the stories of urban squalor
well one of the reasons why urban
squalor was urban squalor was that
cities grew before we had built a
consciousness of city people moved into
cities and whole problems emerged while
we were still operating in it than a
mindset that was not appropriate for
cities and just didn't understand in the
environment
well a mature digital consciousness
would not have allowed Facebook or
Twitter to happen to us the obvious
toxicity of those environments would
have been dismissed out of hand as being
obvious foolishness to to to cause my
entire generation of children to grow up
in that toxic environment would have
been absurd to any mature consciousness
and immature digital conscious we were
said are you kidding that's absurd
that's like having children smoke
cigarettes at the age of six it's
madness and in fact it is madness so now
we're doing again this why they mean by
behind the eight-ball our Zoomers
Generation Z
you
do not just adapt into digital
consciousness they're adapted to toxic
digital consciousness they've grown up
in an environment which is not just
digital but the digital environment was
never well parented never well steward
it was not created in the context of
maturity who's creating the context of
[Music]
a terrible combination between
authorities controlling things using old
models mm-hmm but not allowed and also
not allowing so I listed this right the
control mentality of managerial
consciousness that evolved in an analog
world squeezed too hard in some places
and not hard enough in other places it
didn't understand how to manage this new
environment so our digital Commons are
getting a double whammy that's what I'm
trying to say the kids who should be
mature aren't and the kids who should
have been grown-up growing up in a
mature environment are actually growing
up in a toxic environment is either
divorce
what makes the toxic environment toxic
what's what's it took city toxicity
about let's see actually the the best
example would be to point you to a video
that I watched recently a piece of art
the arts actually conveys at the best
mmm but it has to do with let me just
take Twitter as an example
in a direct conversation between people
and analog space mm-hmm if you and I are
in the same room
communicating there's a very large
amount of constraint on what's available
in that conversation hmm positively and
negatively you can read my body language
you can read the tone of voice you can
read the the way that other people are
responding to get more information
nuance about what's being expressed and
there's a lot that I can't get away with
and there's only so many people that can
communicate with in an analog
consciousness and analog environment
there's only so many people in the room
in the digital environment all three of
those things are gone in principle I can
communicate with as many people as I can
reduce it to paying attention to me I
can get away with anything including the
most bald-faced lying and stimulation I
can possibly imagine
and you can't understand anything I'm
saying more or less particularly when
it's happening in text would think
Twitter and Facebook there's a reason
why the leaders who have begun to emerge
in the West are the kinds of people that
they are they're saber-toothed Tigers of
this toxic digital environment they have
identified the appropriate moves to make
garner attention as much as possible no
matter what adding good don't make any
difference
attention is the currency it matters not
at all what you say and there are no
consequences in the future if what you
said in the past more or less and in
understanding anything of nuance is
strictly impossible so don't even worry
about it
so we get a the toxic digital
environment is
surely simulacrum ah Baudrillard we have
baudrillard yes the toxic digital
environment is a deep dive into the
simulacrum across all people
particularly young so the young have
lost of capacity and by the young I mean
17 18 19 all the way down
live in an environment where stimulation
is much more real than reality could
hope to be and the simulation is in a
simulation around and just think about
how many hours people watch the
tick-tock to be is to produce those
things that are copied to be is to have
been copied to be real is to have been
copied for example I mean it's a message
big question for the end of a
conversation or getting to the end of a
conversation but there has to be asked
anyway so what's their response to this
mm-hmm yes I think we have four minutes
it can take a little kind of a couple
more but ah the response is courage
that's the first response why what
lights for what yeah so the the metaphor
the visual image that popped into my
head
and this is a story that my friend Jimmy
wheel was telling me says scientists
were doing a study of mice or rats and
what they noticed was that the xiphoid
nucleus in the brain that the fear and
freeze response is fundamental because
that's where the nucleus is even more
fundamental which is the turn in fight
the the willingness to face that which
is challenging that what just makes
drives fear it's actually more
fundamental which is to say that courage
is a more fundamental emotion than fear
and anger
you can't think clearly in fear you
can't act clearly in anger but with
courage you can begin the process of not
being reactive to your environment and
not lashing out at your environment my
which is another form the fear versions
to be thrown about tossed about the
anger version is to lash out wait if you
have courage as a root emotion you can
stare the crisis directly in the eyes
mmm
listen to the story of the medic crisis
and not look away not going to
unconscious reactivity or to delusion
yeah there's one other piece I just want
to bring into conversation see how you
respond to that because there's also
something about this interconnectivity
in the Facebook reality that is very
much related to the manageable
consciousness that it created yeah yeah
and you could call them measureable
interconnectivity because it's related
basically yeah as a mention of systems
of logarithms yeah yeah I won't want to
count the posters with a liveable
interconnectivity where the reality of
aliveness in the inhuman living
interconnectedness is
multidimensionality comes into the
picture it changes what
interconnectivity is about dramatically
that allows collective sense meeting to
basically leap beyond this manage
connectivity of I stay with Facebook so
something that's emerging between us as
we connect as human beings in networks
of relationships but living
relationships yes the thing that I have
seen that seems most close to this and I
feel very good about it feels very
powerful are being called digital
campfires my friend Brett Weinstein told
the story of of consciousness in fact is
not held in an individual we don't we're
not conscious as individuals
and we're conscious in groups and we're
most conscious in groups sitting around
the campfire that's the place where
consciousness really landed in humans
and this new creation is ideas of
digital campfires groups with people
coming into groups of five three thirty
in a space that has the feeling of a
campfire and then getting up and moving
to the next campfire and creating this
mesh of campfire it's beginning to flow
and evolve is creating a space for a
much for a truly larger consciousness
vastly larger shouldn't it seems like
just the beginning of a conversation but
they also are at the end of our time I
would like to also make it the beginning
of a conversation I think we should
continue at some point this but I really
like that you landed in the in the very
end because we were talking about corner
wires we're talking about medical eyes
we're talking about the blue church
mental consciousness and we're talking
about interconnectedness but the digital
campfire that you are bringing in right
now and you just touched on it I mean
there's basically it's just a starting
point of something what is this but my
interest response is to taste a lot of
an answer to this that an answer that we
have to engage in collectively to find
if malleable it is in that sense thank
you so much for this conversation
perhaps we'll see each other the next
campfire see you there
you