[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back I'm John Bravo key and this
is a video series on awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time we were
beginning our historical examination of
the origin of this capacity for meaning
making to try and get a clearer picture
of what it is
and today I'd like to continue on with
that we were talking about the
connections between meaning making
enhancing cognition altered states of
consciousness wisdom and we were talking
about that in connection with the upper
paleolithic transition in which human
beings seem to have gone through this
radical change which was not so much a
biological change but a change in how
they were using their cognition we
talked about important ideas such as
cognitive exaptation and psycho
technology and we talked about how the
upper paleolithic transition was
probably driven by the way shamanism was
a set of psycho technologies for
altering states of consciousness to
cognitively exact the enhanced abilities
that trade rituals and initiation
rituals and healing rituals had already
been creating and we talked about the
the way the shaman engaged in various
disruptive strategies to try and alter
their framing of reality because how we
frame reality is both the source of our
adaptability our ability to find
patterns but it is also how we can get
locked in how we miss frame reality and
how we are in need of insight and when
we talked about that in connection for
something like that the nine dot problem
and that led us to realize that there's
kinds of knowing that are independent
from the knowing that we capture in our
statements of our beliefs
there's knowings about knowing how to do
something what it's like to have a
particular perspective and what it's
like to know something by identifying
with it and participating in it and I
was starting to show you how the shaman
altered state of consciousness was also
enhancing and altering meaning making
affording insight and improving the
ability of the shaman to help in hunting
in health care two things that would
radically improve survival I want to
continue now and talking more about that
or more about what's going on in
shamanism in order to get more
explication of this meaning-making
wisdom altered states of consciousness
different kinds of knowing and how
they're all interrelated together so
typically the the shaman engages in
practices that are putting significant
changes in their attention as we
mentioned there's often significant
disruptive strategies sleep deprivation
sexed-up privation social isolation the
use of psychedelics extended chanting
all of these dancing all of these things
are designed to bring about radical
changes in the way in which the brain is
operating now part of what a shaman is
doing is I would argue also getting into
the flow state so the flow state has
become something that discussed both
academically and in the popular culture
it was made famous in work by chicks at
ma high his book flow the flow
experience brought it to the forefront
in 1990 so what is the flow experience
so the flow experience is experience
people get into they often describe it
as like being in the zone so you are
involved in a task that is very
demanding in fact it has a particular
structure to it so these are your skills
and these is how demanding the situation
is right and the flow state is one in
which the demands of the situation just
slightly go beyond your skill abilities
and so you get what's called here
Csikszentmihalyi often represents this
by the flow channel right when my skills
can just through we'll talk about this
through like sort of insight and
restructuring
I can just enough exact and extend my
skills to meet the demand so I have to
put everything I've got into it then I
get into the flow channel if my skills
exceed the demands I fall into boredom
if my demands exceed the skills alright
I fall into anxiety now of course the
thing about you is you're very good at
learning in situation so you need a kind
of context in which your skills as your
skills improve your environment also
improves so one of the things we've
created in our culture if we have
created flow induction machines because
what what those machines that have are a
situation where your skills are
constantly improving and the demands on
the environment are constantly improving
and the skill induction these are these
flow induction machines have other
properties that are very important in
them there's a very tight feedback
between what you do and how the
environment responds you're getting very
clear information and failure matters
it's like at least symbolically because
you can die and of course some of you
are probably realizing that I'm talking
about video games video games are one of
the most reliable ways of inducing the
flow state in people in fact part of the
reasons why video games are addictive
and they now being considered to be a
bonafide addiction by the World Health
Organization is precisely because they
engender the flow state addictions and
we'll talk about this later when we talk
about addictions addictions runoff
machinery that is evolutionarily
adaptive that's why it's compelling
so the flow state what are other things
that people do to get into the flow
state they play jazz they do martial
arts oh I'm a martial artist right one
that's particularly interesting because
there's no other explanation for why
people do it other than you get into the
flow state is rock climbing because rock
climbing otherwise would be like it's
it's like some sort of torture from
Greek mythology right you presented it
like here's a rock face what I want you
to do is I want you to go up that it's
gonna be really physically demanding
it's going
hurt you you might fall to you and harm
yourself and once you get to the top you
come back down it would seem like a
torturous thing to do well we know why
people rock climb they rock climb
because they get into the flow state and
the flow state is deeply deeply positive
for people it's not the same thing as
physical pleasure right in fact the flow
state is much more connected to meaning
in life in fact the more often you get
into the flow State the more likely you
will rate your your life as a meaningful
the more the more you will experience
well-being now what's interesting also
about the flow State and remember we're
doing this because I'm talking about
that shamanism is probably a practice
for practicing getting into the flow
state so remember that right the thing
about the flow state it's a universal
people across cultures socio-economic
groups genders language environments age
groups report being able to get into the
flow state and they describe it in
detail almost exactly the same way
that's a universal and universals are
important in cognitive science you pay
attention to the universals because they
give you profound insight into the
machinery what's it like to be in the
flow state well when you're in the flow
state right you feel like you're deeply
at one with things so for example I'm a
martial artist and when I'm sparring
it's like my sense of connectedness to
my opponent is really enhanced and I'm
really at one and that comes with it
this kind of spontaneity so when one
does when a strike is coming to my hand
is just it I don't sort of raise your
head now John it flows out of me hence
the word right and the block is there
the hockey player the goalie just puts
out his hand the glove hand and the puck
is there there's this tremendous sense
of at one MIT and then closely allied to
it is this right
at one level you know like the shaman
dancing or chanting that there's
tremendous metabolic energy at work
effort you're making at one level all
this effort but at another level
it feels effortless that's the
spontaneity again it just seems to flow
from you your sense of time is passing
differently your sense of self is being
dramatically altered so when people are
in the flow state right their self kind
of self-consciousness disappears that
self-consciously
you know we carry around that
self-consciousness that that's always
doing this this sort of thing it's
constantly sort of doing our
autobiography how's my day going how I'm
doing who am i what am i doing
blah blah and it's also checking how do
i image management how do I look what
are people think of me how am i doing am
i under threat all of that nattering and
all my failing I was I knew and and that
of course and that can get out of hand
and was like when you're in depression
you ruminate on all that stuff and it
overwhelms you but we all carry that
burden around it's taxing and the thing
in the flow state it's gone because
there's no space for all of that because
you're so right engrossed in the task
the other thing about the flow state is
it's super salient like it's like it's
like like it's like the kind of
brightness and vividness you get in a
video game the world seems more intense
and people really like this experience
and not only do they like it it seems to
be where they do their best work
so the flow experience is an optimal
experience in two ways many people
regard it as the best experiences they
can have but it's also where they're
doing their very best at what they want
to excel in that's why it's so
motivating to get into the flow State
so why is the flow state so good so this
year 2018 I published some work with
Adrian Havana and Leo Ferraro in which
we tried to argue for what the cognitive
mechanisms are in the flow States see
chicks at mahai tells you the
environmental conditions what you need
in order to get into the flow state you
need skills and demand to be matched you
need to be very tight coupling between
you and the environment like in the
video game you need very clear
information it can't be ambiguous or
vague and failure has to matter it has
to be costly to you in some fashion
specified all of that you also specified
the kind of training that helps enhance
you get to get you into the flow State
and think about this think about what I
said last time and we're gonna explore
this more training and mindfulness the
more people have training and
mindfulness increases their capacity to
get into the flow state now can we come
up with a unified explanation for all of
this I think we can both for the
phenomenology why we're experiencing
what we're experiencing when we're in
the flow State and why is it improving
your cognition and therefore why would
the shaman be enhancing their cognition
by getting into something like the flow
state through their ritual practices ok
so think about the rock climber okay the
rock climber is climbing remember we
talked about how you frame and find
patterns last time remember the nine dot
problem right and that these patterns
aren't just patterns in your mind
they're patterns in how knowing how to
make sense of things
so you're rock climbing and if that
breaks down you impasse you're stuck and
I don't mean just cognitively you're
physically stuck now if you want to be a
good rock
what you have to do is you have to break
that framing you have to train yourself
to break the frame restructure change
what you're finding relevant and salient
and then change yourself to fit that and
then you've refit yourself to the rock
face you refit yourself to the rock face
then you have to do it again and then
you have to do it again and then you
have to do it again
well the jazz musician the jazz musician
is playing they pick up on a pattern and
they play with it but they can't stay
with it too long whether they have to do
they have to shift they have to
restructure they have to shift into a
new pattern and then play with that but
they can't stay with it too long they
have to pick up on it they have to
refrain again and again and again and
again and again do you see what's going
on with the rock climber the jazz
musician the martial artist is this idea
of a cascade of insights you're having
an insight that's leading to another
insight that's leading to another
insight right it's priming so you know
when you have like an insight you have
like aha and you get that sort of burst
of energy and it's like a flash that's
why we put a light bulb over somebody's
head when we want to show them having an
insight it's like that flash now imagine
if I took that aha and I extended it aha
that's the flow State it's an inchoate
so the more you flow the more you're
training your ability for insight in
direct interacting with your environment
now the trouble of course with the video
game is year though the environment is
into real world but in the shaman's
world of course the shamans flowing in
the real world the real social world the
real ecological world but there's
something more it's not just an insight
cascade that's going on and flow died it
died in and of itself would be great
there's something else going this has to
do with your capacity for implicit
learning now notice what's happening
here notice that although even I'm doing
the history I'm always also doing the
cogs side because wall I'll be
emphasizing the history the historical
account I'm starting to build what I
need to give you the structural
functional account ok so implicit
learning this goes back to work done in
the 60s by Arthur Reber and a whole
bunch of other people so what Reber was
doing is he he was really trying to
understand how people learn language
what he was doing was he was generating
an arbitrary set of rules completely
arbitrary just make them up on the spot
set of rules for how you can link
strings of letters and/or numbers
together like the rule might be you
can't have more than three vowels in a
row or you have to have two consonants
and then you generate you generate
letter strings eight nine long these are
so long that you can't sort of easily
hold them in your working memory and
then this is what you do you take you
generate you can generate an indefinite
number you generate a huge number of
these strings and you show them to
people here's one here's one here's one
here's one here's one here's one okay
that's the first part of the experiment
then you do the second part of the
experiment
now you generate a whole bunch of
strings but two kinds one set of strings
is generated by the
that artificial set of rules and so
follows the same rules as the first
string first set and then the second set
is generated by a completely different
set of rules okay and what you do is you
mix up the first and the second together
and this is the task you give people can
you tell me the strings that belong with
the strings you saw before there you go
now weber originally thought what would
happen is people would because it seems
like so random what he found was people
score well well above chance
consistently on this people can tell you
oh no those strings yeah those belong
with though the old ones no that one
doesn't that one does that one doesn't
now here's what's interesting you now
ask people why how do you know that and
they'll give you one of two answers
they'll say I don't know I don't know I
just I just feel it which is whoo or
they say they give you some explanation
they'll give you some rule the procedure
they're using and here's what we know
they're deceiving themselves or lying to
you because that rule that they're using
wouldn't actually predict their success
so you are picking up you have this
tremendous capacity outside your
conscious awareness right to pick up on
very complex patterns in your
environment and you say okay why what
does this have to do with shamanism well
hang on because we talked about the
shaman picking up on patterns last time
let's go back to this let me talk about
an experiment that's really interesting
so there was some work done on this idea
you know the people have psychic
abilities and there was a feeling of
being stared at the people can tell when
they're being stared at and people
reliably report that they think oh I
knew somebody was staring I could just
feel it in the back of my neck and stuff
like that so they ran an experiment in
which they did the following they'd have
somebody in a room blindfolded ear
plugged the kids sense anything nobody's
allowed to wear perfumes or anything
that person can't see
here feel and they're just standing in
the room unbeknownst to that person
and in people would come in and stare at
them and then they had to report him the
person at the center of the room had to
reported they were being stared at or
not and people were reporting this well
above chance they were saying I think
I'm being stared at and there was
somebody there and of course first of
all there's ooh right but then it turned
out that if you made a slight change to
that experiment it wouldn't replicate so
what was going on you bring people into
the room and they say I think I'm being
stared at and the researchers would tell
them if they were correct or not they
would say you're right or you're wrong
so what'd you say so what well here's
the thing
the researchers thought they were
introducing people the viewers into the
room randomly but it turns out they
weren't introducing them randomly
because you know it's very hard for you
to do random stuff they were actually
introducing people as viewers in a
complex pattern and the person that was
blindfolded and ear plugged was
implicitly learning the pattern because
they were getting feedback if you take
the feedback away if you don't tell them
whenever they say I'm being stared out
or not if you don't tell them they're -
right or wrong their performance drops -
chance see a lot of what looks like
psychic abilities are your ability to
pick up implicitly on complex patterns
in the environment without being aware
of it so hogarth in his book on
educating intuition made a really really
cool really cool claim makes a very good
argument in fact I think for this he
says that what we call intuition is a
real thing but there isn't anything sort
of magical about it in there like the
psychics say or something like that your
intuition is the result of your implicit
learning you pick up on all kinds of
complex patterns not knowing how you
have done that
and but you get an ability to detect
patterns and you don't know how that's
why your intuition feels the way it does
you just sort of know like you know
things you're doing it all the time to
use a famous example from Dreyfuss you
know how far to stand from somebody and
what angle to stick like where you
should stand how close you should stand
what angle you should stand how as the
conversation or the context changes
you're allowed to move closer or farther
away what angles you're allowed to be at
but rather to ask you to tell me how you
do that you wouldn't know you would just
say I know how to do it and yet when
people don't know how to do it it creeps
you out it creeps you out okay so
intuition
now hogarth points out and this is
something very common right hold our
points so that you know we have two
different terms and we don't realize
we're talking about the same thing we
have intuition when we think it's going
well
that implicit learning but we also have
bias and Prejudice for when we think
that implicit learning goes bad the
bigot has got intuitions about races
that are wrong now why is how is it that
implicit learning goes wrong well here's
the thing you have some complex pattern
in the environment right and your
implicit learning picks up on it the
problem is there's two kinds of patterns
in your environment
there's correlations there's correlation
patterns and causal parts on what do I
mean by the correlations is what any two
things are related to each other so let
me give you an example of a couple of
correlations that you shouldn't confuse
with causation there is a correlation
between how large your wedding is and
how long your marriage will last if you
have a bigger wedding your marriage will
last longer now you would be a fool to
therefore think you should have the
biggest possible wedding
because the reason why bigger weddings
predict longer marriages is not because
bigger weddings cause longer marriages
is because right there only correlated
it's because bigger weddings reflect a
bigger social network more financial
resources and having a bigger social
network for the couple having more
financial resources actually does cause
a marriage to last longer here's another
one
so I'm old enough right and I was
brought up in a religious household that
I was you know when prayer was taken out
of the schools and of course people were
very upset about that and you're taking
look at crime as going up as we've taken
prayer out of the schools and things
like that
by the way crime hasn't been going up
and read some of Steven Pinker's work
but let's say it was that's only a
correlation because here's another
correlation we know that greenhouse
gases have been going up steadily and
that's part of the environmental crisis
we're going to talk about you know what
has been also consistently going down
for the exact same time period Caribbean
piracy having pirates in the Caribbean
and wooden ships with cannons and stuff
as that went down greenhouse gases went
up now I hope none of you think that we
could solve global warming by being back
piracy ok so there are many things that
there are many patterns in the world
that are illusory because they're only
correlational they're not causal see the
big yet has picked up on correlational
patterns not causal patterns so what you
want to do is you want to train your
implicit learning to pick up on the
causal patterns that are real rather
than the correlational patterns that are
looser now here's what you can't do you
can't tell people to look for patterns
explicitly go back to rebirth experiment
if you put people into that experiment
where they're looking at the letter
strings and you tell them explicitly
what they're supposed to do try and
figure out the rules consciously
deliberately try to figure out the rules
their performance doesn't get better it
gets worse
okay and hogarth notes this in his book
on educating intuition we can't replace
implicit learning with explicit learning
because it is precisely by being
implicit that it works so well what can
we do explicitly then what we can do is
set up the right context the right
environmental factors so that my
implicit learning machine will tend more
likely to get on to causal patterns
rather than correlational patterns so
I'll get good intuition rather than bad
intuition how do you do that well Hogar
says the way you would do this is the
way you do science you want to control
the context right
because what science is and you know
there's a lot of our science book
science is a way of distinguishing
causal patterns from correlational
patterns you set up an environmental
situation so that you can distinguish
the causal patterns from the
correlational patterns what do you do
well in an experiment first of all I
make sure that everything is very
clearly measured I get very clear
information very clear information I
make sure I'm looking to see that right
that the change in one variable is
closely followed by a change in another
variable so I change your drug dosage do
your symptoms get better right so I look
for clear information I look for clear
feedback and in science failure matters
you test the hypothesis and this
confirmation has to be possible failure
matters now notice this what hoga says
is well what I want to do is I want to I
want to put you into an implicit
learning situation where you get clear
feedback like you do in science where
there is a tight coupling between what
you do and how the environment responds
and where error really matters like in
science and he says what we should do is
we should try and do implicit learning
in those kinds of contexts well here's
what myself and my colleagues argued
those three criteria that will turn your
intuition into good implicit learning
are exactly the conditions for flow
clear information tightly coupled
feedback and error matters the
rock-climber is looking for creates
clear information tightly coupled
feedback and error really matters that
context really means that there's a much
greater chance that their implicit
learning machinery is going to pick up
on causal patterns rather than
correlational ones so notice what we've
got going on here the shaman is getting
into the flow state is developing all
these techniques for getting into this
deeply immersive comprehensive flow
state and they're getting an insight
cascade and they're also getting
enhanced implicit learning picking up on
very complex real complex patterns now
this is intuitive they don't know how
they're doing it now here's what's
interesting - these two are reinforcing
each other because the insight gets your
cognition to explore for new patterns
and then the implicit learning picks up
those new plans and then those new
patterns enhance your ability to
restructure and then right you keep
exploring for new patterns acquiring the
new patterns for implicit learning and
you keep ratcheting your skills up
getting into the flow State is deeply
deeply enhancing of your cognition
somebody who's an expert at getting into
the flow State is going to be an
individual you want to have around
now that individual is going to have
some really serious challenges facing
them they don't know how they're getting
a lot of the information they're getting
they don't know why they're so
insightful they don't and they're
experiencing this radical at one minute
the world this loss of sense of self
when they're enacting the animal right
you have to understand these insights
aren't verbal insights like in the nine
dot problem it's not words it's not
beliefs getting an insight and how the
deer moves it's getting an insight and
the intuitive insight and how to talk to
this person to trigger the placebo
effect to help them to heal right now so
getting into the flow state notice
what's going on here notice you're
getting something that's almost like a
mystical experience it's a powerful
altered state of consciousness it's
enhancing your cognitive processing and
the shaman is making meaning they're
singing they're dancing they're telling
stories they're altering people's sense
of what matters they're altering
people's sense of identity they're
healing and transforming people
what does that mean why would that
empower the upper paleolithic transition
well first of all this is enhancing your
cognition but and this is goes towards
the work of Michael Winckelmann and also
not Rossano what's happening in this
state is your brain is learning to get
areas to talk to each other that
normally don't talk to each other
this is especially the case if you've
gone through a massive disruption
strategy fasting social isolation taking
psychedelics because what if you look at
a brain scan of somebody who's having a
psychedelic experience areas of the
brain that do not not normally do not
talk to each other are talking to each
other now now if I were just to do that
to you if I was just to get areas to
talk to each other you'd experience that
as noise but if you've got enhanced
insight and enhanced intuition those
areas are now talking to each other and
you can bridge between them you can
connect them and now this is an ability
you take for granted you think it is
just the normal part of your cognition
this is your capacity for metaphor
the word metaphor is itself a metaphor
it means to bridge to carry over to
connect things that are normally not
connected and what you need to
understand is how pervasive metaphor is
I showed you a little bit last time the
idea of a project but I want you to
reflect now I notice the word reflect is
a metaphor on how your thought and
language is filled with it with metaphor
by the word that was a metaphor I'll say
for example do you see what I'm saying
do you get my point do you comprehend it
can you grasp it do you understand it
these are all metaphors I'm about
halfway through this talk I hope it's
not too hard for you do you see it's
pervasive and profound all of your
cognition this is work done by Lake off
and others I have some criticisms of
some of their theory but the ideas that
your cognition is field and functions
through metaphorical enhancement it's
just I think the case now why is
metaphor so powerful because metaphor is
how you make creative connections
between ideas metaphorical cognition as
is at the heart of both science and art
when the shamans are enhancing this
machinery they're connecting areas of
the brain that normally didn't talk to
each other and affording a massive
enhancement in metaphor one of the ways
in which your cognition and meaning and
altered states of consciousness come
together is in how your
mind you're in embodied mind is
generating metaphor in order to make
insightful connections there's a deep
connection between how insightful how
good a problem-solver you are and your
capacity for metaphorical thought that's
why when somebody is facing a problem
and they need to restructure how they
think about it we tell them to use an
analogy to think of a metaphor so this
is the point the shaman is developing
psycho technologies for altering the
state of consciousness to get into the
flow state and that flow state is
already making them more insightful and
more intuitively powerful but it is also
making them generators of metaphor
literally providing people with the
forms of thought that will allow them to
connect ideas such that making
inscriptions on a piece of bone can
track the moon carving this figurine can
connect me to ideas of fertility so
we're seeing a lot of the themes that
we're going to develop coming to the
fore here how much right the shaman
is weaving together enhancing cognition
altered states of consciousness and
improving our capacity for making sense
of the world literally making more
meaning if you have if you're a hundred
rather grew pand you have a shaman
you're gonna out-compete groups that
don't there's a reason why it's
universal there's a reason why the flow
phenomena is universal because this
exact some of our most basic machinery
enhances it in a powerful way
now the shamans have a very interesting
kind of experience they go through this
transformation they often experience
what's called soul flight as if they've
gone to another world and they're flying
through it this is the origin
I mean think of how we've come to this
but this is the origin of getting high
and the shaman does this the shaman
experiences themselves as if they're
flying above the world why why would the
brain generate that well think about
this the shaman is getting a much more
comprehensive grasp of more complex
patterns but they're experiencing it
mostly intuitively and metaphorically
where are you when you get a bigger
picture of things you're above them how
do we often explain this even to
ourselves metaphorically right you you
have oversight somebody who is in charge
of things has oversight of them or has
super vision of them do you see that
those are metaphors those are metaphors
that are little whispers little echoes
of shamanic flight flying over things
getting a getting an intuitive
insightful grasp that is expressed
metaphorically of a deeper connection to
the world we're gonna pick up on all of
these themes as we investigate more than
machinery of meaning making they need to
move forward now so I want to talk about
another revolution
this was the Upper Paleolithic
transition this is where the
meaning-making machinery the altered
altering consciousness the self
transcending the flying above the
cultivation of wisdom associated with a
lot of things that we consider spiritual
and religious you see them all together
that's the Upper Paleolithic transition
now there is another important
revolution that into that takes place
around 10,000 BCE
that's the Neolithic Revolution you get
the invention of agriculture the
agriculture is important because it adds
to this machinery an important way
because now individuals are part of
complex societies and for the first time
because of agriculture people start to
stay in one place for significant
amounts of time so their relationship to
the environment to each other because
they're living with large groups of
strangers now and to themselves
radically changes that goes to a very
long period of development this world
right of course then becomes the ancient
world as stone gives way to metal and we
get the Bronze Age the period of the
first great civilizations in Mesopotamia
in Egypt
and there's a transformation that's
happened and the way people are
experiencing they're caught their world
human beings are still doing everything
we've been talking about they still have
rituals of course they've developed them
into very sophisticated complex systems
they're still engaging in altered states
of consciousness and that world is
pervasive for a very long time but our
connection to it is very odd so if I
were to ask you if you've read anything
from the Bronze Age chances are you
haven't have you read the epic of
gilgamesh well no probably not
right have you read any Egyptian
mythology
probably not why the Sumerian
Mesopotamian and Egyptian civilizations
are titanically important long lasting
but notice if I ask you if you've read
parts of the Bible or perhaps Plato or
perhaps some of the Buddha or Confucius
chances aren't you you have read some of
them you somehow feel that those people
are relevant to you in a way that people
from the Bronze Age aren't now why there
seems to have been another great change
comparable to the change of the Upper
Paleolithic transition again whether
it's a one-shot or more continuum again
I'm I'm I don't need to decide that and
I'm not confident that that debates
around that are actually very fruitful
the Karl Jasper's talked about the axial
age Karen Armstrong has made famous that
in a recent book
so around 800 BCE
around 300 BC there's this great change
such that you will read connect to find
relevant authors systems of thought ways
of being from that time period and yet
back here where the Bronze Age ends you
don't read this stuff or at least most
of you don't you don't find it relevant
you don't identify with it something
happened here that is formative of us
just like the Upper Paleolithic
transition was formative of us as human
beings the axial age is formative of us
as Western civilization or at least
world civilization because it's not just
in the West that the axial revolution
occurs it also occurs in India and China
now what happened why this change well
there's a bunch of stuff that happens we
don't quite know there's a lot of
discussion about it but we know that
Bronze Age collapses
there's some good books by this book by
Druze there's a book by Cline 1177 BCE
right different discussions about why it
collapsed was it a change in chariot
warfare is it general systems failure is
a combination of change in military
technology don't know it doesn't matter
for our purposes what we know is that
the it's a collapse now you need to you
need to grasp the gravity of this
collapse this is the greatest collapse
in civilization the world has ever known
the fall of the Roman Empire is nowhere
near as devastating as this more cities
go out of existence
at this time the Bronze Age collapse
than any other time in recorded history
more cultures disappear greatest loss of
literacy greatest collapse of trade and
car this is the closest thing the world
is actually experienced to apocalypse
the end of the world what happens here
is a Dark Age so you have before this
you have these like the Egyptian Empire
these Titanic dinosaur empires huge and
powerful lasting for centuries cultures
that last millennia and then they
disappear and what you would find in
right is something like when the
dinosaurs went extinct when the
dinosaurs went extinct then little
mammals that had been sort of scurrying
about you know they start to evolve what
you have
once these dinosaur empires pass out of
existence in the Dark Age is you have a
lot of little small-scale societies
people barely hanging on it's a very
tough time another time in which there's
a demand made on cognition to adapt
remember the bottleneck in Africa
preceding the upper paleolithic
transition
here's another bottle in that kind of
event so people are more willing to
experiment to try new things than they
have before the faster willing to try
new forms of social organization but
importantly they start to invent new
things and they start to invent new
psycho technologies remember the last
time we talked about what a psycho
technology is it's a standardized way of
doing information processing that
improves and enhances your cognition by
linking brains together your brain to
your own future states of your brain you
brain to other people's brains something
happens here in one of the areas that
was hit hardest by the Bronze Age
collapse the area Palestine Palestine
and what's modern Israel and Jordan
places like that used to be the old
referred to as the land of Canaan what
seems to be invented here is a new kind
of literacy I know we talked about
literacy is a powerful psycho technology
now the Bronze Age world had literacy
the Egyptians had hieroglyphics famously
the Sumerians had cuneiform now the
thing about those forms of literacy is
they're very difficult to learn you have
to go to school for a very very long
time and your job you're just you could
your job you can have this job in the
ancient world this was your job to be
literate it's called being a scribe it's
where we get words like scribble from
all you were your entire job was you
were literate because it was a tough
thing to be literate and it was a very
valuable thing and it was a rare thing
because the literacy was hard when it's
edia graphic so I have some ideograms
tattooed here
right this means meditate right what
gets invented here is alphabetic
literacy
sort of it seems to be invented in
Canaan and then it's taken up by the
Phoenicians and then they take it to the
Greeks and then the the proto that the
Canaanite alphabet merges imperceptibly
into archaic Hebrew and then gets taken
into Hebrew that's gonna be important
these two groups of people are going to
be very important
now why is alphabetic literacy so
powerful it's much more learn about it's
a more effective and efficient psycho
technology remember what I said last
time how much literacy enhances your
cognition if I give you alphabetic
literacy you can learn it much more
powerfully and more people can learn it
so your ability to learn and access and
share with others the benefits of
literacy gets magnified tremendously and
what literate so the amount of people
the number of people that can be
literate expands now literacy does
something very very important really
really interesting in its effect on your
sense of self and your sense of
cognition as I noted before when I can
write things down I can come back to my
thoughts later and I can reflect on them
I start to become more aware of my own
thoughts and notice something else I can
do I can correct my thinking more
readily because I I don't have to rely
on it being held in my mind I can put it
I can externalize it I can put it out
there I can reflect on it I can correct
it I can store it independent of my
memory so I start to get a capacity for
what Robert Bellah calls second-order
thinking
now we all have metacognition we'll talk
about this later
metacognition is your awareness of your
own mind I can ask you right now what
are you thinking
you can company become aware of it do
you have a good memory yes or no you'll
say I do or I don't
that's metacognition it's your knowledge
and awareness of your own mind
we all have metacognition but one of the
things you can do with literacy
alphabetic literacy is you can
internalize literacy into your
metacognition so notice I'm becoming
aware of my own cognition here I can
reflect on it I can correct it I can
enhance it I can store it I can share it
with others second order thinking is
when you internalize a psycho technology
into your metacognition and it improves
your capacity to critically examine your
own thinking and correct your own
thinking second order thinking starts to
emerge because of alphabetic literacy
what else is being invented at this time
well you've got lots of armies moving
around in this period because what's
happening is empires are being rebuilt
famously the Assyrian Empire in the
Middle East
mobile armies are needed
and so there's an invention here that's
really important that we also take for
granted right it's the stuff we carry
around well we used to carry it around
we don't carry it around anymore we'll
talk about that it's money
coinage coinage is invented now quite as
pointage is obviously a physical
technology in one sense like carry coins
around although the sense in which money
is now physical is very very tenuous
because most of us don't carry anything
physical anymore money is disappear Li
symbolic thing and that's the point
money Treacher's you to think in an
abstract symbol system you starts
thinking in abstract symbol systems and
it also teaches you something else
numeracy you have to start thinking
mathematically at least Aerith matically
so you now have abstract symbolic
logically rigorous thought being trained
it's being trained for practical
purposes but it's being trained it's
ready for exaptation the alphabetic
literacy is training this second order
thinking it's ready for exaptation you
say okay I get it
the cycle technologies are training
skills that are ready for exaptation
well bring that second order thinking
and bring that abstract symbolic thought
more logically rigorous together and
what are you going to start getting
you're going to start getting people
having a very bright clear sense of two
things about their cognition one thing
is how much they can correct their
cognition how much they can transcend
themselves self transcendence it
enhances their sense of self
transcendence but what's it also doing
it's also enhancing their awareness of
how self-deceptive they are
how much error is in their cognition and
they previously couldn't be aware of it
but now with second-order thinking with
literacy an abstract symbolic thought
and numeracy they can become aware of
this now you put those two together a
tremendous capacity for self correction
a tremendous capacity for self-deception
and human being start to do something
very differently they start to change
their sense of self and their sense of
the world they start to realize a more
personal sense of responsibility which
of course is gonna change how people
think morally about themselves what I
mean let me give you a specific example
if you look before this time right
people think of chaos and warfare and
violence as just part of the natural
order but after the axial revolution
with the advent of second order thinking
with this increased awareness of self
transcendence and self correction people
start to realize no no no we're
responsible for the violence we're
responsible for the chaos not just in
some vague sense but it's the way my
mind makes meaning that's why the damn a
powder begins the mind is the chief
thing people understand they understand
and you see this in the Dhammapada
there is no enemy greater than your own
mind but there is no ally greater than
your own mind people start understanding
this double-edged sword of their own
cognition undisciplined leads to
violence through self-deception and
illusion but discipline through self
correction and self transcendence leads
to wisdom and the ability to reduce the
violence and the suffering so in our
next meeting together we're going to
talk more about this actual revolution
and this sense that people had of their
capacity for self transcendence and
their capacity for self-deception
and how that changed radically their
sense of self and their sense of the
world and how that changed
what meaning meant and what wisdom meant
thank you for your time
[Music]
you
[Music]