[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time we took a
look at how Augustine drew all of this
development this very complex
sophisticated articulation of the actual
revolution drew it all together into a
noma logical order that brought with it
the best of a wrist italian science a
normative order that brought with it the
best of photonic spirituality a
narrative order that brought with it the
best of right the christian process of
moving through history and of course
along the ride comes those some of the
best psychotherapeutic techniques
available from the ancient world
all of this was integrated together
these three orders that articulate the
space of how we're connected to
ourselves to each other and to the world
the normal logical the normative and the
narrative
we saw however that while this does
address our fundamental the fundamental
axes of meaning even as it's understood
by our best current cognitive science
this historical legacy starts to come
under threat
initially it comes under threat and
again way that doesn't seem very
threatening people are just changing how
they're using the cyclic technology of
reading they're going from Alexio davina
a participatory perspectival
transformative form of rest citation
into a silent consumptive model where
I'm trying to consume information and
what knowledge is is it is an inner
coherence between my propositions rather
than a transformative conformity to the
world and that of course is born out of
a slowing and then Excel slowly at first
but an accelerating rediscovery of the
Aristotelian corpus and the best science
of the ancient world and there's the
threat of how do we incorporate this
authoritative figure into the worldview
that was bequeathed to us by Augustine
and that challenge is taken up by
Aquinas
and Aquinas does this and it's hard to
see how else it could have been done by
returning to the fundamental grammar of
the actual revolution the two worlds
mythology and reconfiguring it into two
real worlds a natural world understood
by reason and a supernatural world
understood by faith we're now and faith
is now understood as how love transforms
the will and the will is primarily how I
assert certain propositions to be true
and as I mentioned that separation while
that solves the problem at the time
brings with it the threat that as the
super not
world becomes non-viable to us that we
will lose the axial revolutions heritage
we will separate love from reason and
spirituality from science in a
particularly pernicious and dangerous
fashion I want to keep going and if for
those of you who want to pursue this
some more depth I can recommend to you
the book after God by Mark Taylor a
tremendous influence on my thinking and
I think it articulates a lot of or what
I'm going to be talking about in a very
clear and precipitations manner but some
things are happening there's immediate
consequences of people picking up on
Aquinas and responding to it and we can
see it in sort of two figures deeply
influenced by Aquinas and they represent
two particular lines of development that
are going to influence each other one is
Meister Eckhart
and the other is William of Occam was
where we get Occam's razor from a thing
that is often invoked by various kept
ARDS without a full understanding of
what I meant by it
akhom certainly didn't mean it to be how
it's often used by people in a
dismissive fashion so Eckhart represents
a pivotal exemplary maybe even a
culminating figure of a group of people
within Germany and Germany is going to
be central to all of this from now on
and that is of course going to be a
dangerous precedent to set for Germany
but Eckhart represents a group that are
called the Rhineland Mystics and others
who bring about a transformation in the
understanding of human spirituality they
bring about a change in the normative
order so
Aquinas basically changes the normal
logical order he separates it into these
two worlds and now there's a chasm
between them alright there's a chasm
between these world
they're right you can't write love can't
lift reason up to here the reason has no
home here right so a different meaning
of spirituality now tends to be
emphasized in the rhineland mystics now
they're deeply influenced by
Neoplatonism that cart I think is
influenced in some way by the whole
Neoplatonic undercurrent within
Christianity there's of course the the
the background history and still there
of of the Gnostics there has been a the
Last Crusade is actually not against the
Arabs in the Middle East it is against
the Cathars in southern France and the
Cathars ri-right they are I well I would
say it some people would argue but many
people would agree with me
the Cathars are a gnostic revival a huge
revival of Gnosticism so there's a huge
gnostic revival and of course there's a
neo platonic tradition Eckhart picks
this up and others the other Rheinland
mystics and what they do is they bring
about a we understanding of the
normative order and it changes from
being the Neoplatonic and agog a it
changes from being that whole conformity
that whole ascent in self transcendence
self transcendence disappears from
spirituality and it does the connection
between spirituality and wisdom where
wisdom is understood as your capacity
for educating yourself in self
transcendence to improve your meaning in
life now what happens is instead of an
ascent upward there's more right God's
descent downward into you
and there's there's important precedents
for this in the ancient world there's
the the--our G precedent within the
ancient world but that being said
nevertheless there's a fundamental
difference here Aquinas had talked about
love driving the will in faith and the
rhineland mystics right they're gonna
replace this ascent spirituality with a
descent spirituality and what they're
gonna do is they're going to say look
what what what love is it's not that
love moves the will love is a way in
which the will moves it's that's an
important change okay
it's not that love moves the will is
that the way the will moves right is
love
specifically when the will negates
itself that's love so they pick up on
and that's why I emphasized it earlier
on in their series they pick up on the
sacrificial aspect of love that to love
is to sacrifice yourself so how is right
how is the will moving in order to be
loving well the will is negating itself
you see when my will is self-centered
and it's egocentric that of course is
the opposite of agape I have to
sacrifice this and we talked about this
I have to sacrifice I have to negate my
willful self assertion in order to
become a conduit for agape or as a cart
would say to make a space so that God
can come to dwell within me so the idea
is that what spirituality is about is
about the will negating its own self
assertion and making a space in which
God will is not being resisted so here's
the idea God's will is this a gothic
love and right we are resisting that
and what we need to do is we have to
stop resisting we have to negate our own
self assertion the way we're expressing
ourselves to press outward and we have
to make a space so that God can flow in
now what this does right is it makes
self negation and this right it makes
self negation and inner conflict central
to spirituality so what had been
incidental and contingent in Paul and
Augustine the fact that they have inner
conflict it becomes much more valerie's
in this new spirituality right I have to
sort of be in perpetual conflict with
myself I have to be negating this self
so that eventually I empty myself now
there are I don't want to misrepresent
Eckhart is one of my favorite authors
there there's beautiful wisdom about
right how to overcome one's attachment
to one's thinking and one's self image
that are drawn from the Neoplatonic
heritage and of great value in ecker but
nevertheless this model of right
spirituality being ultimately a battle
of wills your will against itself and so
it's not against God's will becomes a
central idea for what's going on in the
spirituality of the time now that's
overlapping with a new a new emerging
worldview so Ockham sees God's will as
his primary faculty now some of you may
be saying well why do we have to talk
all this God talk look you have to
understand how this God grammar
developed and how it has woven its way
into the very
grammar of our culture and our cognition
whether or not you believe in a God or
not is actually quite irrelevant to what
I'm talking about right now the fact is
people have and they have so on ways of
thinking and being into your heritage
so for Occam unlike for Augustine and I
would say the whole Neoplatonic
tradition it's not God's reason his
intelligibility that is the source of
his being for all commits his will and
you can see how this lines up these two
these two sides because Aquinas has made
will the Faculty of access to the
supernatural right the Faculty of will
becomes central to spirituality and to
God here now what does that mean why
does that matter why would he say that
because he sees see again here's the
change it's not God's topic love that is
his creativity God's will is the source
of his ability God speaks the world into
existence this as an act of assertion
thought asserts the world when he
creates it and you say okay so what so
remember your model of God whether or
not you believe in God's irrelevant your
model of God has a tremendous influence
on how you understand yourself and
reality God's will supersedes his reason
now that's very very important it means
that God is not bound by rationality
he's not bound by how things who hear in
a rational fashion
reason is not in any way central to God
that's why the rational the ascent
through reason is gone that means that
any order that we find in existence is
arbitrarily imposed on it by God's will
right God speaks it he it's an act of
will he's not bound by any rational
principles of organization it is just
raw power and Fiat on his part you say
okay so what what does that have to do
well as I forewarned your model of how
God is is a paradigmatic model of how
you understand yourself to be again this
is regardless of whether or not you
believe in God right now so akhom
concludes that we are like God we don't
find an order in that look you look at
here's my desk here's a book here's a
book here's a book is a book these are
all books they all belong to the
category of books right that's part of
what they are they're books and akhom
says no they're not whatever order or
pattern you find in there you're making
it by how you're speaking about it this
is called nominalism the way God speaks
and wills whatever order there is we're
making whatever patterns we find by how
we're speaking about them they're not
actually there this isn't really a book
there's nothing in reality that groups
these together it is only my mind
by using the term that groups them
together now because it's automatic for
me in it I can't help but see this as a
book but
problem is there is no universal book
ness forgive the language I'm speaking
and by using language language gathers
things together in the mind forms these
patterns in the order but all that's
really out there are raw individuals all
that's really there are raw individuals
and perhaps causal relations between
them so notice what's happening I'm
reading and I'm not reading inside my
head knowledge is just how all the
different signs of language go here
together and whatever order there is is
only in here it's in here it's in how
I'm using the language it's all inside
the language there's nothing out there
in the world the world is now in a very
real sense absurd it is not in itself
inherently intelligible it's only
intelligible insofar as I speak about it
or insofar as God speaks it into
existence
now notice what this is that this is
doing this is creating a radical the
supernatural world is now right not a
source of reason and rational order now
all of this is slowly unfolding
spirituality is being changed right this
self negation of will the world is being
changed it's the nominal world in which
well it's out there are raw individuals
and whatever pattern or order comes from
how we speak about them while all of
that is taking shape something
disastrous happens shortly overlapping
Ockham's just I think just dead
overlapping with some of the later
Rheinland mystics but what happens is
right well most people think it is but
what happens is right the black death we
think it's the bubonic plague most
people think it is and this is a
disaster right it lays waste to a third
of Europe's population so in the Bible
the end of the world is predicted by the
Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse death
war pestilence famine all these things
start happening there's a
ebonic plague massive pestilence there's
famine because the there's an extended
wet period and the crops are dying
there's huge war hundred year war the
Crusades there's the battle against the
Cathars as I mentioned and what happens
is the church creates the first secret
police the church creates the Holy
Inquisition
try and root out the last of the Cathars
because this there's this Gnostic
revival and the Holy Inquisition is
created to find the Cathars that have
escaped defying the heretics and bring
them to trial imagine imagine how this
feels
analogous to the Hellenistic domicile
people are dying
villages are going out of existence
social order is being radically
disrupted there's war and then the
church is not helping you it's actually
sending out people to try and find if
you're a heretic
so first of all people's confidence
confidence in the worldview that they
had been born into is being radically
undermine eighth they literally think
it's the end of the world most of the
interest institutions and social
structures are broken or at least put
under significant strain something else
happens that's really important of
course there's a disruption in social
order people move around and more
importantly there's a labor shortage so
many people die there's a labor shortage
and because some of the order has broken
down people are free to move around more
than they were leave the land it's like
a bit of like the Bronze Age collapse or
the end of the Roman Empire
people can now engage in some
experimentation now what does this mean
well it means that there's a labor
shortage and there's more freedom right
of geographical motion and social change
people start to be able to sell their
labor for more money and to even to sell
their labor they start to be able to
change their status through their own
efforts before like you were locked into
a quite you know rigid social structure
feudal structure but now you because of
the chaos around you you can actually
make a difference to your own life
through your own effort and strangely
enough all of this is forms a weird kind
of consistency the world actually isn't
fundamentally ordered the order is just
given by God they could just be removed
and then their true
of things is revealed we impose an order
like God does and by my willpower
I can change my status I can make my son
myself into something different so
what's happening here is alright a new
view in which reality is primarily being
seen as a chaotic backdrop against which
a battle of wills is occurring and God
is starting to less and less be a source
of rational order and more and more to
be a source of arbitrary power
now many historians argue of course some
disagree that the Black Plague also
opens up new social experimentation
people start to as I say sell their
labor start to become more
entrepreneurial are willing to move
around more and you get a rise of
commercialism commercialism starts to
ascend now commercialism is really
really powerful right you can make use
of disparity in demand to accrue wealth
so I've got a lot of wool here how much
do you want for my wall not very much I
got a lot of wool - I'm gonna go sale or
travel over here do you have any wool no
what will you give me for this wool lots
of gold oh okay
wow I go back here you know what I can
buy with this gold more wool I can go
back here and I can get wealthy and look
what's happening here I'm doing it
through my own effort has nothing to do
with the church has nothing to do with
the aristocracy has nothing to do with
raising grain farming the land nothing
this is like magic
now there's problems of course with that
one of the problems is political the
aristocracy is is in the way
and so this emerging middle class is
going to more and more challenge the
aristocracy but also the problem with
trade especially I see is your ship
sinks so what do you do well first of
all you're going to create some new
institutions you're going to create
banks money to lend you so you can
finance such expeditions you're gonna
create insurance companies in case your
ship sinks now you're gonna do something
really important what you're gonna do is
say look I'm not going to take all the
individual risk what I'm gonna do is I'm
gonna get a bunch of my a bunch of
friends of people together and like the
way the church is the body of Christ the
body corpus I'm gonna make one body out
of all these people I'm going to
incorporate I'm gonna create a
corporation and what we're going to do
is we're gonna have shares in the risk
we'll share the risk we'll have shares
in the corporation and when we get a
profit we will divide the profit in the
end we will have dividends will create
corporations and financial institutions
and then what we'll start to do is put
pressure on the government the state to
not just be working for the church and
for the aristocracy one of the things
the state is going to start doing is
it's going to start protecting contracts
and enforcing rules on these social
institutions and you get the emergence
of corporate capitalism and the
corporate state now that's important
because it means that now people have a
place in which they can look for power
the ability to change their life and for
norms to govern their behavior that have
nothing to do with the church or the
aristocracy
now that's very important already
because
what that means is people are creating a
secular alternative now they're not
setting out to do that but that's what
they're doing they're creating a secular
alternative a secular source of power
and wealth and prestige and they're
beginning to secularize the state in
order to safeguard those secular
endeavors and think about it the
supernatural world is largely irrelevant
to all of these secular projects
now this commercialism and trade also
means something else really important I
got to get better at my psycho
technologies because I'm not process
information a lot better so what I'm
gonna do is I'm gonna import a new
psycho technology always the new secular
technologies look for it what happens is
people are replacing Roman numerals with
the hindu-arabic numerals you know these
right you take it like one two three
four five six seven eight nine zero
right the hindu-arabic numerals
if you ever done calculations with Roman
numerals it's cumbersome and long and
slow and stupid this speeds up it
empowers you it's a cyclic technology
that makes your ability to process and
calculate information way faster and of
course comes through right the Arab
world because of increased trade but
also because of the Crusades etc what
also comes in is algebra the use of
letters to represent variables rather
than numbers what comes in is this zero
and with that almost immediately the
ability to use negative numbers because
sometimes when you're running your
business you're running in a deficit
you're running in debt notice what's
happening you're getting a powerful
upsurge in the kind of mathematical
psycho technology
that is available for people what else
are people going to do well they're
going to improve their celestial
navigation because if I can sail the
water is faster and better there's less
chance I will lose all of my profits
where my ship sinks well how can i well
I'm going to more carefully observe the
Stars and I'm going to apply this new
way of thinking this Aristotelian
logical coherent propositional way of
thinking and I'm going to use the new
math and the new algebra so I got this
new way of thinking I've got the new
psychic technology I'm going to put them
together and observe the heavens way
more carefully and something that had
been known for a while it's going to
become much more prominent the heavens
don't behave in this nice orderly
fashion the way Aristotle and Ptolemy
said they do for example if you look at
Mars in the heavens right Mars will do
this over time it goes really it's
called the retrograde of Mars it's
because of where the the Martian and
Charon orbits intersect and don't like
as you they don't intersect but like
when the Earth passes by Mars that's
what I meant and as you get this way
more careful observation this
Aristotelian propositional inferential
way of thinking trying to get clear
definitions and that's allied to this
new math mathematical sacred technology
people start to discover how chaotic the
heavens actually are
and of course what they try to do is
they they start trying to fiddle with
the system right okay so the Earth's at
the center and stuffs going around it
but on these spheres there's other
things spinning in opposite directions
and you get all this epicycles and it
gets convoluted and complex and then
Copernicus comes along and says and this
is really crucial what he actually the
way he actually says it he says the math
is better if you put the Sun at the
center right now notice we talked about
this before
Aristarchus had said the Sun could be at
the center and there was all these
arguments against it and Galileo sorry
Copernicus doesn't have any answer to
any of those arguments but he doesn't
need them now because people are
committed to this new way of thinking
they're committed to this new
mathematical psycho technology they're
committed to this new Aristotelian way
of thinking and if it makes the math
better that's good enough and we all
talked about this oh yeah it's the
Copernican revolution - ha ha
and we titter over our coffee and tea
look you have to understand what this
means you have to really get it let's go
back you're using this Aristotelian way
of thinking right remember what was
Aristotle's marks of how you determine
if things were real okay is the organ
relevant organ functioning yes is the
medium not distorting the information
yes do other people after rational
discussion agree with you yes remember
we did the example if you hear somebody
over somebody says oh I heard that Susan
said she loved you at the party that's
how you determine if things are real
watch this it's morning we are all
stone-cold sober we all have perfect
20/20 vision I don't but let's say we
all do we all watch the Sun rise in the
East pass overhead and seek in the West
we all agree that that's what we all see
we talk about it we argue about it we
come
in agreement and we're all wrong the air
is clear we're stone-cold sober our eyes
are working perfectly we rashly discuss
it we all agree and we're all wrong it's
an illusion now here's the thing that
should immediately occurred put yourself
back there if that's an illusion what
else isn't an illusion how do you know
any of this is real because all you have
be honest all you have is oh well my
mind and my senses are working normally
everything seems clear there's no
distorting fog or not and people agree
with me that's what they see that's what
most of your sense of realness is based
on
that's why Aristotle's view was so
powerful and yet what Copernicus is
saying is that can all be satisfied and
it's still not real because the Mac says
it isn't real and that also all of a
sudden means all of this all of this
experience all of it isn't real remember
we had the theory that we were in touch
with the world
we're in conformity with the world
that's gone now what's happened is the
following here's the world out here and
here's our mind and in between is this
barrier experience your sense experience
isn't you being in touch with the world
notice I'm using a sense term it's not
putting me in touch with the world it's
actually a veil between me in the world
the only thing that cuts through all of
this illusion this is very narrow
channel of math
everything else it's a move all of a
sudden you are mostly out of touch with
the world this is terrifying it's
terrifying so you've got all this chaos
going on around you and then you've got
this view that suddenly says to you well
how do you know this isn't an illusion
how do you know that this table is here
how do you know that your mother
actually loved you you really have to go
back see this is we're protected we're
protected by our loss of participatory
knowing a perspective on oil we assert
merrily in our minds the proposition yes
yes there the earth is not at the center
blah blah blah but we don't actually
translate that existentially into what
does that mean prospectively what does
that mean about your participation in
reality put yourself back into what it
would be happening for you to just learn
this for the first time and you can see
the terror we're becoming radically
disconnected from the world you can see
the influence of Occam here we're
trapped behind our experience is now
just something that we're talking about
but it's not what really is the case now
galileo comes along and says ah but I've
got an answer to Arkham this is what
Copernicus is showing it this is what
this new scientific way where I put
Aristotelian logic and I put the new
math together and I put careful
observation together what it's telling
me is that the math yeah spoken language
and Sense experience can't trust those
that the math mathematics is the
language of the universe
he's very influenced by that old
Platonic view about abstract
the medical things being what's real now
what Galileo does is he starts to put
that new way of thinking about math that
new way of observing that new way of
reasoning into practice he does
something really unusual
so of course math up until that time had
been and still primarily was understood
via geometry so the quintessential math
text is Euclid's elements right math and
geometry are pretty much synonymous
now there's arithmetic in calculation we
already talked about those new
mathematical tools but Galileo does
something really really interesting he
starts using the geometry in a
completely abstract fashion because look
my sense experiences can't be trusted
right the way I'm the way I am thinking
of things doesn't have to in any way
look like what it's representing there
doesn't have to be any sensual no
sensual no experiential similarity
between my thoughts and and the world
let me show you what I mean here's a
triangle I'm gonna use geometry and he's
using it to represent the relationship
between you know distance and time and
that gives me speed now there's nothing
triangular about speed he's using the
geometry to represent abstract
mathematical relations these have
nothing to do with how I'm actually
experiencing the world
there's no conformity between this and
the way the world is in my experience so
he starts to use math in a purely
abstract symbolic way so he starts to
observe things like he sees a chandelier
swinging in a church and he measures it
by tracking with his Paltz he's rolling
balls down inclined planes
and what is he what is what comes out of
all of this well
Galileo kills the universe because what
Galileo realizes is inertial motion
things don't move because there's an
inner drive and they're trying to get
where they belong
that's a purposeful narrative way of
understanding the world things don't
move for that reason things move because
they've been hit by a purely random
arbitrary external force and they will
continue moving like that until another
random external force before Galileo
everything is alive everything is
driving trying to get where it's belong
where it belongs to make the universe a
more beautiful ordered place after
Galileo everything is dead there's no
inner life to matter nothing is moving
on purpose at all now that is really
important because before Galileo you
were like everything else because you
act on purpose and so does everything
else when Galileo kills the universe
you're now a little island of purpose in
a vast desert of purposelessness you're
alone you're a oncological castaway all
by yourself you're weird and strange and
you don't belong and the universe is an
indifferent machine notice notice what
that notice that's what this does look
at this we talk about it again pay
attention to the words you're using
oh yes inertial motion what's at the
heart of inertia inert inert dead
lifeless not capable of moving itself
and what happens is Galileo starts to
understand matter differently in the old
world matter old world view
it was the potential for information but
now matter goes to being that which
resists matter resists my will it's
defined in terms of my resistance why
does why is that so important why do I
want matter to be inert and resisting me
look it's actually a beneficial thing if
the world is resisting me because what
everybody is telling me is no it's all
chaos up and I'm in I'm deceiving myself
I'm creating all these illusions the
only hope I have is if the world pushes
back on me if the world resists my will
everything is defined in terms of will
and the resistance to will so now what
you have is you have this lifeless
universe and a battle between isolated
wills largely creating illusions and
this vast inert Wilma Willis but
nevertheless resistant machinery of the
universe it has another function by
making matter an actual substance rather
than the potential for information gal
Galileo removes their being any basis
for evil before we had an we had a
cosmological explanation for evil evil
was a hole in being a pure like pure
potential pure chaos there is no such
thing now matter is just this resistant
inert stuff which means we've lost
something and it's telling to us we
don't really have a way really of
talking about evil we don't know we
don't have a metaphysics of what evil is
we think of evil as just excessive
immorality but what is evil well people
used to have a very coherent
fistic ated answer to that now they
either say well ultimately there is no
such thing or I don't know or it's just
a way of talking about great immorality
now Galileo gives us the scientific
method notice how it's a legacy from the
axial revolution the scientific method
is a way for overcoming our willful
generation of illusion and
self-deception
the whole point of the scientific method
is to get the resistance of the world
the inert purposeless world to resist
our purposes in our will to show us how
we are deceiving ourselves now that
means that you're going to give huge
priority to the scientific method and to
the mass so what Galileo is going to say
is look the mathematical properties are
the real properties of the thing the
length of this right and its mass
anything that I can measure
mathematically about this is going to be
real it's gonna be right in the object
as we will come to say it's going to be
objective the mathematical properties
are objective those are real
so we're about where are all these other
properties what about all the things I
can't measure mathematically what about
how sweet the honey is how beautiful the
sunset is how meaningful these words are
what is all that meaning where's all
that meaning
well that's non mathematical so it's not
in the world it must be inside that that
mind remember we've developed a mind as
this internal chamber that manipulates
language and propositions inside there
in trapped inside your mind that's where
all the meaning is that's where all the
value is that's where all the beauty is
all of that non mathematical stuff
that's subjective
it's only in the mind it's an you
experience the illusion of it being in
the world the world is not meaningful
the world is not purposeful the world is
not filled with beauty the world is not
filled with truth the world is not
filled with goodness the world is not
even filled with chairs cops tables
because those are not mathematical
entities those are all illusions created
by your meaning making mind in its
willful self-deception the way it
asserts itself on the world
what's happening the orders are breaking
down see one of the great strengths of
the Aristotelian worldview was that your
view of knowledge and your view of the
world mutually supported each other but
the great weakness of that of a
worldview is as one starts to unravel so
does the other
and the unraveling accelerates as if
like as the Aristotelian world breaks
down you wish to Tilian theory of
knowing breaks down and as that breaks
down the Aristotelian model the word and
this starts to spin very fast in an
accelerating fashion notice where we are
already we're we're disconnected from
the world we're trapped inside our heads
we've lost respectable and participatory
knowing self transcendence all the
meaning all the beauty all that that was
out in the world that's all gone it's
all trapped inside of our heads all
that's out there is a purposeless inert
chaotic absurdity and all that's here
within me is inner conflict and a battle
of wills with other human beings it's no
wonder that many people were
experiencing this as a trauma now here's
the thing none of us are immune to this
trauma we just don't think about it
anymore or what we do is we'll wake up
at 3:00 a.m. in the morning laying on
our bed and think these thoughts and
realize how disconnected we are from
reality
we believe in a scientific worldview in
which our meaning and purpose ourself
and the objects we interact with the
tables and chairs and cars and
everything of that ilk is all ultimately
not real and all the purposes we're
striving for are not real all the
meaning we're making is not real and
then fundamentally I'm not real you're
not real
I mean do you ever awake at 3:00 and
think I'm just very complex pattern of
atoms that's all that's really there
everything else it's just an illusion
and everything I'm doing I'm doing for
things that aren't real for a self that
isn't real in a universe that doesn't
give a damn about me is completely
indifferent it's not that it hates me
it's completely inert and indifferent to
me so as you can imagine this is not
going to leave religion in the spiritual
life untouched there are individuals who
are going to be affected by akhom and
the rhineland mystics and the rise of
the new science and are going to try and
reconfigure Christianity to deal with
this crisis that is emerging and so as
the Scientific Revolution is picking up
steam as the commercial and corporate
revolutions are picking up steam as the
secularization of the state is picking
up steam the Protestant Reformation
occurs
of course it occurs in Germany because
that's where everything is occurring
it's gonna keep occurring so what I want
to investigate with you next time is the
Protestant Reformation and how it
furthers the dissolution of the
nomological order the normative order
and the narrative order notice how
they're already all under significant
stress this new scientific worldview the
normal logical order is one that I don't
fit into the normative order of ascent
and self transcendence that's gone the
narrative order of their being a story
and a life and a purpose to things
that's gone Luther's going to come and
he's going to bring about a process of
reformation that it's going to
exacerbate this collapse of the oxys of
meaning and the ways in which we are
connected to ourself each other in the
world we'll take a look at that next
time we're together thank you very much
for your time and attention
[Music]
you
you