all right hello welcome to our first
idea cafe for projects an idea Cafe is a
type of conversation where each
participant takes up to five minutes to
answer the question and then we have an
open dialogue for the remainder of the
time so Adriel I'll leave it up to you
do you want to start or don't need a
start um I can start some Jen is what do
you need to in order to be able to trust
alright so I guess a bit of context to
what I'm coming at this conversation for
it doesn't explicitly say that is I'm
taking this from the context of what do
you need to trust like a project
organization you know like a group of
people or a project basically not just
an individual although I guess a lot of
the same stuff that's still apply and
the previous yes
thinking I've done on trust to me it
split into two main like high-level
groups and then there's sort of sub
parts to each of them so to me Trust is
split into character and competence so
if you trust someone's character right
that like most people can hopefully
trust the character of their family
their friends the kind of person you
know they say I trust that person to
watch my stuff you're saying like I
trust them not to try to steal stuff and
you know be weird and then there's the
competence part where that is you know
if you think about I don't know some
sort of an action or a war movie if you
trust somebody to watch your back you're
not just trusting their character you're
also trusting their competence that
they're going to be competent and able
to actually do the thing that they say
they're going to be doing so in an
organization I think that still applies
where there's the character of the
organization like for example we've seen
many cases over the last let's say over
a hundred years
we're being profit motivated and
sometimes not be great for you know the
actual actions taken that affect
someone's character and just any
else that would make you not trust and I
think when people talk about trust
character is the most common thing that
people are actually referring to and
then for competence that is like for
example if you want to be able to trust
in a tech company right whether that's
Google or Apple or just a start-up there
is sort of the assumption that like hey
we're gonna you know you can trust us
with whatever data is on the platform
there's the trust that that company
itself isn't going to do something weird
which is character and then there's the
trust in their ability or their
competence to you know have computers
security not get breached not get hacked
and that's more a competence thing or
even if the company is well-meaning and
you trusted the person not to do
something intentionally if they're not
competent then they might end up you
know bad things might still happen
regardless if you can trust it that
their character or not so that's sort of
where I come at the thought of trusting
your organization is split in those two
areas and yeah so I think that's sort of
an important first thought and then for
the character of a organization that's
where I don't think they you know a
for-profit company is necessarily like
means you know you can't be trusted
characterized but I think a lot of the
actions that actually come out of that
right like taking actions that are not
as ethical whether that's you know
blatant polluting or using slave labor
or something like that I think those are
some obvious examples of where I would
have less trust in an organization the
more things I find out about them doing
that in some cases they might not have a
choice like from what I understand the
supply chain for lithium it's all based
on slave labor so if you want to be able
to offer something with a battery what
do you do
and then competence that's harder to
figure out a lot of it is based on what
the company is saying I'll actually do
which I guess is kind of a third part of
trust is what are they saying that you
can trust them to do and then you would
base that out know if you should trust
them or not on their character
accomplish
and so the competence of an organization
a lot of that comes down to what what
they say they're going to do like if the
company is a tech company you might not
need to trust their tech credentials and
their you know whatever sort of security
protocols they have in place but if so
if you know it's something like Google
or Facebook even if security isn't the
main concern that does end up becoming
at least you know partially involved
because at Facebook or Google or
somebody like that gets breached that
can be a pretty serious serious thing
sounds like you're done I'll do I really
liked it she said about break into
character competency I would like to add
a third C which is what you were talking
about here at the end which is
consistency that how like they can be
really good at something but if they
show up one time and be good on it and
it's not good continually then that's
gonna be a problem in an organization
for me though what what I mainly trust
in an organization and very few have it
if any is transparency is to honor that
you know what we live in a very
antitrust society everyone who we did
trust in it has let us down consistently
and so to be able to create within that
current atmosphere you have to be
willing to be transparent and the beauty
is that that when some people in any
industry start being transparent they're
gonna be able to somewhat force the rest
of their their industry to become
transparent because no information is
bad information so I'm looking for the
input in the data on a company and can
we trust it who has funded the company
who are the main players and do they
have the character and competency I
actually care somewhat less about
competency I care that the thing can do
it but but I can see how a team comes
together to create that competency so I
don't care about an individual's
competency but because of the world we
live in where trust is bought and
somewhat both
assumes and it's assumed that nobody
trusts anybody nobody actually trusts an
organization and those with the most
money you can do the marketing can kind
of offset that trust and so what I look
for is like I said the transparency in
the organization that you have the
information available but in the current
system although once someone in the
industry is willing to put that
information out there the other ones
someone up to follow suit if that
infrastructure isn't in place then
actually it costs you something to be
transparent right if you are a better
life beyond mine and you aren't using
slave labor but you're you know paying
people two bucks today well that's
better than what's going on but if
you're the ones saying hey I'm paying
people two bucks a day look you look
worse than everyone else who's not
saying anything right and so I look for
truth I look for consistency and I look
for verification
how much can I know that this is the
case in a world where we don't trust
each other I trust people a lot if I'm
trusting an individual it's like have we
met each other in person or on video and
have you do I get a good feeling from
you friends that's not really something
you can put into a metric but also I'm
going to assume trust until you've
broken it within caveats right if I'm
not gonna lend you money I'm probably
not gonna like go out of my way to spend
all my spoons to help you but I will
trust what you say I'll take it at face
value I'll assume you're showing up
honestly until you've proven it wrong
and then even then I'll let you prepare
it but if you keep you of the
consistency of the broken part the
consistency of breaking your word the
consistency of not having I'm telling
you you're confident in something and
then not being confident like I care
less of a competency and more about
honesty and competency which I don't
think a lot of people are capable of
they don't even know whether they're
competent or not it's something people
either overestimate or underestimate
themselves sorry where do you say
honesty incompetency you mean like
they're able to be honest in where they
are at are not competent yeah oh yeah
they can say like I do not trust anyone
like Trump who's like I'm good at
everything when it shows the metrics
don't show that and I've even gotten to
the point where even if
you show up at face-value would tell me
you're the best at everything you might
actually be and I'm not going to trust
you like tell I need to know that you
marry your shitty and where you're good
in order be able to trust that you know
where you're good and so that is that is
my my trick that reminds me of I think
one of the comments in the comment chain
for this post on Facebook where they
were talking about it's kind of
something like that look they don't
trust someone if they've only ever said
positive things and there's a couple
like that to me resonates highly and
like where's how different countries
show up internationally where a lot of
the countries like I mean a lot of the
Western countries get you know get in
trouble for doing things but they also
admit to it like there's tons of things
in Canada in the US and the UK where
they've got a paper and said like yeah
we messed up that that was wrong
sometimes they they fight it right
they'll say like no we didn't do that
until it's proof and then okay yeah but
even just the fact that you can be
disproven with proof and they're on the
record as sometimes being like okay yeah
we screwed up we shouldn't have done
that there's certain countries that
especially the West doesn't tend to get
along with I've never heard them say
that they did that single thing wrong
even when like there's video proof the
entire international community is in an
uproar and their to say nope we didn't
do it you're all just you know trying to
gang up on us or it's all fake or and
time after time after time mmm
I've never seen them take responsibility
for anything that's when I'm like okay I
don't trust that that that not that
country I'm impressed that government
sorry keep talking or change text ad
okay there's something else that vote
right with the the transparency part
yeah I think that's super important I
think you can't really assess either
competence or character without some
level of transparency but then like if
we use something from the game a world
which is hurt like as a part of my day
job I end up reviewing a lot of
different you know business software one
of the the things that I personally take
is like a big tick as a plus
if a company's actually willing to put
their pricing on their website but a lot
of companies don't because there's
actually a disadvantage to being you
know the first one of the only one doing
that because then your price is out
there all of your competitors can be
like look at their price right and they
can structure conversations and their
pricing and everything around just
trying to be better in that one-on-one
conversation yeah and so it's there is
that both right you you hinted on it if
you're the only one saying right like oh
we pay our you know our lithium miners
$2 an hour to 2 or $2 a day even if
that's better than the others if you're
the only one that's owning up to it that
then gets iffy we're like all the up you
know there's a good chance in that case
the other companies would just stay
silent and sort of sink into the
background and just wait for the public
to tear that company apart what you only
pay them two dollars a day
yeah we're also the best at it like we
that's the best outcome we're just being
honest about it but the public typically
doesn't take that kind of context yeah
exactly and that's where like we're
having this conversation about the
projects met up the meta projects at
slights Turner normal board meeting time
is how do we build that trust with each
other that's somewhat the easy part
right to be able to come completely I
trust you you're my brother but like um
within within like even you know I trust
Bentley I trust me Jonas even though
I've never met them in person because
they show up consistently in there but
like um how do I trust an organization
that I've never met the person you can't
meet everyone CEO you can't meet
everyone and so it's like right
transparency and so that's where like
the the base needs to create that right
if the world is like listen we are not
gonna stand for not having transparency
and we're gonna assume bad and like
we're gonna soon you're the worst in the
industry if you're not willing to be
transparent right and there's like right
now under game a the world is very
structured in the people with the money
and people the power have wealth power
whereas the truth is the people have the
power and so creating a system because
the reason they don't want that
information out there is they want our
money they
I ought to not be paid attention to that
they want and so as soon as it's easy to
pay attention to that and it's easy to
see who the best left the abidance are
even if they're still atrocious then to
see that be like okay we need to have
another option right so you should not
be the case who are the people who own
these Lithia mines who are the
government's in charge of these
countries and why this is happening but
the first step there's probably a few
steps before it but it's to have a
platform of trust right a platform that
it's like instead of marketing how do we
know what you actually stand for what is
your mission what is your vision what is
your values that are you actually doing
them and what are you doing in the
process are you adding positive
externalities negative externalities
probably not zero probably not net zero
but probably and then you you know
allowing people because the other weird
thing to comprehend is that like not
everyone cares about slavery a lot of
people are completely fine with yeah I
came a my teacher that's fine it was
cheap yeah and then they'll for but then
they'll freak out over animal testing
you're like that I don't get it but I
don't get to understand everything
everyone does if you just have to sort
of try to make a system to handle those
and I think that's where that kind of
goes back to the transparency but a kind
of transparency where it's not I guess
like you lateral source or like the
previous you you utopia conversation it
can't be around one single kind like oh
here's the transparency around slavery
well great but what about the
environment and slave labor and this and
that and all these other things that you
know people might care about and we
might just want to be able to to measure
and that's you know put out into the
world here's all of the companies that
my lithium here's the companies that use
those and here's sort of the different
things right because how would you wave
the two if there's two different
companies one of the less heavily on
slave labor but actually you know is the
best as far as environmental impact goes
and then the company that actually pays
their people is just atrocious in the
environmental that that's where I think
it gets murky at best yeah absolutely
and I mean the irony of course is
usually companies that are good at one
hour got it the other ones
you're good at social justice you're
generally more care about the
environment in those things but not
always and even if you are those things
and you put that you put that into your
business even if you're gay may you then
still have to market in a world where
nobody else is doing that and spend all
of that money just everyone's like how
well we're not going to trust you why
would we trust you yeah you say you're
green you say you're good we were if you
aren't able to be like if there aren't
the systems in place to be that
transparent all I see is that your price
might be higher and then like oh well
you're ripping off no this is a better
quality product made with ethical you
know things all in the way you don't
usually get the option to do that like
to you know have that conversation it's
just you get to look you know people
will look at your packaging your price
and then make a choice and if there
isn't that system where you can like
either some sort of a scoring system or
some sort of an alert being like hey you
told us that you don't like animal
testing this thing you're you know of
the three things you're looking at those
to do animal testing just a heads up
yeah yeah exactly
and to help people find the there are
tools what they need to do that because
that is I mean everything has a
trade-off and even a lot of amazing
solutions out there I don't actually
know how they compare I don't know how
one food system compares to another food
system and aren't even in the ethics and
trust division but just because even if
I could totally trust that every person
is in it for the collective good which
clearly I can't that's probably the
opposite of that but even if that's the
case it doesn't mean your idea is better
than the next person who's with that
saying okay then your competency isn't
necessarily there right so so having and
that's where I actually really like the
broken down of like character and
competency and consistency of like is
the product consistent how long does it
last for right how much does it cost in
actual resources to implement in labor
and material in water and energy and how
much how long does it last for and what
are the ongoing inputs and what am I
getting out of it and what what is the
production right if it's creating
electricity or creating information how
good is that information I'll
trustworthy is that information and for
me it's like I trust the crowd more
I trust the government for sure like
it's like I'm okay
leaving up maybe it's might be wrong
which case made to put new things in
place but to say you know what I don't
really understand chemistry as much as
other people and don't really understand
physics as much as other people so if
instead of the pharmaceutical company
telling me they're their thing is safe
and effective if instead I have chemists
saying no listen like it's the best of
our knowledge is what this thing does in
your body and we've looked into it and
we're monitoring it monitoring it
ongoing right then I can't read that you
don't I mean it's not about trust in the
permit so covered the pharmacy Oh Kofi
can even still make the thing but like
what's actually in it is is part it's
like what's everything I don't trust
about it basically everything your
profit motive or your history your
character your competency and your
consistency all of it is a problem and
your transparency but collectively we
can input transparency that then helps
us see the competency and the character
and the consistency right what are all
those lawsuits that have been settled
and not settled that you've had a
pharmaceutical company right like what
are what is the if we're able to put our
data into the system as a person who
takes you know pharmaceuticals and then
events happen are they related to the
pharmaceutical who knows but if we're
all taking by fenton and all like a
statistical significant number of us
have heart attacks we should look into
that right you know like we're going
blind weird
what is the reason okay it's not a
thousand people weren't blind hmm okay
yeah and to be able to see that that
like there's a certain amount of
transparency is probably the wrong word
but information that only comes through
the collective right like even if again
if our missile company was working in
the greater good which they're not good
then they even then they're not gonna
have the data they need but they they
need to look at it for they can only
look at it for so many people they can
make it safe enough before it's a market
it has a reason it's there it's supposed
to be helping people so then then it's
you know makes that that bar and then
let's have continual continual
monitoring
is it about vilifying the company it's
about finding the truth right is this
drug and then yes did you know it was
toxic if it shows that it's toxic but if
you didn't know when you put in the due
diligence and you weren't hiding things
and now you turns out hit people one
important distinction is which then that
if you didn't know it was then that's a
hit against your competence not hit
against your character and I think
you're completely right that character
is more important than competence
because if you're competent don't have
character you're a super villain if
you're if you have character and you're
not competent like you're trying your
best but at least you're not gonna
intentionally kill people yeah yeah I
don't know why but like the Elizabeth
Holmes it's coming up it's like did that
like she didn't have competency and she
didn't have character at the same time I
think she got a bit out of character I
think she was in it for a good reason
and then it's like this is the problem
with incentives when it's for-profit and
when it's for your shareholders is
there's every incentive to lie even when
like you can trick yourself into
thinking because my understanding is
like she knew it was all bs yeah
cardinal the idea was it was always six
months oh right it was like oh we're
getting there we're almost there so
instead we're gonna like we're gonna say
were there and then test the blood then
get it it's like I don't I think she can
actually have it now and like oh yeah I
know she totally like her and like oh
yeah give us your blood and then there
was like take him somewhere else and do
it yeah it was absolutely it was a
complete show but I think her when
she first got involved in creating the
company both and that was like she was a
had a persona that was trustworthy even
though she had a tech background I'm not
even really not a science background so
she dropped out of like school as a
scientist she would go and do this thing
about it that works for tech it does not
work for science but your competency has
to be like I don't think you have to be
under the establishment for science but
ya better have been a scientist for 10
years I don't had the scientific
discussions understand what's possible
or not what a scientific meeting I
totally like
whether it's chemists engineers doctors
are certain people you're like I want
you to have gone to school but you know
what even if you were a chemist or like
you're doing chemistry work and you've
got ten years of like showing that you
know you're talking about even if you
don't have a degree
personally I'm less inclined certain
things like for doctors and engineers
and like no I still want you to have
gone to school but certain things I'm
like if you can do the science and you
can show it you're consistently right
like you've proved it you're more
competent or as competent as other
people who did well I think that's
what's coming up for me in in trust is
like there's a certain amount of trust
as a collective we have in certain
organizations and like I'm thinking
specifically of our medical system right
that like Oh doctors are trustworthy and
I don't think they're not trustworthy
but as a collective I'm like you don't
have anywhere near the information I
need you to have in order for me to be
able to trust you your competency right
I can trust your character mostly that
you're in it for the greater good right
you're in it too you would rather me be
healed than not you
but your competency is like zero because
you don't know my body and you don't
have all of this scientific information
sitting in your head being able to like
you know connect with everything else
nobody does so so unless you're like a
genius and even then you're not going to
be by GP right like if that's not gonna
be the level you're at and then
consistency it's like between them
they're not consistent it's like okay
well which which shouldn't matter
because I should be able to get a second
opinion but when each one says I'm
you're gone right like my dear you look
look how many doctors now get angry
google something exactly and it's like
well Google knows I look like the
problem because I don't trust doctors
right because we as a society we hold
them at this i esteem it's like no
because they don't have the information
I need them to have nor do our
politicians start do anyone and so my
competency I'm very honest in my
competency but my competition competency
looks low because I admit that I'm not
an expert in everything right and yet I
know how to save the world like it's
like I also
so I'm like like four other people those
things don't mesh together and I'm like
ah if I could show up like Trump pretend
I knew of the answer to everything then
you would trust me more but you should
trust me less and it's like and so on
like when you say you know something and
then you're proven by experts in that
field that no you don't know that thing
yeah then like in the early days where
Trump was saying I'm the best at the
military in this and then sent some Navy
SEALs off and people got killed and
stuff like that and he was like you know
and various people on site were like
sorry he's new at this didn't you just
say he was the best I think I'm a really
important example now his news and
that's what like this huh
something where Trump hit a nerve in the
public eye where you started talking
about kake news he didn't create that
everyone thought that that was something
that was under the surface waiting where
no one trusted any news source there's
this trust vacuum and I think people are
really uncomfortable being in a trust
vacuum so they end up picking well which
of the available options is the least
offensive to me and then they pick that
and just go all-in
and that's where you see people
completely ignoring when their news
source is blatantly lying and that's on
on you know all sides yeah yeah I'm so
to be able to again from the foundation
be able to say conversations like this
what can we trust and then how do we get
that information and a lot of its
already exists and this is where a lot
of the trust that we have because they
don't trust things is built in under law
right like that you have to have
ingredients on on food and beauty
products and only certain ingredients
though right certain ones are like
fragrance f is that is it like a flower
is it toxic like what is that Vincent
perfume Thanks ingredient list it's like
this is having those that information
that's already available to us in a
database so it can be correlated so that
it's like okay well I know fragrance is
possibly carcinogenic because you
haven't been transparent with that
ingredient and here's everything that's
listed under fragrance so you get the
worst look if you're not giving the
actual ingredient and proprietary nests
only goes so far when you're going to be
costed when it's going to cost you all
customers to not be transparent you like
do I want to smell goods do I want to
get cancer and not be old web children
so I can smell good
maybe they'll live in ignorance but
probably not not if there's other
options available and so like both I
think for society starting to create the
tools that organize transparency that's
already there under the law and then
from there just like I mean the politics
right which I'm sure you're dealing with
quick election a lot of the information
is legally there right like every
lawsuit every your your whether you're a
CEO or a CFO it's just not organized
it's not available it's not and then
even if someone does organize it how are
they then trusted but so it's like okay
we need to be able to figure those
things out because that's a very simple
if not easy step towards trust for all
of us and the interconnection and then
having like a lot of the stuff that
would come out of to get us to trust one
another is also black mayor level
right like what's happening in China
with the social currency yeah I in no
way want that instilled by either my
government or Facebook or Google no
thank you
but at the same time I want to know if I
can trust you I want to know and I want
on different levels to know I want to
know can I trust you with my money can I
trust you with my time can I trust you
with my like whatever it happens to be
are you anything
yeah that's what's interesting is it's
like I only like the idea of Social
Credit if it is only at the top later
like if you want to participate in the
public conversation and have us trust
you great you need to have your social
credit be public just say what you
didn't didn't do and all that stuff and
then the average person if they aren't
trying to get involved and you know they
aren't asking for an above normal amount
of trust and ya know they're fine did
they should be as anonymous as they want
to stay but like for example one of the
things I'm gonna have to deal with if
wiki election takes off is then that
counts to me too because I'm a part of a
product that's you know no asking to be
trusted I'm gonna end up with a profile
on with the election to with the history
of saying can you trust Adriel yeah
absolutely
and so but part of it is also like
there's a cost that comes to that right
and again I don't want to put our
government and I don't want it to be
Facebook and Google but I do want to
have the conversation with 10,000 people
like how do we trust each other and how
do we trust the 10,000th and one person
right so so including I'm not going to
give you my bank account information
right like that's not gonna happen but
how do you know that and so part of it
might be something like well if we're
exchanging money it doesn't start with a
million dollars it starts with 50 and
then I don't have to know if you paid it
back you're not a bad person because you
didn't pay it back
you're just not responsible with your
last character we're competent this yeah
yeah it's like I'm sure you wanted to
pay it back
what are you didn't and that didn't you
know inconsistency maybe it's one-off
time they didn't pay back for some
reason and so to be able to be honest
about that and say you know well sorry I
lost my job I thought I was getting my
paycheck that was my final paycheck to
be able to just you know right yeah
actually how you can make mistakes but I
think and that's where I've been trying
to sort of figure out where it's the
third see you added this consistency
where that fits in and I don't think
it's in the same group as character
competence I think it was like a
separate list of things that you need
for both and on that list or both
transparency and consistency yeah you
can be consistent across your character
and you can be consistent across your
competence and you know if you're 95% of
the way there okay you screwed up
occasionally but there's still 95
percent that's pretty damn good yeah and
and transparency well you can't really
know if you don't have information so I
think it's in my mind it's still
character incompetence and then we're
starting to build a list which is good
because they just splitting it into
character and competence isn't terribly
useful if you can and go go deeper and I
think that step of going deeper starting
to come up with it like how do we judge
those things what do we need what do
they mean and two very important aspects
are transparency and consistency yeah
absolutely and I like that like I think
we can slate
character and competency a lot
especially in the politicians right it's
like oh you haven't extramarital affair
that goes the character not confidence
well he balanced a penny or where he
stands if he stands for family values
and this and that you're lying you're
being a hypocrite you're having an
affair while you were changing laws yeah
but if you're like you know if Russell
Brand runs for office and goes in and he
has you know some sex scandals that's
not really against his character in a
mine cuz that's kind of his thing you're
like yeah alright I kind of expected you
were you know going to do that yeah it's
like kind of going against your brand
because I guess that's it right like
that if the character is also like
society like kind of like the doctor
thing that society has a certain level
of character so even if it's within your
character and it's completely fine
you're probably amorous society's not
ready for that and you're gonna be
looked at as like that's why people have
to fake having family values and fake
that they're in a monogamous
heterosexual relationship and they go to
church every Sunday but don't know how
to say the books of the Bible like it's
like um this isn't consistent with who
you pretend to be
I personally but they would never get
elected when we rather have someone
who's honest and that's where like again
if you're like oh no family values and
we never do any it's like I'm just gonna
call BS and let's prove another one
right like I'm pretty sure that most
people aren't that and unless it's the
50s and even then they probably weren't
it's like so prove it and I don't like
it's like it's less of a um importance
then I'd rather you be honest but
society's not ready for that like no I
want to know if you're gay I don't even
care I just wanna be able to be open and
honest and can you run the country can
you run the city can you you know do
it's like your competency but you
honestly and this is part of it you
can't be competent if you have to hide
yourself if you have to hide who you are
you're putting all of your energy into
like putting on this persona I'm like oh
no what if I'm caught what if this seems
like I think it depends what you're
competent in but yeah cuz competence
does get to be kind of a blurry line
we're like as weird as it is being
dishonest you can be very competent than
that and now you're doing great but
that's not a kind of competence that
anyone like so it's like but I'm
thinking like the Don't Ask Don't Tell
in the military right when it was was
there for the states and like that cost
them something
like even if they were okay being there
it was like wait I have to pretend that
this is my friend that I go home to at
the end of my tour not my husband not my
way we stand in your language as you're
talking throughout your attack earlier
of like I know you're like well bullets
are flying at you right like it's like
it costs you something and so to
constantly be like okay well how do I
live my life and give my best self to
the world in whatever way I'm doing that
well I have to live under in a closet
about anything right and so it's like
this is what I'm learning is that you
don't actually have to spew all of your
truth but at the same time if you're
hiding it right if it's something you
really don't want people to know that is
kind of like because then you're gonna
be making decisions that's gonna be your
incentive to make decisions so that
doesn't come to light and whether its
financial or character or any event it's
like it costs you and it costs your
mission something it costs your
competency just because there's other
 going on right you have to like
think about that thing first and it
definitely costs your character yeah
yeah and so that's interesting so I
think there is like there's a part to
character where it's are you app like
does your dear actions betray what
you're trying to portray or your
character as and then there's things
where that doesn't even matter right
like Pete Buddha jej was openly gay so
like him being gay there's no character
conflict there but for some people that
either character conflict for their
personal value so there's sort of these
two parts to character then there's the
how they're portraying themselves and is
there a dishonesty there where you know
their character doesn't match what
they're supposed to be doing and then
there's just the individual person even
if you're completely open and honest if
you're open and honest about something
that I find offensive on a character
level that still counts against your
character on an individual basis because
you can totally have somebody who fully
trusts someone as somebody who doesn't
and it can just be right like people who
who like Trump and like the Republicans
a lot of them like his character and
then a lot of and they both have valid
claims because they're like well it's
just that same aspect of his character
if you like
or not will depend on it that's a plus
or a minus yeah there's some of the
things they're like how is this not a
negative but sure sure well this pretend
family values you I think a big part of
that also comes into where it fits into
the system like talking about okay if
you have to lie in order to be able to
get an office you have to lie and say
you know that you're in a monogamous
heterosexual for a relationship but like
that's not really a core part of your
message then that's where it kind of
gets a bit again murky where it's like
the person lied but I didn't really care
about that and they did that so that
they could navigate this and people will
do that you know they'll come up with
their own judgments so I guess this
whole conversation is just around trying
to come up with a map for like here's
things to consider when you're trying to
decide if you can trust or not and my
eventual goal is to take some sort of
understanding of like here's how we
think about trust here's all the aspects
and a ways to judge it because I think
that's where if you take that up to the
public and start having people sort of
vote and get feedback it needs to be as
like detailed as possible so that it's
not you know that conceptual is actually
no there's character it's confidence
here's examples here's this here's that
you know and you're trying to come up
with kind of an exhaustive list of
things that could make the list and is
starting to group them yeah I mean we
both we know we come at it from
different ways like my I would like to
be able to go out to not the public go
to the stream you like what makes you
trust people be able to have this same
conversation on multiple channels and
then be able to bring that data together
and say okay look because not everyone's
gonna have put it of course into
character and competency because that
was so how you started this conversation
right which really helped frame it and
so it could be framed under that to
begin with and then asking people have a
conversation right or just like trust in
general and then we bring that to the
next conversation of like who we divided
it into this and that kind of really
helps what are other ways people
organize the play right and then see
which one's the best one and then like
creating the system around that and
brainstorming like okay how would we
even characterize character right how
about even characterize competency
because competency is also big one we're
like we're judged based on some what
or confidence in our skills and our
actual skill and they are not
necessarily correlated right I
personally say basically negative like
it's like if you think you're amazing at
something like the people who are
actually genius in something and baby
beginners are the two who are like I'm
so awesome at this and everyone in
between that is like oh you keep
learning what you don't know right it's
done Kruger if there's a there's an
effect you have to embarrass the
Dumbarton over those I feel like it's
not something Kruger Dunbar burger
something okay yeah but having like the
more basically the more skills you got
the less it and for me it's like okay I
know that we're supposed to show up and
be confident we're just to be like oh
don't trust me because of this and put
on that air and I have no desire to do
that because I think that then you're
you're it's I don't have the energy to
put on a persona in mask I just don't
and so here I am accept me and then
we'll move forward together or we won't
right and we can't move forward that's
cool I'm down with that
like that that everyone lies on the job
application everyone shows up to a first
date their best self and I don't I'm
like this is me but everyone thinks
you're showing up is your best self so
then they're like oh god this is you
know sister is going through you know
some like trying to tear is capital for
her business and what she's learned
through reading and just through doing
it is that for some reason you know it's
just known that when you're trying to
get funding business owners will like
massively overestimate the value of
their business but when you look at the
history of it well women are far less
likely to do that and so they end up
with it they don't get as much money for
their businesses because they don't
overestimate when the people who are
doing it just assumed everyone
overestimate so they're taking that into
account and if you then don't do it
you're not the dishonest and the person
thinks you are Dan right which happens
it's like I'm proficient in Spanish
because I can say five words so then
they're like oh great how the
conversation with this person oh no
so I think everyone I said that
proficient in Spanish really means they
look no five words when no it's like
what is your actual level and this is
where like we need outside metrics to be
like not like yeah you get hired based
on your competency you're gone the main
thing is you can't trust individuals
because because the thing about Trump is
I think he actually thinks he's the best
I don't think he's lost I don't think so
either
and Selina you can't I think it's just
you can't trust the person's own
feedback cuz there's also people who
were incredible at something but because
they know you know they could they
always see this five or ten percent of
things they don't know that I call them
so stupid and you're like no you still
know that topic way better than anyone
so how do you judge those two I think it
has to come down to some way to sort of
track over time but you know pin to
paper or more accurately like chisel to
a stone write it publicly say I think
that this is going to happen I'm saying
this blah blah commit to it and then
over time we see what happens and we see
okay this person is claiming to be
competent in chemistry here's all the
things they've said publicly about
chemistry and what ended up happening
with those right which also yeah the
difference do you like the individual in
the group and this is kind of what's
part of what came up in game be it men's
part is for me not for necessarily them
it's like is it the group or the
individual you care about if we care
about movie or a game be forward and yes
let's let's let in the people who are
competent at the social part and the
intellectual part and all of this but if
what we and and but how you find those
people is hard and so it's like if if
the point is game be itself then yeah I
get I get having a more stringent
barrier to get in but having it be the
individual right like this has brought
me so much I want everyone to be able to
experience this who wants to experience
it those are very different barriers
right like ones basically let everyone
in until they prove themselves that they
can't be here and the other ones like no
we need to be very very strategic and
whom we let it and hope you don't let in
look and so having that peace of trust
is like right having because what I want
is for to be able to help everyone find
their genius their purpose their passion
right and I want to know what I want a
project that I am with
people who were around my competency
right like I honestly don't want to be
on a project with you on mas like no
thank you I want to be on a project with
other people who are around and maybe I
would be okay I'm with you and mas right
like maybe that is my my level I don't
know but he over uh States himself and I
probably understand you know what I mean
so like are we who knows right you
wouldn't know until like they're circles
of all these people and can we can we um
rate each other right if we were on a
team together and then after the team we
rated each other how much is that
accurate cuz we know it's not right
women get underestimate a man get
overestimated same with with race and
gender and every like or gender
expression everything right so it's like
okay anything we can actually measure
that isn't about um the feeling inside
right like I think they're competent I
think it's like no are they competent
are they actually and how we measure it
across gender and race where it's not
about what we think we're perceiving and
then it's a matching up and but I want I
want both to design my bridge right that
I have to drive across I want the best
engineers doing that and so I want to
know that they I want there to be a
metric for competency that is universal
throughout all of them and the best ones
get hired for that right at the same
time I want anyone including my kids be
able to learn engineering and be able to
know where they're at and how they can
progress and how they find their team of
people and it like there's because in
our current game a very competitive
world like a lot of my issue is you have
to fake it till you make it and lie
about it which puts it a disadvantage to
everyone including society right you
don't know the best engineering bridges
because we have the people who say
they're the best and come off as the
best which is absolutely not the same
thing yeah couldn't afford to go to
engineering school and thus they could
have the world yeah there's tons of
things yeah I encountered that a lot in
my professional world where there's like
two people one just nose to the
grindstone doesn't talk a lot and just
does stuff and does great work there's
somebody else he does okay work but they
do one thing and then talk about it for
the rest of the week so everyone knows
how great they're at that one thing
you're like yeah but they didn't do
nearly as good of a job as that person
you don't even know that person's name
yeah yes no and that's it like I I
encounter people all the time I have a
project or a passion something and they
just are like a dog with a bone with it
right like all they can do is talk about
it I also that person I get that I get
the irony but like at the same time it's
like right but I can find holes in
everybody's right like I'm like
okay that isn't the game changer you
think it is because you haven't dealt
with all this right because I'm
that person and I'm a pessimist and I'm
a realist and have poked holes in
everything my whole life I know with my
own project yes I'm not going to be I'm
not going to be young and partial but
I'm like calm poke holes in it okay like
I'm telling you there aren't holes there
are holes we will fill together and so
it's the kind of thing of like it's one
I wish I could be the dog with the bone
I wish I could show up and be like hey
Maz come talk to me hey give me five
need like like I'm like calm it down you
don't have the world-changing idea you
think you do but I also don't want to
discount their idea because maybe I
don't see their vision right like people
don't necessarily see mine but at the
same time I'm like no that's not I don't
know you know economics like I'm like
basic science or there's something
that's broken whereas no one's been able
to break mine besides just like I don't
think it can be not right like that
feeling peace I'm like I get it that's
true and real and it's gonna be a
barrier until it's not and so it's like
moving forward and showcasing it as it's
happening but that trust in it it's like
well one I'm telling you I'm not
competent right now I guess like some
like both wanted a not competent I'm
showing you my character but because
everyone else isn't right this whole
thing with Kyle sees and it's like
everyone later it's like oh yeah gave me
a bad feeling and I'm like not at the
time why are like come on you can't in
hindsight say these things jump in but
at the same time it's just like like we
have to figure it out together we have
to figure out what someone's competency
actually is and not necessarily like
looking at character traits of a
narcissist and the character traits of
someone who's autistic are very
intertwined the difference is that like
so you show up and they're like oh you
only care about yourself you're a
narcissistic it's like no actually like
like we actually want autistic people
doing this doing the
work but they come off like they're you
know I mean only in it for them some of
them not all of them of course only in
it for themselves only it's like
those aren't the same inside people like
oh that person feels wrong I'm like no
they feel autistic and we need
them and that's not the same thing as
somebody who consistently shows that
pretends they're the best at everything
which is what narcissists do and it's
like those are not like it's like
personality traits when you just get
their feeling they kind of show up the
same in fact if anything narcissists
like so the Coyotes thing was like he I
took a course and sexual predators are
like he's not one cuz he doesn't come
across as one I was like did you take a
Disney villain course like that's not in
any way and I'm not saying he is a
sexual predator that's how the court
system works two people show up and the
judge just says you know that person
vibes wrong jail
yeah vibes are on vibes right I'm like
that's not in any likes like sociopaths
are really great it I think they're the
ones I was going to confuse the ones you
can show up and beat they're very
charismatic they're it's like that's
very different than someone who has zero
charisma showing out their competency in
one area is amazing and we need
their competency in that area but we're
not going to get it because of all of
the things we assume is their character
we assume is their character falling
it's like there's something broken about
their character when it couldn't be
further from the truth
it's like if they knew how to act in
that way they would they don't know but
they're like showing up the best they
can look it's like we're trying we're
trying I think one important thing about
competence which is probably implied but
sometimes it's good to be explicit with
that kind of things is that of course
there's a bunch of different kinds of
competence and then some are linked like
you can be competent in science okay but
now what kind of science because if
you're competent in science that's going
to give you certain skills right like
probably you know like being able to
have a base level understanding of it
like a scientific research and report
you know and spotting issues and the the
scientific method but if you're like a
really good chemist and someone's
talking about like advanced physics I
mean but you know that's now it's still
under science but it's now a different
kind of competence within science
and so you know if somebody loves to
pipe up about physics but they're
terrible at it but then they go and pipe
off about chemistry that's now a
different thing because maybe they are
world class at chemistry and they just
love to dabble in physics but they're
not great at it
but in chemistry when they pipe up there
like Oh they've been 100 percent of the
time so now it's being able to dive
deeper into that okay we're talking
about science so they have some level
but now we're talking about advanced
physics and neither that that person has
never said something in this category so
we don't know even though you know
they're a world-class chemist take it
with a grain of salt because we've you
know they haven't talked on this topic
before or they talk on all the time and
they're very seldom right so even though
over here you you you can trust them in
science over here you can't yeah
absolutely
you probably wrap this conversation up
pretty soon I have another conversation
half an hour are not don't so you can
call for four hours this party and I
have some family stuff to update you on
so it probably should yeah online ID you
have any closing statements you would
like to give on trust um none come to
mind I mean I'll be hopefully you know
watching this video sort of dissecting
some of it and coming up with some
questions to ask the public which I mean
I'm not about to go and ask people in
person what when I say public I'm
talking like maybe a couple of questions
to the game be space and then you know
figuring out what what what what
questions I could ask on reddit that
kind of thing to start getting feedback
from multiple people but yeah I don't
I'm doing in person yes this one's my
Star Trek a whole new conversation but
like when you saying that was also to me
it's that like the opposite of
consistency like to me somebody who
starts at a skill and improves can
rather a lot it's very different than
somebody who has always been good at
that skill or like I like the ability to
improve on something is because it's
like oh you're on the trajectory to go
like it's like where you are now versus
where you could be is very different and
just yet it's important to note that
we're all you know we're always seeing
the current moment so if you say
someone's always been good well they
probably weren't we just didn't see them
when they stopped yeah no absolutely and
kind of part of it it's like oh well how
do we how do we trust that this person
isn't his are they on their way up for
their way down are they on their like in
competency right are they or are they
just plateaued and that's okay it's if
anyone wanna know for me right like okay
here's where I've come from and maybe
nobody needs to know right maybe no one
needs to know it's like okay I show up
and I always come off as a almost always
come off as anxious but I'm like does it
matter that I used to be on more
anxious I don't know I don't know if it
matters but it does because it's like
listen I've tapped into how to get rid
of anxiety and so they would ask someone
who's completely calm to be like oh how
did you do it I'm like this liked it but
to see where you were than where you are
right like like Tony Robbins is big on
kind of fake it till you make it right
find the person who can do it and then
find out what they can do and I'm like I
honestly don't want to learn running
from like the kid in Africa who's been
running since name or two across the
Serengeti right like I'm like awesome on
that they're clearly the best of the
ones we're gonna win the gold medal
abso-freakin'-lutely but I'm not that
person I want to learn from the person
who was a couch potato for 40 years and
then went on to run a marathon I don't
even need them to win the marathon right
like I want to know from the person who
was who was in the area of lack and they
got to mediocre more so than like was a
genius prodigy from day one I'm like I
just think I have more to learn from the
other one um even though we need but so
almost like the area of diminishing
returns where after you learn from that
person and you've been running for three
years and you've capped out there at
some point in that ridiculous been
running their whole life because they're
gonna help push you that I should 5 or
10% but yeah you can't start there it's
like hey I'm just taking an intro to
physics course Louie just dial up
Stephen Hawking and see what what what
what do you say oh I didn't understand
yes yes all right
let's let's end it here and thank you
you too we will see you tomorrow on this
channel for the solution raising an arm
at 2 p.m. Pacific Standard Time all
right but I know it's gonna put least
that's not gonna work let's leave you
here recording oh you do