nice to meet you hi very nice to meet
you
yes umm I don't know too much about you
I know you work at perspectiva with with
with Zack sixth I know I just had an
extraordinary interview with and I know
you work with horses and I know you do
chi-gong and that you lead insight
retreats and I also know that you write
these extraordinary texts on medium and
have a sort of ability to combine very
high abstraction with very down-to-earth
sorts of sorts of issues so so did you
want to just sort of introduce yourself
or say something about what you're
trying to do what your what's your yeah
what's your angle what's your unique
thing um yeah you know I've been
thinking about that in the last year or
so because people always ask me that and
I think my answer has gotten to be more
refined at first they stumbled over it a
little a lot more so my current version
of where I am in this space is and I
like that way you put it in that email
what's your parallax you know what's
your author and all or side view is I
mean we can get into why this matters
but you know I'm a person that has been
looking for new architectures of thought
for a long time and partially because I
think that I've been thinking sin
different ways but also that as I
studied philosophy and read people's
writings over many many years I started
to see wow this you know there's a lot
of philosophy within a certain Canon
there's a lot of writing in a certain
scientific paradigm but there are
actually you could start to see like
this genesis of different ways that
people are constructing thoughts and I
started getting very interested in
so what I'm attracted to I guess now
after maybe 20 years of this is I really
see a lot of hope in combining a process
philosophical approach you know ala
Whitehead and then there's there's many
many versions of that but we could
anchor that in Whitehead with like
embodied in active approaches of
Thompson and Varela let's say they're
also in that process field and then kind
of integrate that with what I call
holistic complexity science which is not
cybernetics it's not second or third
order cybernetics it's it's really kind
of a new science I would say that Dave
Snowden and Nora Bateson are in that
field and so somehow I think that
there's a new architecture or a new
paradigm of mind that's going to draw on
some a lot of those resources I might my
current turn for what that theory looks
like what that combination looks like is
complex potential State theory which is
a move away from complex adaptive States
you know Darwinian kind of understanding
of complexity to a more emergent novel
so complex potential States and that of
course draws from processed philosophy
so even in it might I'm writing a big
paper or a small book for perspectiva
and transform transformational
approaches to education drawing on this
notion of complex potential States can I
can I bring forth the potential what's
the potential from here you know what
are these pre egoic evolutionary
potentials of the human right so yeah
that's kind of where all my work even in
organizations I talk about complex
potential states and
education yes I would say that's kind of
the sphere around which my intellectual
life and I did this I did this interview
with Zack Stein that I'm still thinking
about a lot and and there was a quote
that Zack used and that quote was and
and you suggested that we start talking
about this the quote was that schools
make you stupid money makes you poor and
medicine makes you sick so so we're
talking about the dysfunction of
organizations right and III believe you
work very hard to try to heal these
dysfunctions and also to try to you know
bring forth human potential mm-hmm do I
have that right yeah so you know that I
loved that when he said that and I kind
of I kind of sent it around the
Twittersphere
and you know so why does I would like to
talk about why does that ring true I
mean right I thought about that because
I mean on the one hand it seems kind of
like a funny thing to say but it does
ring true and it points to these
sense-making crisis the you know war on
sense-making in the meaning-making
crisis so I want to step back and say
why I think this is rings true and
there's something like there's it's not
like we invented schools to make us
stupid you know there's like a
conspiratorial kind of feel to them
because they're all happening at the
same time and this is part of the
paranoia in the social media space right
now is because people feel like all
these things have a common reason and
they project that as a cabal of a few
people but they do have a common reason
but the common reason is not a cabal a
few people it has to do with what we're
seeing is the reversal of intention and
outcome right so
goals the intention is to educate the
outcome is makes us stupid so there's
good intentions which but that's leading
to this often terrible outcome yes in
our everyday life I have a good
intention to protect my family
and my my country and it leads to
nuclear war if a good intention to you
know to play the game by the rules and
it turns into fraud I have a good
intention to make a home and a good life
in career for my family and it destroys
the environment so what we see is this
reversal or decoupling of intention and
outcome and what that makes me think of
is that it's the result of a mono
perspective of some kind yeah okay
exactly it's it's a result of the long
process of decreasing returns in the
cycles of civilization and then you get
a reversal and the returns decrease to
you know the benefits of the return
starts at tip okay and so what we're
looking at mean we live is Zack says and
a time between worlds we're living at
the end of a very large paradigm a very
large cycle of civilization and this has
happened before we're lucky to be able
to conceive it as the end of a cycle of
civilization he calls it that he says
we're living in the post tragic age
which is an interesting I thought an
interesting concept yeah but this
in-between world place is sort of like
you know it's the tragedy of modernity
which I guess has to do with you know
all of these institutions kind of
falling apart and no that's right and
the tragedy of post modernity is more
like we don't know what to do so so
there's like the problem with the
paradigm we're in is that the modernity
and its critique are in the same
paradigm yeah oh this is mmm this is why
it's so tough
this is why this is like the mother of
all paradigms right and so if you think
about it in the past paradigms there was
not a conceptual critique of the
paradigm itself it just it just evolved
and you know wrong just destroyed itself
by just action but in modern times we
start to see we get post bond and
critique and so what you have with
paradigms they're either inconsistent or
they're incomplete now inconsistent
paradigms don't live very long they're
not very robust because so you start to
have a lot of relativistic you know
movement between paradigms but in our
modern society we get the postmodern
critique the postmodern critiques start
shoring up all the inconsistencies of
the modern paradigm and that makes it
much more complex you get this complex
systemic hyper systemic understanding of
them of modernity from postmodern but it
started to close up all the loopholes so
it actually made it more robust and more
recursive and so the game is is kind of
closed on itself and the reversal is
happening because not only of the
inconsistencies of the modern paradigm
but we've shorted up with the critiques
right all the regulation in business and
all the height or surveillance of AI and
all the systems keeps shoring up those
inconsistencies so now we have a very
robust paradigm very closed on itself
but it's incomplete and this is the
challenge not to look for
inconsistencies but we have to see what
we can't see we have and this is exactly
what you said we're closed in a paradigm
and the job is we have to see outside of
it yeah so when you say we have to see
what we can't see or you're thinking
about about the future and but also I
was wondering if we have to
a thread to the past in other words we
have to kind of rediscover some of the
you know the narratives of the past or
the grand narrows asked to move us into
the future so it's so we're not just
starting from nowhere because that's
okay exactly yes and there's people that
are working like that going back to
archetypes and this and that but this
was me what makes me different it's
that's not radical enough so the
instinct that we have to go backwards to
go forwards yes because you can't just
start here and then emerge from nothing
but we have because the paradigm is
linguistic and symbolic we have to go to
pre-linguistic and pre-symbolic modes
again and then build from there
Wow so the archetypes are not the place
to start so further back then you know
further back so like I don't know I my
my friend Alexander bard
talks about no madala G and trying to
look at the the the dynamics of early
tribes and how they work in the Dunbar
number and all that how people work
together
I guess that's still working within an
archetypal model exactly it's not deep
enough so now but you see quite a lot of
people that are saying and we need to go
back to the sensory more motor
perception action mode of being we
actually have to reclaim a lot of that
because you know I do work with horses
and literally people get so lost and
thought they cannot see what's happening
to them in their sensory motor spatial
relationships they either get completely
overwhelmed with emotion or completely
overwhelmed with theory in their daily
lives and so you start to see and this
is why our culture has like extreme
sports there's this intuitive need of in
Thompson's work Adam Roberts work at the
side view it's all something in us
Jordan also says yeah you have to be in
right relationship you have to be sober
and you have two choices and app we're
going all the way back down to these
deep
or protocol of embodied choice
experiment in action so there see you
know we're split right we're very split
let's say between the brain and the body
like the whole culture is extraordinary
split between embodied experience and
abstraction yeah I mean so you know the
question is what comes on top of duck I
call that the core self the embodied
sensory motor perception action so does
is there another linguistic symbolic
system that gets built on that probably
it just won't be the paradigm that we
have now and so there will be you know
that's the possibility for emergent type
of Minds right because the architecture
of mind has changed through time with
these with these transformations of
civilization hmm so maybe you could
unpack a little bit you know this I
guess Francis Forellis idea of Auto
poiesis and and emergent theory and and
all of that I'm not I'm not sure if I
understand it in the sense of
self-organization if there's
self-organization and
how do we work with that does that mean
this was my set is my question clear
yeah I'm gonna riff on it instead of
going deep into the theory okay
so I do the I do the presentation and
that's called how self-organization
happens and why does it matter on why
you can trust it or something and one of
the slides I put up or you can you can
find it on the internet and it's it's
this animation of DNA being unraveled
and copied in a ribosome Factory and I
and it's all molecular self-organization
so I say well how does that happen how
does that not only that but there's
autopoietic cycles so it perpetuates
itself am I
the ribosomes are just molecules they
don't have DNA right but all of life is
predicated upon the fact that they self
organize in these extremely complex
factories right nobody knows how to do
what they do
so self-organization is not trivial it's
deeply intelligent and it's deeply well
I guess nature nature is intelligent
right you know you know I mean nature is
complex and intelligent and and we're a
part of nature but we also make these we
construct things like machines and we
kind of believe that those are complex
no there's complained it paired to a
blade of grass or something like that
our machines are very very dumb or very
simple yes so machines don't
self-organized right I mean and then you
could say well machines can build other
machines but then now we have to think
about the notion of self-organization
and you know machines build build each
other up from parts and
self-organization are patterns of
relationship that make you know that
create more complex types of potentials
ok so I like to talk about
self-organization and every in every
relationship in a self-organized
relationship there's a promise that is
made for a higher possibility right so
if I and this girls cuts across living
and nonliving things right so if I'm
working with a horse as a farmer and
plowing the land but there's a
promissory note between me and ores for
a larger possibility the horse and I
right and so you start to see that
that's kind of just you know an N
storied way to talk about
self-organization
yeah when I can go the other way too
right if you don't if you don't
cultivate that relationship and in a
good in a positive or in a correct
manner then the relationship can degrade
right self-organization can go backwards
exactly so if you know so some people
can talk about it as an energy kind of
equation so at the higher level it's got
to be a lower energy state or lower
energy cost so that's the possibility so
you you know molecules work like that we
get together there's a lower energy cost
for something that we're doing so that
we're going to promise to interact in
this certain way I like to say you know
if my cells didn't promise to get up -
if my cells didn't promise to keep doing
what they were doing I couldn't get up
and walk across the room but you could
start to see this like from an inactive
approach and I think this is where
Varela was really inspired is you could
start to see yourself inside the
universe of self-organization and this
notion of promise and possibility so
like if this if the way a stone is right
as the laws of nature are like deep
promises so if there's stone and its
promise to lay upon the ground I
couldn't pick her up and throw it and
you start to get this completely
animated participatory process view of
reality is all upon us and participation
promise is the same thing as as
potential or I'm trying to understand
what you mean by promise yeah there's
every relation like in process its
relation every relation is both a
promise so that there can be enacted a
higher potential okay right so MA so the
laws of nature are like promises they
meet your promises to behave a certain
way in order for other potentials to
come across so they're not archetypes or
ideals in the Platonic sense or
something like that there
they're their promises that's very
interesting I like well it's kind of the
way to talk about what is self a self
organization from a process view you
know their their their relational
dynamics yeah in from easy way to
understand it to bring out this kind of
beauty of a world that is seen through
this way you can think of it as promise
impossibility at different levels you
know so there's there's this and that
that really brings up the way Whitehead
thought of his philosophy he talked
about you know prehension is feeling it
was the long it's very it's a very you
know this notion of promising
possibility is a lot of feeling a lot of
effort to it and this is the world that
he wanted to bring forth this notion of
not just making connections like wiring
things together but that there were
tomes those affect on both sides of the
equation and so I turned that into this
phrase about promises and possibility
and this is actually what a society is
you know you you promise to obey certain
rules and certain patterns because
everybody it's going to enact a higher
possibility for everyone it's what a
company is its what self-organization is
it's a set of promises to realize a
greater possibility and when the
promises are when the promises are being
upheld and the possibilities are not
then you start to have some breakdown
and so that then we can maybe that's a
segue into talking about education again
going back into education and this sort
of breakdown you're talking about and
what to do to create genuine
self-organizing let's say education yeah
Zack distinct
is between education and school mm-hmm
like he has just you know ivan el
acuerdo called the schooling society so
i guess my question is yeah so is it
yeah you know about organizations and
and how they work and what is it what
does education going to be like and what
is it now and and you know in the
internet age and how do we educate
ourselves today it's I'm asking this
question because I'm thinking about like
this conversation we're having and then
also my and my interactions on internet
and then my job and all these things in
different compartments and how does the
whole thing work how do we how do we do
that how do we how do we fulfill the
promise of Education if you like that's
interesting so again when you ask me a
question like that I have to start by
saying okay the whole discourse around
education is in this paradigm so I make
the distinction between education reform
which has not exited the paradigm so all
those moves will give you decreasing
returns increase in complexity won't get
you out of the pickle so that's
education reform so what we need is
transformational philosophy a new
transformational philosophy of education
what Zak Stein would call a theory a new
theory of the human a new theory of the
human yeah so you have to step way back
and so a new new philosophy of Education
requires a new theory of learning how do
people learn I want to just go back a
little bit about the human what would
this new idea of the human be yeah as a
learner I guess or as a learner exactly
so the new idea
of how people learn how do humans learn
and so we have to examine assumptions
for example in our current paradigm we
have what I call a developmental bias we
think the past is primitive and the
future is more complex and that
development is linear so this is how we
think people linear and additive this is
how we think people learn and so it
turns out this is not true the the being
the amount of information that your body
processes just to get to being like a
perceiving walking sensing feeling
organism is like 11 billion bits a
second and in the cognitive narrow
cognitive linguistic mind can only
handle like 14 to 64 bits per second
most of the intelligence in us is in
disembodied organs in our body and also
in our deep history I guess or inner
yeah so there in genetic and epigenetic
evolutionary potentials right so first
of all this is we need to think of
Education not so this is what we think
about education so the child goes to
first grade or kindergarten and we said
oh the embody child is is that phase is
over now we're going to do this phase
and then we're going to do this space
now they have to learn abstractions I'm
not going to do this we have this
feeling that we have to add all these
things on top now we learn science now
we learn science in a more complex way
or whatever but what we really need to
do is say the embodied core self
we're actually educating for ourselves
the this comes this is a kind of
maturation of the theory of donald's
Oliver who is one of the first
philosophers of education that took a
process approach or giveness is in my
mind my whole sphere but we have to
educate the core self so the
sensorimotor perception action self has
to be educated and this requires a lot
about the family environment and the
nutrition early childhood nutrition so
without this without focus on that on
this then the societies lost anyways so
so we have the core self and then we
have the communal self the communal self
is a self that can create relationships
the civic engagement the self that can
speak that can participate in group
process that creates larger and larger
spheres of inclusion this is the
communal so now the communal self
doesn't come after the education of the
core self the communal self is the
course of expanded into communal
possibilities so we still now we have to
educate both there's a transformation
that happens in this potential of the
human it's not it's not just they're
learning is something like this sort of
transcended include idea as that course
is it there's not not quite yet because
transcend means stage does it's not see
it's a developmental theory not a comp
it's not from complexity science so and
this is why it's got a lot of holes
these are big problems but develop so
one of the problems with our paradigm
today is it has a developmental wires
and all our bad developmental stage
theory has a developmental bias so what
we're looking at is there's a core so
and that it complex defies to the core
self or the communal self the core self
has certain psychological schemas the
canoodle self has other structures the
identity changes the organism changes
the potential changes what is possible
from here now and then you're going to
educate into the cosmopolitan itself
which right now the cosmopolitan South
is all on what education teaches just
stuff back down to what is the core
psycho-spiritual self that I'm educating
at this point in the lifespan which
doesn't concern itself with that so so
we're forgetting the earlier stages so
to speak like we're we should continue
to nourish those earlier stages as were
because they're not just earlier they're
more fundamental earlier so it's not at
linear time foundation has to grow
holistically that's a holistically
complex yeah participation of complex
you know psyches really and so so but we
actually exclude some so in our society
we exclude the kind of psycho spiritual
growth that should be happening in in
the family and for and onwards but what
we have is a very short window of time
if you happen to have a healthy nuclear
family for psycho spiritual growth to
happen then you give it to schools no
psychology no spiritual growth allowed
you just get information psychology and
spiritual growth you mean you mean
working on on your effective self you
know doing practices like meditation and
martial arts and orienting yourself with
nature and exactly like that these
things need to grow throughout the
lifespan so what we have today I teach a
master's course in consciousness studies
and transformational psychology I get
you know by the time people are 40 or 50
years old they say oh I want to do
exactly that
work on my mindfulness in my car my
trauma and all this stuff but the whole
point is is we educate and condition all
these things until people are 50 years
old yeah and then when they're 50 we
have to decondition ourselves to go
forward but by then it's too hard you
have to be in a fourth or fifth level of
consciousness to metacognitively
deconstruct what the society has
constructed for the last 50 years so for
example we know children are intuitively
collaborative and empathic mm-hm
but then we say Oh Keegan's fourth or
fifth order consciousness people become
collaborative and empathic why does it
take a fifth-order consciousness for
people to be that because the way we
educate or school today is we school
competitiveness and and non empathy so
by the time you're 50 you have to have a
very strong metacognitive mind to
deconstruct your early conditioning so
the whole the whole project is
inadequate so what were what we need
what we need and you know I wrote down
one of my questions I was listening to
one of your talks you talked about
competition versus consensus and it's
like on some level we have hyper
competition and in another level we have
hyper conformity or consensus you know
in our relationships and how we're
supposed to be with each other and so so
and then the middle ground would be
creativity right in relationships or
self-organized like organizations but it
it's based upon a model of collective
collective action that shows that
there's kind of like complex feed loops
in holistic complexity science what you
are encounter is things that are very
similar to the brain like the brain
doesn't just have feed-forward loops
some some some brain areas of the brain
when they get excited inhibit others but
then when they're inhibited they
uninhibit other things that get excited
but then might inhibit you know very
complex feed loops so when you're
working with holistic complexity you're
always working with very complex feed
loops that create threshold events so
what's an example of a threshold event
so that's happening in my brain I may or
could use for Vicky's language I make
something may or not become salient
because things are inhibiting you
disinhibited each other all their
savings until something switches and
there's more inhibition or more
excitatory
inside that system are not just this
Vicki calls an opponent processing or
something that there's a back and forth
between exactly this different modes of
being and and then you come to some kind
of consensus or some kind of as you say
threshold Bray or some kind of insight
or exactly processing that's happening
have complex feed loops so it's not just
for example this so this this neuron
tickles that neuron and amplifies that
neuron and then it crosses a threshold
event that would just be a linear
feedback loop just dissolve four feet
forward
there's there's there's back-and-forth
of pushing exactly there's a
back-and-forth right and then it's a
much more complex space of possibility
until there's a threshold event so this
happens in organizations also and and
this kind of answers some of the
questions in this social media space
about hierarchy and privilege and stuff
so an organization also sorry what were
you referring to questions of hierarchy
in the social media space I'm not sure
you know like the whole you talk about
the difference between consensus and
competitive competition hierarchy and
egalitarian is okay so so we have to
look at societies and organizations they
also are a dynamic that has complex feed
loops so for example what I call it the
the the feed loops fork right so you
can't just you can't just for example
teach social justice concerns over and
over and over at school because then the
feed loop will form you'll get the
reverse outcome from your intention
because you get a bunch of fascists when
you're trying to create a bunch of very
helpful kind people or yes because the
human collective intelligence has
complex feed loops you can just feed
forward or feed backwards
that's not how complex holistic systems
work so in organization I'll give you a
very easy example of how we use it in
organizations yeah as trust in let's say
you're working with a team as Trust goes
up right yeah you know you're getting to
know each other as Trust goes up what we
call action thresholds the thresholds
for action go down so you know
I have to get everybody to agree no
longer require consensus because you
have high level of trust same we do with
our kids we trust them we give them the
keys we buy them a car okay so is trust
those are the actions the thresholds for
action go down yeah as the thracian the
need for hierarchy I guess becomes less
no aha
no or natural hierarchies kind of
developed or exactly yes action
thresholds go down small just
differences in skill yeah become larger
and you'll get a natural hierarchy and
when that happens trust those gowns do
you have this new cycle kind of thing
and so in the dominant discourse all we
have is polarized discourse you know
those are against hierarchies and those
that were things but what if we come at
this from a new paradigm complex
holistic systems we see our work were
dealing with their complex feed loop and
this is part this is part of all living
systems there's and so the interesting
thing is all societies have actually
adjusted themselves unconsciously for
these feed for these feed loops we can't
help ourselves we're self-organized
Ecology's things it seems like whatever
we try to do we make it worse or you
know when you're talking about that I
was thinking yes there's this complexity
of behavior and then there's our
attempts to try to manipulate that
behavior and how often that has a
negative you know outcome again we're
back to the same thing you were talking
about at the beginning of good
intentions because we do technological
innovations uh-huh from a mindset that
doesn't have holistic complexity hmm we
do technological interventions from
either developmental linear
developmental mindset or
so how would you rate technology in the
manner that you're suggesting how would
I create not you personally but how
would one like like how would you create
technology where let's say the
technology is not dominating the human
being the feeling on social media that
it's that it's kind of it's such it's
such a destructive ecosystem like 99% of
Facebook yeah and there's like 1% that
might be might be might be positive you
know okay so you know we can go directly
from here to there
what are the feed bag feed loops in
social media they're only in one
direction
the mob complex feed loops they do not
min an image they do no it is not a
platform that supports the complex feed
loops in actual discourse they only
amplify in one direction so amplified
salience or you know the clicking one or
two hijacking them Magdala I think it
was what Frank so so it's going to
disrupt normal discourse because it
impedes the feed loops to be as rich as
they need to be for normal discourse to
happen okay and then of course the more
people spend time in that kind of
environment in then their brain gets in
patterns of the feed loops themselves
our set our simple simplified or
reductive because you don't you know
whatever you we have beef only did you
read that article
yes have this beef only have a kind of
medieval sort of Game of Thrones society
where we're just regressing to her most
yeah but this is also we have to be
careful because this is that past is
primitive assumption all right
I'm glad you said that yeah because I
also noted that that as well I thought I
thought okay actually a night he was
talking about nights and nights and
territories of a night is actually a
beautiful concept and but this is just
such a flat land view of well how things
are and how people are this is game
world modern people are these this is
not how foraging societies are right
great modern people are and we keep you
know the modern person is a big Lea
Miglia has been hijacked the immediately
of itself is very intelligent yeah so
yeah so so just you know like there's a
lot of moving parts and that we have to
be careful on like you know so a lot of
what I do when I do good process is
exactly this we just trying to keep
people out of the assumptions of the
dominant discourse because it will
always you know Jared hawk cause it's
malware you know you can't think from
that paradigm and move out its to
recursive it's too strong it's too okay
and then just connect I'm sorry I if I
interrupt
I was thinking about I was thinking
about how there's that going on and then
there's this conversation going on you
know so it seems like the two things are
happens happening science simultaneously
there's there's all of this interesting
stuff that's out there which you can you
can kind of you can learn from long-form
discussions which are which are deep and
interesting and then and then and then
it's like an extreme there's that
happening and then the other extreme is
this sort of sound bite you know you
know very negative almost almost
you know regressive mode of
communication happening at the same time
like I see those things kind of
happening simultaneously does that does
that make any sense yeah
I think that you know there's a question
we were actually a group was actually
asking this question and it's not clear
how much the behavior on social media is
driven by the algorithms I think it's a
lot more than you think I think that the
behavior on social media the discourse
on social media is driven by that's like
crack cocaine that's like yeah it's like
somebody gave everybody acid yeah I
heard somebody was saying that right it
can't be underestimated you know yeah
although I don't want to be like you
know I don't know I don't want to be
dramatic or melodramatic about it but
for example I have almost was 3,000
or 5,000 forgot what the limit is I have
thousand friends yeah yeah I like almost
5,000 friends on my Facebook page
mm-hmm and you know I'm in this group
that's grown to a thousand and it's
starting to be as they grow to that
limit to be completely chaotic and
dysfunctional it breaks down at a
surprise but so I say the algorithms in
a group are different than the Admiral
algorithms on my Facebook page I don't
have I have five times more people there
but I don't have that dysfunction it's
quite quiet and respectful and so the
way the way that algorithms work are
different in groups
and I think that's why you get the kind
of dynamic so it's an algorithm that's
almost trying to turn people against
each other of course
cuz the more that people the more that
it can prioritize like these sparks of
activity which are emotional then the
more it keeps your attention and that's
what it wants it wants you to be
attention and it wants your interaction
with the with the hardware to be
emotional because that creates a
coupling an addiction coupling so every
time your emotional so first the hog
where it creates the emotional and then
every time your emotional you go and
pick up the hardware right so it creates
this one directional again not complex
not rich feedback loop but a
exponentially amplifying feedback yeah
yeah when I was talking to Zack again I
have exact at my conversation with Zacks
time very much in my in my mind and you
know he was he doesn't use social media
and he was telling me and that he almost
would say think it's it's unethical to
use it just because of how much you know
sort of money that these companies are
making from from people's you know most
intimate you know feelings and emotions
and and all that so I what what why why
are we still using it I mean why are
intelligent people still using it and
you think we should be using it or you
think something else is coming next or
that we can jump on to that will be
better or I think question component to
it I think that I think that one of the
things about social media as is true for
a lot of Technology we engage in it
the effort the ethical component is very
demanding and so you have to constantly
ask yourself am i a choice here am I
choice here and ice here so there's a
due diligence that is part of it and
then at a certain point and you know and
I think this is more true for me than
Zach and so I really respect that is
like a certain point are you at choice
for all the energy you're putting into
the system to be a choice right so I
think that there that social media is an
experiment I think that if you can keep
that more like an experiment yeah for
example I remember you saying that you
you would share positions from different
political parties or from different
perspectives or rather than remain
trying to remain in this kind of you
know bubble feedback loop where you're
just getting your own confirmation bias
confirmed over over again yeah of
confirmation porn somebody said that
somewhere which I thought was a good
exactly so so I think it's interesting
to have it open up many many
perspectives but again you have to do
due diligence am i right am i is it just
clickbait or is this some real person on
the other side of opinion that is also
doing due diligence and I you know I
think it's I think there's there's that
comes a point where social media is not
helpful and I often wonder at what point
it is for me and especially now you know
many of us are deep enough in cyberspace
with that there are ways like we can
find that that's great I mean it would
be horrible if you couldn't find people
like that you know and so the question
is once you establish enough
networks and how do you you know how
then you can jump off and yeah yeah it's
how you pull the plug I think yeah oh
that's that that kind of brings me up
because um you know you mentioned this
word parallax that I'm working with a
guy named Tom I'm mark I think you did a
podcast with him and his magazine is
called parallax magazine and and we're
working with Alexander as well and we
wanted to make this magazine into a kind
of alert learning platform as it was
kind of its kind of our ambition at the
moment and we've been talking about this
for a while and and and now we're
talking about it openly so so I wanted
to get maybe your advice and how we
could do that like how something like
that could be done you know III we're
making a video and we're gonna put it
out on YouTube and podcasts and and that
kind of thing that's how it gets to
people but again we haven't pulled the
plug we haven't we haven't found that
there hasn't we haven't found a space
for let's say intelligent people that
want to be thinking in a parallax world
yeah I think it's you know these are not
these are questions and experiments that
are not yet answered
I think we're experimenting our way to
them you know and the what's interesting
is the shelf life of these innovations
or these initiatives is starting to get
really short so for example the
intellectual dark web became it went you
know it came it wound it and even like
some I mean I was very happy to be on
this podcast with you because it's so
much more like a conversation and not
like trying to capture a certain segment
or sector and you know so there's this
in I love his accent he's like you know
to some point podcast like we have a
podcast with Zack
it's not entertain yeah so well yeah it
would be a conversation it wouldn't be
marketing like marketing's over like
there's no need to be Martin all
marketing about it does that make sense
we don't have we don't have to put on
some kind of a persona and you know have
a deep voice and all this music and
stuff that's you know almost like the
raw thing yeah more but then the
question becomes you know and I'm not
saying you know these are these are
things and I think you're probably
trying to answer and that is like then
what is the public or performance nature
of it and you know some of the work that
Hannah rented comes to mind because she
talks about you know there's a private
sphere and there's a public sphere and
the Polish the great polish is when you
came into the public sphere and and what
did you share right and the question
here is with the rise of the internet is
it's like it's almost like everything is
public everything is the paulus so what
are the new rules what are the new rules
for engagement and and you've become
virtual versions of yourself so
something you see on a video can get
clipped and put over here and now you
exist
if you have any kind of social capital
that's influenced if you're an
influencer now you exist influencing the
opposite of maybe what you wanted to say
and these are big questions yeah yeah
well I think I think you know in a way
in a way we do have to go back into
smaller communities don't we smaller
hubs and smaller smaller worlds because
when something is too big it's it
it's corrupt does that make any sense or
is that yeah so I talked about it we all
our worlds are becoming Isis like
they're just identities like us versus
them it's like a thin category and what
we don't have anymore our ways and we
are units of agency so if you're on a
team like a baseball team you say we did
it it's clear but when what we're doing
and so maybe it's a Dunbar number but
for me it's not the number but it's the
point at which you feel that the
collective is the unit of agency an
intimacy like there's others there's a
real relationship between each person
exactly
not like a hyper relationship between
them not like the person is you know
this is on a stage and you're in the
audience or or the person is you know
just a persona or where there's a real I
guess that's what a church is is or a
temple or they they're they're always
there's always you always know everybody
at the church yeah but sometimes not
sometimes a religion versus a church or
a parish I would say becomes an us
because you know actually a unit of
agency you're not you're not
participating in the enactment of some
kind of world oh you're a cult rather
than a are you just on the Christian
well I'm not enacting the things that
Catholic Church does let's say I'm not
enacting the things that my religion
does and I don't even agree with maybe
it so you know what is what is yeah how
to keep it living I think what I'm
hearing from you is how to keep the
whole the community are living like a
living community yeah you know so if I
associate with something like I don't
know any kind of any kind of
ideology or any kind of category like
like I'm a female okay yeah well my we
is not female
I don't experience all women together
doing something together like a we on a
team it's not a unit of agency it's just
a categorical identity and what you see
is more and more people identified with
categorical identities and they don't
actually enact things as groups they
know actually you know have Wiis that
have goals and aims that they come back
to and focus on as a group one of the
one of the early things I found out when
I started doing group process dialogic
process is that after it's not about
just learning how to talk to each other
mm-hmm so and in these in these group
processes you always have the tension
between the individual and the
collective the autonomy and the
relationality yeah that that is like two
legs of a three-legged stool in history
all collectives are also solidified by
action there that's where the family is
powerful you're not just an individual
and the collective you have things to do
home to build food to create there's a
unit of locus of production inside the
collective that's different than being
like you know a French citizen or
something or exactly so when you have
these we space groups that don't have
the third don't have the third leg of
the three-legged stool they don't have
actual work abstracts or a project they
actually don't let the world in and
they're saying oh humans can be you know
transformative just by individual and
collective intersubjective is in
individual sovereign actions is not true
we've cut ourselves off from the other
aspect of what being a human collective
is and that's
with the world you have to let the world
in the world solidifies so for example
it works both ways because I you know
you could have a dysfunctional community
and then a hurt Herick and hits and
everybody's together because the action
solidifies grounds its discourse so all
these practices are sure to fail yeah
discourse this is also why some of these
you have to remember mind this in your
podcast so how do you move how do you
build so you and Tom and Alexander will
be really doing something in the world
but how do you express that call to
action to your audience to make a week
and this is this is again this is one of
the blind spots in a lot of these
practices and it's something on Facebook
there is no world there so like in game
D Facebook there's no there's no world
there is that what you said yeah world
no work there's no work there it's just
you know right so we constantly say this
Facebook group is not going be find
people's make a choice do an experiment
in the world so so it can't be just a
media platform it has to be sort of
events as well it has to be people
getting together to do pro actual
projects if you hear in collectives the
world has to be the third leg of the
three-legged stool the actual work in
the world your body the work that you do
or else you're not gonna get coherence
okay so all those forms that don't
realize that are destined to just be
incoherent mm-hmm you mentioned if
there's a hurricane or something like
that we would all get together and we
suddenly become human right suddenly
become how relationships with each other
instead of just walking around like
zombies no no but then the question is
like how do you do that in just ordinary
life when
there isn't a you know when the world
isn't falling apart all around you or or
well the way we used to do it we would
create art or sing talk together or
dance there would always be things to do
and so when you take this into the into
the workplace so so one of the reasons
where a lot of people doing collective
discourse practice have started to work
with organizations is because they do
have a goal or a name but in many
organizations there isn't what you're
what you're actually asked to do is
decoupled from the goal or the aim of
the whole itself so you have what graver
calls jobs right jobs
yeah so you start to have you start to
see people going into the workplace and
having you know more loyalty to a small
silo because they can have a picnic or
they're gonna do something they're
actually doing something together but in
the context of their career they're not
they don't feel like they're doing
something with the organization because
it's a job so this is another
way of saying you need the sovereignty
the iconic autonomy of the individual
you need the relationality of the
collective and you need agency you need
action in the world and then the system
coherence yeah I mean I guess the only
reason we do job is to make
money right to survive you never had one
well yeah you must be very fortunate
yeah very also work very hard to be in
that position I didn't mean to no no I
did I did in high school I worked in a
factory to save money go to college that
was the kind of a job
but then after that well I guess I
washed dishes you know and things like
that I worked in restaurants and on
fishing boats and those aren't really
 jobs like working-class jobs
are not jobs because
it's it's the kind of job where you're
putting numbers into Excel files you
know that seemed to me to be sort of so
dehumanizing yeah I mean I worked in a
like what is it called not a deli but
where like a catering industry arm of a
big big store in California and I
learned so much about cooking and spices
and food farm-to-table you know so the
the benefits of that job it wasn't it
wasn't highly paid but it wasn't gonna
feel like a job no and then
after that I just I worked I ran my own
companies and landscape design
architecture contracting so yeah so so I
think this that the things you do I've
always been very practically again as
what I was struck struck by by your
writing and and and the fact that you do
very practical things and then but
you're also working with this high
abstract concepts and try not trying to
bring it bring the two together and well
I just a lot of the sort of stuff that
people do around getting together and
and like talking and doing dialogue and
and all that sort of stuff often feels
quite flaky and narcissistic to me
because because because yeah for that
exact precise reason that you're saying
it's like okay we had this good feeling
together we had this good communal
feeling together it's like so what
that's it that you know I always want to
say it's good feeling is an important
experience but then when it becomes the
hole or catharsis or it's just endless
it is so grounded in something and doing
something something real or it seems
just
a kind of upper-class pastime or I don't
know maybe I'm being too insulting here
with no no I just was talking about this
with the future thinkers people and the
thing is is you know Western popular
Western psychology you know over
psychologize is everything this is and
there's a little bit of an entertainment
factor in it when people don't know what
else to do they can start deconstructing
this psyche now part of that is helpful
but what happens is when you're in these
extended groups the psyche one of the
the nature of the psyche is to create
structures so you and so you have for
example people that will work with
internal family systems and they have
like you know the inner child and the
father and the mother and the policeman
and then I then I I know people who then
think the inners inner systems
themselves have inner systems and so the
psyche can can you have to be careful
because as you're working with
psychological structures you'll end up
creating more psychological structures
that you have to work with so it is
infinite it's a it's a self
proliferating process and if you don't
know about this you think you're
actually finding more and more
complexity you're getting to something
but you're building it up as you do so
and we got to iatrogenic
this this in medically created diseases
in a way it seems to me that that's what
happens to is is that the more you know
complex solutions we come up to things
and we're actually creating harm yeah or
at least if it's not harm its
complexified things you know Carl I
think it's Karl Weick he has this great
little metaphor he says you know the
human body is very complex and we could
think of it the psyche us
and if I'm sick like then I go to our
doctor now the system's even more
complex because not only do I have the
complexity human body but I have the
complexity of the medical doctors
paradigm and the medical doctors
complexity and his interpretation of me
and there might be some political or
social class kind of thing yeah so that
move is hyper complexified the illness
just just that one move and the medical
doctors inside the institution and the
insurance company in this and that so
how is a society do we improve how can
we intervene at the lowest level of
complexity that's possible great so he
says you know we have the but because of
our society we've given people the
impression that self-care is inadequate
self learning is deficient yeah self
work yes less valuable so it makes us
because that the shadow economy like all
people thing all the things people do
which are devalued but which are
actually often the most valuable thing
like being a mother for example or
exactly in every move toward the next
level of complexity hyper complexify is
it right so if I can if I know something
about my own body you can work with them
but if that's less complex then going to
a doctor now I have to make that move
okay
but the it's it's it's I I tell my
students you know solve your problems at
the lowest level of complexity that you
can the same problems so deal with them
there don't go to a doctor to figure out
how to solve your problem with your
mother go talk to your mother
great
yeah yeah that's hard it's it's kind of
hard to talk to your mother's much more
easier much easier to go talk to a
therapist ten years ago my mother my
relationship yeah I was thinking about
yeah well you had some interest in your
discussion with David fuller a rebel
wisdom I thought you had some
interesting insights about about men and
women and and and you know and and that
whole thing yeah and that I thought was
very very useful so yeah so I'd like to
kind of expand that a little because I
don't want it to generate it it can
generate into a man and woman so this is
kind of what I call a heuristic or a
little taxonomy of the types of
behaviors people tend to show up within
in group process and I think that the
rebel wisdom I talked about the rancor
and the were longer yeah these are two
out of the eight but there's some
there's some deeper psychological schema
underneath how you show up so for
example and there's there's there's
three structures in this
typology so there's what's called the
primary psychological schema this is
from good joke Jeff's work that is yeah
good job brave is just like sorry to
interrupt
you mentioned Gert chefs craving and
dirt chef is like I live in a von France
where he had his his big monastery in
his graves about a block away from my
house sorry excuse me for interrupting
your yeah so the primary psychological
structure or the strategy of the child
is either to take power or seek approval
sometimes that's highly gendered
sometimes not but this is this is like
the primary so the rancor see takes
power has has learned as a child to take
power the belong er to seek approval so
that's one aspect the second aspect is
what I call social processing typology
so when were to come into group space we
have social anxiety it's it's part of
being a mammal really you get to get
your energy comes up and so when so
there's another type apology some people
turn that energy into talking about the
emotions and using story and some use
mental models and abstractions right
right so so then there's either
narrative or absence concepts easily and
then the third piece is how we've been
trained to think about collectives and
this is comes from our social or
political kind of background and so one
one typology is the focus on individuals
rights and responsibilities and the
others are collective so you have Jordan
Peterson on one side and then you
social justice warriors on the other
something like that right so a rancor is
my archetype for a person who's
psychological schema is power processing
temperaments concepts in individual
rights and you'll see in ABBA longer is
approval narrative and collective and if
you take these three things it creates a
matrix of eight social types and I've
done this in workshops we just yeah yeah
you have precisely eight different types
of yeah because the combination of these
three and different combinations give
you eight types so the rancor is power
concepts and individual but you could
have power concepts and collective
that's a different one a different
archetype and I've done in some of my
early work I mean it's kind of a fun
typology it's not that intellectually
rigorous but people will take the test
they'll answer the three questions when
you are a child relative to other kids
did you take our secret probe all and
they will recognize their archetype
based upon these structures that are
operating on them and so my point in the
rebel wisdom was that people you know
people have biases they think that that
one of these archetypes is better in
cluttered space than the others and I
say no they're just different archetypes
of the social self and what the first
stage is in collective process is the
Ruby on the social self into more
authentic selves so it's just is
typology and yeah well often that the
belonging stuff you know has its form of
manipulation right just as exactly this
is the ranking stuff that has this form
of you know manipulation so in ranking
stuff is the more obvious kind of male I
would yeah one person trying to be
tougher than
the other and then and then the
belonging is more more female or is that
too reductive it's reductive the point
is they're both they're both social
selves they're social strategies to
reduce anxiety and they're both
distortions of the authentic self so
neither of none of them you don't want
you don't want them in you know as you
move along and I was just saying some of
the confusion in social space social
collective practice was a lot of the
initial circles were convened by people
who thought the belonging needs person
was in the right direction I've noticed
that because and neither of them are in
the right direction they they are
actually the same structure that needs
to be resolved yeah often it's it's also
the I would see this as people who are
really into emotionality and feeling and
expression and drama queen type of
people run the show and then the geeky
little or lost in abstraction or
completely lost we could see how the
other yeah you know and then there's
gifts the rancor becomes very perceptive
and tends to be a very builder these
these high build theories to see them as
you get more capacity in these groups if
you stick together that's that's kind of
a mature contribution the rancor has so
the belong or is the person that is
experiencing well I I feel like no no I
feel like we should stay on this and
their way of processing becomes an asset
but then
clutching like when they first start you
have all these belonging needs if
they're released of those those
contractions
hmm so that there's an erotic form of
that and an enlightened firm of that so
to speak
exactly right there's a gift inside the
just started typology yeah yeah that's
that's what another thing I've been
thinking about is is I've mentioned Zach
about 20 times in this interview of so I
can't stop he's been saying and we talk
he talked about his high level dyslexia
it's a it's a it's a personality who you
can you read the paragraph before you
read read the sentence or you read the
word so you go from top down instead of
bottom up yeah that kind of and I think
I'm exactly I mean I'm not exactly the
same that this Zach because I'm I'm not
high I'm not so gifted and a dyslexic
but I know that I function in that way
yeah that's made it very difficult for
me in some areas especially school where
as I kind of excel in other areas and so
in terms of our discussion about about
education and how to fit in these people
that maybe don't fit in the the ordinary
technologies or for a bit sort of yeah
they're lost in in in in the functioning
kind of kind of world and I've known a
lot of people like that in my life I
tend to enjoy people who are a bit odd
or stranger or you know yeah wacky minds
are just different kinds of minds yes so
in my educational philosophy I talked
about the switch from complex adaptive
systems you know so like the Darwinian
model of Education is dyslexics have to
adapt to the reading program right
versus complex potential systems all of
a sudden well what's what's what's
potential from here this this is a
different inner mind perhaps a whole new
mind what
is the potential of this but I'm facing
to educate is to bring forth
they have the potentials that to notice
identify detected amplify potentials
that are in front of me not to force
that emergent potential into a
pre-designed or preordained adaptation
plan yeah that's called you know
curriculum or the devil and and in our
standardized testing and all right
thinking you know a third grader is
going to move from here to here because
what we're noticing in like early
childhood research psychological
research alison gopnik is great for this
is that there are metacognitive
abilities that come online early in
childhood and so if we assume these
things are only going to come online
when someone's 18 19 or 20 then we miss
these emergent pathways that may be
staring us right in the face maybe all
this deviant behavior in schools is our
inability to ask ourselves what's the
potential that's arising here I mean I
could get oh if you get a hyperactive
kid who has this kind of world energy he
can't sit still he should be he should
be I don't know working with horses or
something or exactly it's it's I say
this all the time in organizations its
energy for free there's a teacher and
you're looking at energy for free how
can i shape the form that's X gonna take
I mean literally it's crazy I'm making
an energy you're looking at purpose you
know you're looking at impulse and
instinct and desire these are the
fundamental protocols for civilization
right there in your faces yeah we're
gonna drug them yeah yeah and they're
all there aren't they all of these as
you say protocols for civilization the
whole all the typology all the different
types are just sitting there you know we
need to be used and we're
corralling them into this very narrow
perspective his white head said you know
we have to move from this notion of
constraint in control to see the world
is screaming with affordances I mean
literally screaming the I think mindset
that gets us beyond the sense making a
meeting making crisis and into being
able to literally see the potentials are
staring us in the face but they're
categorized as problems or deviants
that's just funny because when I'm
talking to you compared to my
conversation with Zack Zack Zack very
weren't very deep into you know this
apocalyptic sort of feel to what's going
on right now and and you you have a very
you know you have a way of making one
feel very hopeful about the world in a
sense right if we can if we could sort
of see all of this you know chaos as
potential as abundance rather than
scarcity and and work with that of
course we're in trouble in a lot of ways
as well we can't deny that / well you
know actually one of the things that and
I both are warning of I haven't said it
so dire but if you don't take the
problems with society seriously then
you're just being snookered right you'll
say oh here's a new potential but it'll
be the same structure just in more
disguise you know to be the same problem
under cover right so we have to come to
terms with the fact and so the way I
describe that is by saying no you have
to exit this paradigm you have to get
outside of me if you try to think of
complex systems outside of adaptation we
have to adapt try to tell all your
stories without using that subtle mental
model that you have to adapt to
something
mm-hmm it's almost impossible mm-hmm
yeah you can't adapt to it because
you're saying I don't want to use that
paradigm that Darwinian paradigm so then
what do I use to talk about conflict
systems and yeah and also it may have
been that that paradigm had its value in
its time but it's but it just keeps
going and becoming more of a monolithic
kind of dead structure right all
civilizations become you know their
paradigms become deficient I didn't find
sucks
I'm sorry we're talking about you is
that I didn't I didn't find that
interview disheartening oh no I found it
very clarifying you know yeah yeah I
agree with you I know I would say that
there well I I would say that he says
that we have to look through the thing
right which which isn't which is not
saying that we're stuck or were blocked
or we can look through the thing but
he's saying that he buddy buddy but he
he is he is also saying the world is
burning so you know if you're here or
you're in the middle of the fire so I
think if you're the kind of person that
wants to has it has a hunger for for
truth and that that that kind of message
just wakes you up and makes you feel
more alive if you're a person who wants
to retreat back into safety and comfort
and habit then maybe that would see
depressing or something like that you
know to some people exactly I mean I
think that
what I will kind of say in terms of my
own despair is you know I don't I don't
see people changing I don't see masses
of people changing I see hope potential
and small initiatives and so when when
when Zack talks about his hub and spoke
network of education I think these are
smart designs for the possible
transition I don't see I think the whole
even the whole strategy to change
massive well that's a what I would say
why would you want to change everybody I
mean that seems there's something wrong
in it I was listening to one of your
talks where you talking about how I
think so it has to be a very a local
everything has to be very local and
that's really that's where you have to
work with
otherwise you're you're you're
pretending you if you felt that you were
participating adequately or learning
then that would be okay maybe yeah I
mean I think it at least you have to
have Theory practice consistency so if
you so and this I think where is that
really shines because he's like social
media we all know it's really
problematic oh yeah so he gets out we go
ahead social media saying how its
problematic so there's a very practice
inconsistency there now that tension can
go either way
maybe we say well it's not as
problematic as I thought or yes it is
but at a certain point the you know you
have to have to strive for more
coherence between the theory what you're
espousing and the choices that you make
and everything has to start with a
choice mm-hmm and I think that's the
linchpin I think I think it'd be easy to
get people
to conceptualize change even if it's in
very high metacognitive terms that seems
easier to me than for them to take a
first real step and and the first real
step you would describe as coherence
what do you mean by that
no I think the first real step is for
example well that's maybe the goal
coherence excuse me maybe maybe yes the
goal more of a goal and the first step
would be directing yourself towards that
or or or taking concrete actions and
going in that direction yeah it's kind
of like a really hard time with that
word I get maybe it's just the way it
looks I are geneticists yeah so if you
truly believe that if you truly don't
think the medical institution is helpful
that the medicine is making you sick
then don't watch it don't participate in
the medical system you know I have a
long background and Qigong in self care
and well-being I don't have health
insurance I wouldn't I have two nurses
my mother and my sister are nurses and
you know you can see this the doctors I
I know more about some of the history
look just like Zack Stein knows more
about some of the psychological
psychopharmacological things of then the
actual people who prescribed the pills
you know it's like there's this illusion
of professionalism in in medicine and so
if you get parish's people doing Qi Gong
and learning about the human body and
learning about holistic health and
healing that is more powerful medicine
than the medical institution and yet all
the discourse is medicare-for-all or
this or that I mean I don't see why
people want to expand the u.s. medical
system it doesn't make any sense
it's just so that's what I mean by
choice many people would hear you say
that and think that you were a very
wicked person because you you're wanting
people to be dying on the street or I
mean that's the kind of that the level
of discourse today is that you can't
really talk about anything like that and
in polite society because because
because it's so dichotomous is so you
know these things are very complex and
deep and unless your friends are doctors
and you hear the back-channel then you
know then you know and then you know and
so but my point is that I mean that's a
big that's a big step but at some point
you know it's easy there needs to have
you need to tie your values your
espoused values to choice mm-hmm and
then that moves you along into action
and it changes the world but espousing
values does not change the world