i'm mike maloney author of guide to
investing in gold and silver it's the
world's number one best-selling book on
investing in precious metals it's
available in 11 languages and in my book
I said that we were on a wild roller
coaster of a ride and that we would
first see the threat of deflation
followed by a helicopter drop and that
would be followed by big inflation and
that has happened there was the 2008
crisis we're seeing the base money
around the planet being hyper inflated
right now while all of the credit
aggregates are collapsing and so it's
sort of netting out to zero inflation or
just slightly positive to inflation even
though base money around the planet is
just taking off like a rocket but it
would then be followed by a real
deflation and then followed by
hyperinflation
so I think it sort of looks like this
we've got the markets going up in the
real estate bubble in 2007 and then we
had the threat of deflation which was
the 2008 market crash and a big
helicopter drop of currency and you are
here and then I think that we're going
into something like this and it will be
followed by the world's central bank's
overreacting people say you know some
people say I've been calling for
hyperinflation hyperinflation
hyperinflation there isn't any time that
I can find in all of history where a
population that's all on one side of the
boat when you have a nation of debtors
what has to happen is that you go into a
deflation first allowing the banks to
foreclose and the public in general is
on the losing side of the debt
we are entering a period of financial
crisis that is the greatest the world
has ever known the wealth transfer that
will take place during this decade is
the greatest wealth transfer in history
wealth is never destroyed it is merely
transferred and that means but on the
opposite side of every crisis there is
an opportunity the great news is that
all you have to do to turn this crisis
into your great opportunity is to
educate yourself I believe that the best
investment that you can make in your
lifetime is your own education education
on the history of money education on
finance education on how the global
economy works education on how all of
these guys the central bankers the stock
market how they can cheat you how they
can scan you if you learn what is going
on and how the financial world works you
can put yourself on the correct side of
this wealth transfer Winston Churchill
once said that the further you look into
the path
the further you can see into the future
this program is all about creating your
own crystal ball being able to gaze into
the future being able to change this
crisis the greatest crisis in the
history of mankind and in your great
opportunity
[Music]
[Music]
well I've been traveling overseas quite
a bit but I'm on my way home now to
speak in an event in California finally
but I've been trying to make clear is
the fact of this roller coaster crash
that I was talking about in my book and
that I've been predicting since 2005 is
playing out right before our eyes one of
the things I really like about speaking
of live events is the chance to interact
with people and sort of get my finger on
the pulse of what they're thinking and
lately it's become pretty obvious that
for a lot of people it's difficult to
grasp why I think deflation is coming
before big inflation or even
hyperinflation so here I'm going to
break down four of the biggest reasons
that I see deflation coming first the
first one is simple the overreaction to
the 2008 crisis has caused a credit debt
bubble and all bubbles pop so I talked
about hyper inflating base money this is
this is hyperinflation right here
inflation and deflation is either an
expansion or contraction of the currency
supply and prices follow the inflation
or deflation eventually now most of this
currency does not circulate it sitting
on banks balance sheets and what's
called
excess reserves you know if you look at
the years leading up to this crisis this
red line is reserve balances the white
line is how much of it is excess and
here we have Alan Greenspan's response
to 9/11 look at the scale of how big
this emergency is compared to 9/11 but
what is Ben Bernanke afraid of and now
Janet Yellen has inherited this legacy
well one of the things that happened in
the 2008 crisis is that banks froze up
and wouldn't lend to each other they
were all scared to lend to each other
and
system is such a fraud that at the end
of each day they all have to be able to
borrow digits from each other that were
created from nothing just to keep the
whole smoke-and-mirrors game going they
all have to do this interbank lending to
keep things balanced well if one bank
won't lend to another and they don't
have any reserves the whole system
freezes up now if you've got all these
excess reserves that are on their
balance sheet and they pay them interest
to keep the reserves there and not use
this as a basis of fractional reserve
lending they're going to be liquid this
basically prevents bank runs by banks on
banks it's not a public bank run with
the the public lining up at the doors
it's a bank run where one bank is trying
to get their currency out of another or
won't lend to another and so this keeps
things liquid right now what this is
done though the banks get to use this
stuff in the middle of the day and so
you see the use of margin in the stock
market going to record levels you see
the stock market going to record levels
things like I follow collector cars
they've been going astronomical the
number of 10 million dollar cars out
there now is just absolutely insane and
there are cars now selling for thirty
million dollars wine collections art
it's all going ballistic at this point
and all bubbles pop this is the average
price of a new home divided by the
median annual household income normally
3/4 times your income is about what you
can afford with a house when you drop in
interest rates the affordability goes up
so people pay more for a house but
interest rates don't stay in one spot
forever they have to revert some time or
another and all these people are going
to be trapped every bubble pops that's a
bubble we are in for something big again
and this time it's going to be more
horrific than the crash of 2008 simply
because the response to 2008 created a
lot of stored energy and then when the
market crashes that energy is released
in the op
direction that previous chart of the
hyperinflation of base money well we're
going to get a reaction from all of this
whatever bubble you're in the opposite
happens of what is of greatest benefit
to the most people right now if we went
into big inflation or hyperinflation the
average Joe Sixpack would get rewarded
for mass stupidity they're all out on
credit we're in a credit boom we're in a
bond bubble those are the bubbles have
to pop and the popping of a credit
bubble is deflationary its deflation and
in history crystal-clear on that a lot
of the gold-bug say you know the Federal
Reserve and central bank's they're
creating money which they are
unprecedented but they're actually
inflating to fight the deflation that
started to set in the late 2008 early
2009 and and if you look back at history
to say every major debt and financial
asset bubble in history that the
railroad bubbled the early 1870s at peak
followed by deflation you know the the
auto and farm bubble and tractor bubble
that's actually a tractor bubble that
caused the Great Depression it was farms
failing and it was smaller local banks
failing that caused the Great Depression
and high unemployment deflation because
the deflation has to root out the
massive debt in the financial assets
that get overinflated and it's good if
we bring down the cost of living if we
restructure debt if we bring financial
assets down it actually improves our
standard of living long term but it is
painful when it happens people don't
people think that the Federal Reserve
can prevent deflation that they control
the money supply most people don't
realize that the Federal Reserve
controls base money only and it's an
incredibly small portion of tiny right
and all they do is influence the rest of
the economy with interest rates and
reserve balances and such well you know
some people say the strategy didn't work
well no it did work we would have been
in a depression just like the early 30s
we were going that banks were melting
down financial institutions major
fortune 100 companies were failing like
AI
we would have imploded because because
once you have that much debt and
leverage and things go wrong it just
builds the other way like you say you
get a bubble on one end you get a crash
bubbles don't correct they burst so we
were going into that but government said
no we will we will do whatever it takes
Mario Draghi you know Ben Bernanke and
they created trillions of dollars to
fill the hole well all that does it's
like taking more drugs to keep from
coming down I mean a drug addict can
keep taking more drugs until it kills
them or until they just fall down and
get dragged into detox it's exact same
thing debt especially when it's extreme
is a financial enhancing drug it gives
you more than you deserve makes you feel
better in the short term and but when
it's over you have to go through a detox
as they would call it a debt detox and
that's where you get deflation this is
the demographics of the United States
back in the year nineteen forty and it's
broken into five year age groups and
what I'm going to show you here is the
baby boom and one of the reasons that
we're going into this deflationary
scenario and we're also in this swing
from individualism to collectivism this
is a pendulum a cycle that just goes
back and forth throughout time and this
is the greatest threat to your
well-being and the well-being of the
economy and freedom we're going through
a period where this demographic is going
to cause some huge problems so here we
are in 1950 and you can see the
beginning of that baby boom taking off
1960 1970 and this wave now the reason
I've got this broken up into these
different colors children are the
ultimate consumers they consume
everything they produce nothing except a
quality of life for their parents you
know a big reward as far as seeing them
grow up and so on but economically
children are an economic loss they
consume economic energy what you
here is this wave coming into
working-age the green area is sort of a
break-even area that's when people are
getting a job and it might be a minimum
wage job or something like that and then
might be sharing an apartment with a few
other people and then as you get into
the yellow area you start to become a
net positive for society your paying
income tax you're producing more than
you consume and then you get into what's
called the maximum spending demographic
the maximum spending demographic is ages
45 to 54 and this group lives in the
largest houses of their lifetimes
they're driving the most cars in their
lifetimes they're sending their kids off
to college they're spending a lot then
the kids that then they become empty
nesters that's the maximum saving
demographic once the kids are gone is
off to college they go holy moly we
didn't save anything we want to retire
in five years or ten years and so they
start saving and then you get to the
point where they retire and they become
a maximum social burden demographic I
call it simply because they're
liquidating assets they're poet they've
got their stocks and their savings and
each year they're going to liquidate
some of those to live and the only
driver that in the economic driver is
the medical industry they drive the
medical industry so economically the
maximum social burden group is a net
loss for the prosperity of society the
prosperity of an economy and so I'm
going to go back again and you can see
that that maximum social burden group
almost didn't exist in 1940 and there's
a lot of people of that working age and
maximum spending age supporting the few
people that were of the maximum social
burden category
and then we get the baby broom sweeping
through and in the 80s and that stock
market boom of the 90s and all the way
up to 2000 that yellow area that really
drives the economy was growing every
year now we have an economy where it's
supposed to grow at about 3% or it's
going to stall we have we inflate the
currency supply at about that rate and
but now after the year 2000 we got 2010
the peak of the maximum spending
demographic and from now on it's sort of
downhill maximum savers they do help
drive the stock market but look at that
maximum social burden category and look
at what happens next so we are going
into this time period right now now the
reason there's no children on there they
haven't been born yet but if you look at
you know when I first presented this a
couple of years ago birth rates have
been falling for quite a while now
and they've been falling even at an even
greater speed since the crash of o8 and
if you look at the data from the Great
Depression birth rates just fell off a
cliff in the Great Depression and so you
have less people less people of the
younger age coming into this demographic
to support the people that are retiring
they didn't have the pill during the
Great Depression contraception was
something that was was not within most
people's reach so here it is automated
and you can see that big wave sweeping
through there and if you could imagine
data for the children it would be a much
lower rate and if we do have a big
economic pullback you're going to see
that really reduce so we're in most
likely some very serious trouble here
because all of our social programs and
the way the economy and the society is
set up everybody's expecting to be able
to retire at a certain age and
fairly comfortably off of the rest of us
offers the government any comments on
this these different age groups maximum
spending demographic met and say they've
got the same model we do what is unique
at this time in history and it's the
main topic of my most recent book that's
why I call it a demographic cliff this
is the first time in most wealthy
countries there's a few exceptions let's
call it Sweden Switzerland and Australia
countries like that they'd have a larger
millennial or echo boom but almost every
other country has an echo boom that only
comes up near the same height or is much
smaller than this echo boom here is when
you're talking about so so my question
to people is what hat like you say it is
a pyramid each generation has been
larger and more wealthy to help pay off
the debts or their or the accumulation
from from an aging generation before
them what happens when the millennial is
having to support a generation that's
actually larger than them and what
happens when there's not enough for them
to drive house prices back I've got a
model now for housing it says people
spend the most on housing at age 41 but
then when they die at age 79 or 80 on
average they become sellers so I have to
subtract the dyers from the buyers and
when I do that baby boomers are going to
be dying at higher rates than the
Millennials going to be buying at some
point there's gonna be net negative
demand for housing everybody think oh
we're going to be more housing for them
no not when a smaller generation follows
a larger so for entitlements that's huge
there is no way this next generation in
the US and there's a lesson Japan or
Europe where they're much smaller can
even hope to pay the entitlements in
pharmacy baby boom is a fairy tale and
housing will never be the same
we saw the Bob Hope generation come out
of World War two the first middle-class
generation history where the average
person could buy a house on a mortgage
that was not the case in the Roaring
Twenties even only the fluence could do
that so that was a big boom for housing
housing went out to depression my way
then the baby boom comes unprecedented a
number
all of our lifetimes housings gone up
with a few exceptions here in them
housing is going to do well to go
sideways for the coming decades
nevertheless go a lot much again because
of this generational shift we've never
seen this in history so now that we've
covered three of the major components
for deflation I wanted to show you one
of the real big E's here and this one is
the convergence of cycles there's a
whole bunch of cycles the first one is
the wealth distribution cycle and I want
to use my own family as part of a
demonstration of this this is my father
he's right here he's about the age where
he enlisted in the army to fight in
world war ii he fought in the Battle of
the Bulge he was among the troops that
liberated Dachau here he is in the
mid-50s he was manager of an auto parts
store that sold high-performance
equipment and here's his tax return from
1955 this would have been he would have
been filing this about a month and a
half after I was born and so what you
see here is that he's a store manager in
Salem Oregon and his income was about 96
hundred bucks and he paid about eleven
hundred and sixty bucks
in tax for an effective tax rate of
about twelve percent and you say well he
only paid twelve percent because he
didn't make very much so he's in a
really low tax bracket but wait this is
median home values this is US Census
Bureau data and here we have 1950 and
1960 so we're going to Oregon 1950 in
the median price single-family home was
68 hundred bucks and in 1960 it was ten
thousand five hundred dollars so I'm
going to say probably eighty five
hundred dollars as a happy medium there
today in Los Angeles where I live the
single-family median price home is three
hundred and sixty thousand now he was
making enough making 96 hundred bucks
he's making a
700 bucks more than the cost of the
average home in Salem Oregon
so a autoparts store manager would have
to be making 360 to maybe four hundred
and twenty thousand dollars and then
paying only twelve percent tax on it to
equate to the same amount and it's part
of this wealth distribution cycle this
is the amount of in national income that
the top 1% earns and back in the 20s the
end of the roaring 20s it was above
twenty percent of the national income
was going to the top 1% of the income
earners there's a trough here in the 70s
where it got down to just nine percent
but it's back up to 20 percent and so
you know in this area the middle class
was doing better but and paying less
taxes but on the trip there was the
Great Depression right here so getting
back to that is going to be a very
deflationary painful thing this we've
already seen the baby boom demographic
but I just need to show you one thing
here you recall that the maximum
spending gamma demographic drives the
economy the maximum social burden puts
deflationary pressure on the economy
they sell their stocks bonds and real
estate to survive and they don't produce
anything but what I want to point out is
that there's about six times more people
driving the economy here in 1940 than
there are putting deflationary pressure
on it and when you watch this wave go
through the drivers are always more
until just the last couple of decades
here and now the people putting
deflationary pressure on the economy
exceed the number of people driving the
economy so if you could chart this out
with time on that axis and the energy
going into the economy on this axis the
curve would probably look something like
this and I believe that we are right
about here right about now and now for
the next cycle in this big convergence
the stock market cycle this is the S&P
500 p/e ratios a p/e ratio is the price
of a stock per share divided by the
annual earnings of that company per
share and if you're paying somewhere
between 10 to 14 times annual earnings
that's fair value anything under 10 is
undervalued 14 to 20 is overvalued and
anything over 20 is bubble territory and
here comes the data and what is
important here is that when the stock
market goes into a bubble without
exception it has to visit undervalued
before a new bull market can begin
except for this time the bubble biggest
bubble in history in the year 2000 and
when it popped
we went down to fair value and bounced
back up into a bubble do you really
think that a new bull market can begin
from here that we're not going to visit
extreme under valuations I don't think
so I think that we have to visit extreme
under valuations before a new solid bull
market can begin and now for probably
the biggest factor in this convergence
of cycles this is Nikolai Kondratiev
he's a Russian economist that Lenin
commissioned to prove that capitalism
wouldn't work he went away for a couple
of years to do his studies and came back
with his findings the capitalism was the
superior system and would work
marvelously well but it would always
suffer from these long wave boom bust
cycles to which he gave the names of
seasons of spring summer autumn and
winter we'll come back to this in some
other episode and and really dig into it
but for now what you need to know is
that the winter is the deflationary
season the last winter was the Great
Depression and they used to call this
the 50-year cycle but lately it's gotten
stretched out and takes longer I believe
that it's got to be the length of a
human lifetime and the reason is that
the winter is deflationary and the
people that were old enough to be of
working age and have young families that
lost the house lost their job lost the
family farm they become very emotionally
scar
and they become very risk-averse and
very very frugal and in order to make
all the same stupid mistakes that we
made in the roaring 20s that led to the
Great Depression that generation has to
die off well they have died off and we
have made all the same stupid mistakes
so this is very deflationary should it
happen and here's the supporting
evidence this is interest rates and what
you see here is that they go right along
with the cycle this is wholesale prices
in the US and again they go right along
with the cycle until the point the
Federal Reserve decides that what we
really need is constant inflation this
is one of the biggest cycles of all it's
hard for people to see though this
east-west cycle takes about 500 years
for the pendulum to swing each direction
and 500 years back it's innovation and
prosperity swinging from asia to europe
and north america and back and in the
dark ages china was developing gunpowder
then china stagnated well we had the
industrious onson Industrial Revolution
so ingenuity and prosperity does flow
back and forth and right now you should
be able to feel that the Western
economies are stagnating and have sort
of stalled while the growth in the Asian
economies over the last 20 years has
been mind-boggling and so this is very
deflationary for the West and here is
probably one of the most deflationary
cycles of all this is household debt is
a percentage of disposable income and
the alarm bells should really be going
off when people owe more than their
disposable income anytime this exceeds
100 percent but I believe that this is
also a cycle and that if we had data if
we could go back further it would
probably look like this and what's
interesting is that this reflects the
seasons of the kondratyev wave of spring
summer autumn winter spring summer
autumn winter and we're going into a
winter and that's very deflationary
the next cycle you've seen before we
learned about this in Episode two
but it's the shift in world monetary
systems the classical gold standard the
Gold Exchange standard the Bretton Woods
system the US dollar standard and
there's something that's coming next
these usually coincide with major Wars
but whatever this next shift is it's
going to be chaotic and it's probably
going to be a little painful it's not
going to be pretty right now and we
learned in Episode three how countries
are abandoning the US dollar
standard had a blazing rate right now
it's developing stress cracks and it's
going to implode and here's the thing is
that that is going to be happening with
the convergence of all of these cycles
we have the east-west cycle we have the
baby boom demographic we have the wealth
distribution cycle household debt as a
percentage of disposable income the
stock market cycle the Kondratieff wave
and the shift in world's monetary
systems and the thing about all these
cycles is that they have all peaked and
they're starting to descend which is
deflationary deflation deflation
deflation deflation deflation and that
is all happening at the time when the
world monetary system is developing
stress cracks it's about to implode and
it's going to be extremely chaotic these
things are all going to make it even
more chaotic so that's the convergence
of cycles and all of these things are
the reason that I am expecting deflation
before big inflation or hyperinflation
but just as I said in my book any
deflation is probably going to be
short-lived
this is the nightmare scenario for every
central banker and all of the world's
central bankers are Keynesian they
believe that they can print their way to
prosperity even though they have proved
that you can't time after time all it
does is caused a wealth transfer when
all of the world's central banks start
printing their currencies into oblivion
simultaneously what you will see is a
wealth transfer where the VAS
majority becomes very poor and just a
few people become very rich it's
horrible for the economy
but Japan is the prime example that it
does not work you can't print your way
to prosperity and here's what you can do
educate others protect yourself from
what is coming and please share these
videos with everybody that you can and
until the next episode thank you very
much for watching you can do stuff now
to be ahead of this and be positioned
right when this happen because this is
inevitable this is is going to be the
first time that we have an economic
event of this scale that is global a
small percentage of people are going to
make a fortune and do very well and most
people are just going to not know what
hit them