good morning welcome to Saturday morning
roundtable I'm sure there'll be other
people joining us in a moment if you're
watching on Facebook there's a link to a
stream yard Facebook to join and mile
we'll just start you know through what
have you been up to with your projects
yesterday we had the first prototype
planning session where we sort of
actually went a bit deeper into the
technical part of doing a prototype for
a web app that was pretty good it was
the full hour and it was I think useful
um tried to avoid going too technical
but it was more like for people I guess
sort of in in in my role like aren't
developers but are the ones sort of
trying to plan how it works which i
think is a fairly common position to be
in in the projects group so that will
hopefully be helpful and I mean that's
where the project is that right now just
trying to work on getting the prototype
out we actually got sort of a new
version of the prototype released
yesterday so now there's like a member
login and an actual database and stuff
behind it so moving along I don't even
know where I'm at in my project we had
two solutions this week though we had
one on suicide and went on self-help
both of which were powerful
I found the self health plan I thought
there'd be more people and it was just I
reached out to one person we scheduled
one for Friday and then he was the only
one who showed up which is fine and but
they were both good when we had our
fourth fifth process raising which seems
to be coming together ribbons and I are
gonna meet next week to talk about
mission and vision for the process
raising and only took us four weeks to
get some innovation so that we can then
look for more people in order to do the
foundational documents or to go through
the protocol that loves it that is which
I'm looking forward to and just playing
in the attention of having slightly
different visions but like between this
and together it's like between process
racing and together tech and feel like
it's both it's the flip side of each
coin it's like bring your project and
own it and like how do we help each
other versus
okay we all have our own project but at
the same time how can we create
something together isn't necessarily on
you and for our projects but actually on
you in for society in our lives you know
like that outside and they're completely
different like emotions that trigger it
in the process and so it's it's
interesting and then as I mentioned
before going live but just personally
I'm dealing with more interpersonal
health stuff and healing started
different programs so although that's
not directly related it definitely ties
into all of that so I don't know what I
would need help with besides just know I
really don't know what I would need help
with yeah I mean stuff I need help with
I'm getting helpless that was that was
yesterday's session perfect yeah well
we're done three minutes and that's a
new record
let's see if anyone if anyone else joins
we can focus on their project this could
become an impromptu project raising
there we go we got to talk about I mean
I'm pretty excited that we have a lot of
people in game B projects fact the
rubble wisdom did a podcast on game B
and then actually how did you watch it
it actually had our image on it like it
was like and oh there's these side
projects right like the side groups and
one of them was Gabey projects in fact
if it's only the render one other one
but like they showed our logo at the top
so I think that's why a lot of people
end up fighting us okay so one of the
comments saying like yeah we tried to
join game be but it's not allowing our
invitation yet so we just joined this
without i I've said that to people I was
like they might not let you in for a bit
but we seem to be letting a lot of
people in so I mean it's been going I'm
doing the welcome message some every few
days oh my god said 50 okay I got it
actually welcome message today so that
how many is the teaming group at almost
2200 yep but it's also I mean we don't
want it to grow too fast cuz there's
also like this energy when you first
come into it that's like you want to
post and do all this stuff but it's like
okay
yep cool but if the new people come in
and do that every intervene every time
then right then it's just a flood yeah
exactly
and Sade's ybd the welcome message the
people hopefully post under there
I mean here I don't wouldn't mind in our
Facebook or definitely their project is
individual when they first came in one
time and then when you have your project
right under the your update your update
for your project what is my brain fog is
is pretty pretty awesome today so yeah
mine's still clearing in a week for
maybe 20 minutes my second coffee my
dental appointment kokin 19 dental
appointment they fought yesterday she
still coming you know I was like sure
what do we need to do like well that's
still a necessity but that should be
interesting
there's a lot new precautions thought
still have to wear a mask the whole time
did that but that my mask and so I mean
but you're when you're there in your
mouth I mean you can't wear a mask with
her in your mouth I could wear a mask
she can't necessarily good morning
Bentley
hey sorry Mike that's all right we
already did our updates we have nothing
to to ask for over that's night talking
otherwise would you like to give your
update Bentley yes
trying to think what I wrote on the
Facebook post yeah I haven't I don't
feel like I've accomplished a lot this
week I have reached out to some people I
guess I'm in the point of the system
where I need to start small practices
and kind of user can remember what's
called right now I haven't woken up yet
but yeah where you work with some users
and a small thing and kind of gets small
feedback rather than group stuff so I'm
trying to have some debates in areas
that I'm interested in but they're all
really complex
it's a nutrition science and stuff so
yeah I'm starting that I guess that's
really the only role update I didn't do
any code this last week on the project I
was working on someone else's project so
we're doing a no code meeting and a
local Dallas meetup website so I'm
helping my friend Kerry get a LinkedIn
login working for her community site so
I guess that's mostly the way I've been
spending my time as faux as far as
requests I don't I've been thinking it
would be nice if if someone had some
debates if anyone like has a topic that
they want to experiment with but it
don't mind playing with a untested
system on finding agreement and a
complex debate would be fun
what is the number of people you need to
be able well I think just me and someone
else hopefully if we're actually
disagreeing on a topic so it or even
would be really great is if if two
people who are knowing know each other
and uncomfortable having a debate wanted
to do it through the system and it might
not even like it'd be nice to do like a
live video but some of the debate will
happen afterwards because it would be
like oh I need to do some research and
find the studies that back this up and
so it could be a series of videos or not
even doing videos at all and I just be
like they both have access to the system
they go and enter data and just kind of
see how the flow goes so those are the
different ways of doing it together
heimo juice I give an update on oh sorry
Bentley are you I've got a new dad
you're probably done Mateus do you want
to give your update and my update about
my products hmm just in general if you
have any yeah still running out some
stuff which I I'm not sure at this point
if I am just luck helps to make it all
public in one go and I'm just finding
and looking for more excuses to just fix
one more bag before go in Eiffel is it
something that really needs to be fixed
before there's always one more Park
yeah exactly I guess I am just afraid of
releasing it i yeah so I kept doing
that's the route this week also Ariel's
project was on like my things and I did
make progress with and yeah that's me
short version muscle we're done by ten
minutes a knurled I finished by three
we're like we just call it an eight here
then you guys came on but now what do we
want to talk about no one has your like
we're all kind of before in our projects
they really have like a Bentley though
you had something and so like who can we
think of that wants to have a debate
yeah we could bounce around ideas for
topics er so a few is there any sort of
more clarity on what might help pick a
topic cuz I I know you sort of bender
topics and every time it gets like oh
that's too complex that's too complex
yeah and maybe the problem is how to
simplify it and so now I'm thinking that
it can be a complex topic I just don't
know how quickly people get bored but
maybe a way around that is to just take
turns so you know you you put in a fact
or maybe two at a time and that way
you're always kind of exploring and and
maybe a way another way to kind of get
around that is to let people put
manually put their confidence in a
statement so you could say here's the
study and that that I think proves my
point will by like seventy five percent
or whatever like that and that way they
don't have to go deeper than that
if both both people agree then you never
have to explore that that data but if
they if you don't then you can choose
which one you want to explore then it's
a kind of a growing thing when right now
I feel like kind of like a mark to for
saying that you can't I don't know when
to release it because at any point it's
like well I only have five studies I
know there's like five hundred in here
isn't that cherry-picking and then but
that I have to put it out there and say
this is cherry-picks if you don't agree
with my cherry-picked things your
responsibilities go fine the studies I
missed and put them in and explain why
so now I'm thinking it can be any topic
but it it would be good if the people
are really interested in it because it
is really boring work unless you're
interested in the topic and it could
yeah so I you know there's lots of stuff
right now like you know it could be like
what take a take a proposal like the
what is it the eight proposals on on
criminal justice reform I can't remember
what what the website was but a family
yeah I can't wait so you could choose
like just one of those or talk about the
whole thing I think it'd be better if it
was one of the proposals and debate that
although what I posted that on my
Facebook and Twitter and no one was
really arguing with any of the apropos
well cop shouldn't be people with unless
they yeah I guess actually the immunity
one might be interesting because cops
are often put in situations where they
have to do things that the general
public may not understand as being
correct so if they're in a jury room
they could get convicted for doing
something that they had they had to do
anyways yeah so stuff like that would
yeah I think now I'm thinking that most
anything would work I was just being to
perfectionistic so that's part of the
learning process as a game be it men how
about I invites up at any time there's a
debate on the page to be like Bentley
you take it outside but like on this
very specific debate format yeah yeah
I've thought about that whether it be
useful if you see one that's that's
talked about it and see whether that
would work us oftentimes though
especially recently one of the people in
the debate tends to be seems to be
disingenuous and the system isn't really
good at handling
trolls yet it's it assumes both people
but if you if there you came just two or
three or several people that are having
this we could even take the arguments
they've already kind of made and put
them into the shore and say well this is
where we understand the discussion is I
think it'd be useful in some of the
debates on on how to do admitting
because everyone and there is genuinely
wants to see game be succeed so it might
be interesting you know should we ever
ban somebody when should we ban some
people and stuff like that but yeah I
kind of like that a lot life actually
using it to try to make some decisions
for the the game B group or like that
that as well and even if we aren't you
know trying to to make it binding right
I think just to be like hey here's what
you know came out in the wash when we
looked at like what are the values that
the game B projects group stands for
right like what do we consider a game
view project yeah yeah the challenge in
there is also that it's not real good as
far as like you know there's a part of
the debate in the group decision-making
process where you're expanding the ideas
like oh we could do this we could do
this we do this and then you're kind of
paring them down to the best ideas it's
really the tool is only really useful
when you're testing one idea so some
sins we should have and anyone that uses
the f-word right then then you could you
could do that one that's not real good
if you have a couple of options you can
try and choose the best one that's just
not a good tool for that but if someone
has a specific proposal it would be
really good we could also use it in some
of our projects I haven't decided
whether you know we have someone come up
with a new project idea but I'm kind of
like I don't think that's gonna work I
don't know if it'd be beneficial to the
person to to go through that level like
we said part of its learning and trying
and failing but would it be helpful to
have someone actually mathematically
show that your that your thing would
never work a lot of its opinion basis
like does that person have the skill set
or can they attract the people how this
goes that but every once in a while it's
you know here's a here's a tool here's a
new economy that I want to bring up our
new currency and like universal basic
income is something that I'm very
interested in but I'm very concerned
about not just the transition to it but
also is it sustainable and I know some
of the arguments on both sides but I but
I still kind of feel like there's
something out there that there's a
concern an unspoken concern there of
what might what might result in a
society button so that would be an
interesting one as well but does kind of
have to be a specific proposal yeah what
do you think about doing a fake one like
you know choosing something that people
in some fictional universe are arguing
over so it doesn't matter and be you
gotta have a limited amount of evidence
available but kind of only what's in
that show or movie or yeah
I'm reticent to do that I know you're
gonna your plan doing that for
Wiki election and I think that does show
off the wookie election features and
this sort of thing can show off oh and
technically I guess I did do that
because the example on my website is
fiction city deciding to close a street
right so I have done that so that's true
I guess if we could find something that
was more provable than just an opinion
like if I want say you know who's who's
the best even like who was the best
actor who played this thing but that's
really real but know who you know like
favorite Star Wars character or
something like that
yeah that's all opinion based but who
should have won Game of Thrones right
yeah I mean yeah hard but just or like
the kind of stupid example that came to
mind was there's a part in Futurama
where there's two two presidents or two
presidential candidates having a debate
Jack Johnson and John Jackson and and
they're they're arguing whether like
your 5 cent carbon tax is too high your
5 cent carbon tax isn't high enough
I mean hopefully a bit bit better than
that
but that's sort of like a very
simplistic thing with hopefully a couple
layers okay yeah I guess I'd be open to
that I I do want to make sure that
there's a lot of debate websites out
there that have just ended up being a
place where people argue about these
kind of fictional things and some have
there's debate island and and I actually
posted on a debate group and I said this
is the the nightmare of all of our
systems are moving towards because it's
just a group of people just kind of
trolling each other with this debate
software right in their memes and
they're in their fictional you know in
the fictional verse because there's a
lot of debates on there about Star Wars
and Star Trek and yeah so I have a fear
of going down that thing and would there
be would there be evidence like in law
these things it's evidence based and
it's like well your only evidence is
what they happen to show in the movies
right but but it's I'm not completely
closed to the idea but those are my
concerns it is something that also be
interesting is as fictional as I thought
it would be great to kind of popularize
it a bit is to actually create a mystery
story so if you think about kind of how
Sherlock Holmes functions
he's like bringing together all these
facts right that's very deductive and
logical so I thought it'd be interesting
to do a short film where it's a
detective and he has all the suspects
and their percentage of likelihood of
being the President as you gathers
evidence
you know people kind of move up and down
in their rankings and then you know in
theory you have enough evidence that
this one person oh I like that because
then you've also got like an excuse to
kind of have like four or five of them
like you
here's one per suspect and then you can
tell totally different you know things
and showcase it that seems like it has a
lot of promise and theoretically could
take an actual movie and I've thought
about doing and I guess we'd discuss it
another time just taking a debate and
there's a great I don't know if you know
of IQ squared
intelligence
I guess it's just like you squared but
they do debates almost once a month or
twice a month or something like that and
their formal camera in the name of this
but so therefore the formal debate
process we have five minutes each to
talk and stuff like that and then
rebuttals and questions but that's the
one where I started going through it and
they they spent so much time not
presenting evidence that it was really
kind of boring too so I pulled like you
know out of their twenty minutes I put
like four sentences that were actually
like pros and cons and evidence based it
was all convincing you there's like
people being wordsmiths
and not actually saying anything of
substance they were yeah well they were
being convincing but they were all it
was all kind of emotional triggers and
right as opposed to here's the evidence
that I was just so I politics yeah right
right not keep thinking maybe I see and
a lot of times they'll just kind of say
half of what they mean and they'll they
won't you know they don't say where they
got that study from so then if I want to
combat that I have to go find the study
right and then I have to pay 50 dollars
to have access to it and stuff like that
but yeah I'm just thinking it's hard the
other thing is that maybe just hiring
someone who's used to doing
fact-checking and research and but then
a lot of times they'll go down rabbit
trails approving something which
everyone kind of agrees to so that's a
danger as well that you start filling
this debate with all the stuff and
actually a lot of people wouldn't have
argued those points so it's the only
worthwhile to put it in there if someone
actually has that concern yeah I
personally would be interested in seeing
what at least one looks like that is
like generally agreed upon and like it's
kind of one-sided I'd be interested to
see what like how how that boils out
instead of like an actual active
contentious thing you know is water wet
well hopefully that score is fairly
one-sided there it's yeah although you
have to define wet
huh we uh yeah I did just see a physics
girl did an experiment where she dipped
her hand in the boiling hot oil and that
was the lyndon frost effect okay if you
do it with a slightly wet hand although
this other scientist had done the same
thing with molten lead but he did it
with a dry hand because he's like well
you know the transfer of heat isn't
really that fast right but if you get it
and then get it out as long as it's not
sticking to your skin you're fine
but yeah that wasn't so much a debate
well I guess yeah I guess anything that
would have a known conclusion would yeah
it would might be a good example for ya
like what does something mean looks like
that's 90 percent or above
yeah like where maybe there's at least
one that's like trying to be against it
but it's just thoroughly disproven so it
doesn't have a lot of weight but yeah
yeah and you can't really do Flat Earth
because they have so much yeah there's a
lot of debunk yeah and as soon as you
see if I'm good there's five more things
right yeah it's pretty amazing but yeah
I mean if even if flights you know I
don't know if adrià you and I could
think of something that we honestly
disagree on although I think we're
fairly close yeah a lot of things I
don't know do you have an opinion on the
universe space you may not want to say
because of no minds almost the exact
same where it's like I like the idea in
concept I'm worried about the
application and like less so about the
like that people will get lazy and more
like how does the Helen does a scale
like what happens if you have set you
know 10 billion people and only nine you
know or and only a billion of them sort
of won't want to do full-time like
contributing towards paying for ubi work
what's the cutoff so I just want to see
some actual examples in the real world
and they keep getting truncated and that
yeah and that's one situation where if
you did the reason score it would
probably come to like undecided and the
in the result is we need to do studies
and right
you know so in that case the reason
score didn't help at all except if
someone's arguing yes I know it will
work and another person yes I know it
won't work you get them in that's like
okay you don't know let's all put our
money in and do a study together right
because I think some of the best studies
are when it's funded by both sides of
the argument my passion of people and
they both get and I don't know if I've
seen this where they both get to design
the study because then when it comes out
you they it won't be so easily like oh
well you you didn't have any one because
you know I'm doing a lot of stuff on the
on the keto diet it's like well this
study shows that kita is dangerous I'm
like you did not have a single person in
that study that was in ketosis your
low-carb was like 300 carbs grams of
carbs a day and ketosis is fifty to a
hundred you can't say you know they're
making lines and they're taking lines
and and projecting them out and it's
like well that's not that's not how
reality works I'm not sure how you could
do this well there's a really
interesting episode of mythbusters' I
would love to see them do again because
I was like whoa that's weird it was
where they um they tested like if plants
can react on a polygraph it was based on
a book called the secret life plans
which I've read and they did the
experiment wrong like just slightly
because they they did it and they
actually got a result where it did
respond and they freaked out and then
they kept doing it again to the same
plant and it's not doing like okay it's
it's you know debunked except that if
you read the book that's like the the
third sentence is that he kept doing
into the same plan that it stopped
reacting so we got a new plant and that
plant started reacting and so it was
like the plants get used to you or
something according to the book and you
know as I was really having like this
sounds kind of hokey and then mints
Buster's kind of accidentally proved it
I'm like okay now I want to see more of
this that's super interesting yeah have
one that I looked into in when I was
doing my undergrad which was you know
over ten years ago so I don't know if
it's been decided but wild salmon versus
farmed salmon and that wild salmon
killed a certain farm salmon kills wild
salmon stock right they farm salmon is
dangerous for wild salmon and I wasn't
eating wild salmon at all I'm sorry
salmon at all because I was I was
boycotting it and when I looked into it
there neither the Suzuki Foundation
which was the environmental Pro while
you know wild salmon nor the fish farms
had done this very simple simple
experiment that would have cost a few
hundred dollars and proven one side or
the other but neither side wanted to
prove it right because sea lice it just
makes sense
all of these wild salmon have so much
sea lice on them of course they're
getting it from the farm salmon like
logically and then when you look at when
they go through and the lifecycle of the
lice it doesn't actually make sense
because the lice can't move so like to
just put particles in the water and see
where they end up what the currents
would be so easy and yet none of them
have done it instead they just wanna you
know what I mean like vilify farmed
salmon and vilify wild salmon and that's
one issue right forget about all the
pollution that comes off the farmed
salmon but like this one issue nobody
wants to look into because it's just
easy to pick one side and be like yeah I
believe that yeah yeah that's
interesting because it makes me think
that if you if we did have reason score
out and wasn't use that situations like
that people would see that all this
arguing just gets everything to the
middle and it's like well if you want to
move that dial do a study which
oftentimes people really sometimes you
don't want to know if your identities in
it if you've worked for 20 years on on
fighting this thing and then you ran a
study and proved that you were wrong
that would be devastating
no I don't think people think through
that process but that's kind of the
subconscious back of the mind worried I
I was digging into my nutrition science
and I invited a guy who opposes my
opinions I started reading his stuff and
listening to his podcast and I felt that
same sort of thing it's like oh that's a
good point and that point scares me it's
like well first of all have I been you
know for the last four years making it
or I'm gonna have a heart attack but
also just the fact I could feel my
subconscious fighting me on following
the truth because it breaks my identity
that was really interesting
experience so yeah so if anyone either
has a topic and either knows the the
hard part is finding two people that
would disagree so either one of y'all
would have to actually disagree with me
on something or we'd have to find
another person that does that are all
willing to kind of do it I so yeah so my
next tactic is to get this guy who
believes that that is against the keto
diet and I'm going to have him
participate and I'm also gonna put it
out on Twitter to those communities both
kind of his community in my community
and and have them kind of feed in facts
to it we'll see if that works so I'm
sorry I didn't take up the whole hours a
hot seat but it was a pretty detailed
sort of nicely wandering conversation
throughout the various pieces feel like
it's masks no masks to to hot button
right now for that to be a thing that
recent scar deals with because it feels
like not only is the information
changing everyday it's also like people
have their one viewpoint and I find a
lot of it is also sensory based that
people don't want to wear masks so
therefore they're gonna find them to not
wear masks versus looking at the actual
science and yet it's very true it's hard
to wear a mask and to not honor that I
think that like this actually isn't easy
and it costs something but it's the
science and is this good for the
population and then it's not actually
protecting you it's protecting that
everybody else and then yeah the people
I know that don't wear masks tend to
believe that kovat is not a hoax but
it's so overblown so that gets into the
whole you know is everyone lying to you
and the truth is yes the media's lying
Oh
Media is exaggerating the government is
exaggerating but that doesn't mean that
it's not something we should print so it
kind of gets into that into the other
discussion pretty quickly but if I if I
found someone who was concerned about
the disease but thought you didn't have
to wear a mask I mean actually like we
don't wear masks outdoors usually
anymore unless we're in a confined space
like if I was in a protest I'd probably
wear a mask but just walking around the
parks and stuff we don't so that yeah
that would probably be an interesting
yeah that would work if we have two
people on either side
one of the other things that I've come
up against are just possibly my identity
and that was like the discussion of free
speech and like the technical definitely
no you don't get to say anything you
want to me and I don't get offended like
you there actually are consequences to
your actions but is that like I don't
that may be one of the things that you
you saw the debate when you frame the
question so there's several things
that's like saying you know is this
person racist or not well once you
define racist don't you have a
definition the answer is the person is
yes both is racist and isn't racist
because racist has multiple definitions
and they fit some and not the other so
when you frame it down it's like and
really the amazing exercise of just
clarifying the actual question solves
the debate and that may be one of them
but it's still good to go through the
exercise a lot of times you have to put
here's the statement in there and then
when you start putting the facts in and
people realize oh we're talking about
two different things and then and then
they argue about the definition race in
which I don't I don't ever argue about
definitions there's very few words that
have a single definition and so we just
agree which definition were talking
about or what two definitions we're
talking about that's two different
answers and and we're settled we're in
agreement
yeah what was the I did that Thai tribe
and I forgot what your what your topic
was
I free speech oh yeah I yeah so to put
this in you'd have to have a very
specific statement because yeah the the
thing about fries it's free to say
whatever you want and it's free for that
other person to call you whatever they
want back including cussing at you and
telling you you're an idiot
okay be yelling you down as a part of
the free speech process if you don't
like it it's when I have the government
put you in jail for speaking yeah yeah
yeah so but but that would be an
interesting discussion because I think
often times they are getting at
something else like that's their what
they're saying is their intuitive thing
but if you if you explored it with them
it'd be something that does get into the
whole conversation about deep
platforming which is interesting you
know someone's going to a university
should they be allowed to do that or you
know they're allowed to stand on their
street corner and say it so that would
be and then and then whether there's
allowed whether whether they're legally
like have a right to do it and then even
if they don't have a right to do it
should we still allow it even if they
disagree with us right so that's another
thing that's a separate debate the point
could be true and what could be false so
that would be that yeah that would be
another interesting topic great timely
one should JK Rowling be cancelled
that's what's the question he can go
through but but there's no evidence like
it's not it's all emotion right like
there is no scientific paper it's like I
feel very strongly this way or I feel
very strongly this way there is no it's
like you can disagree with the thing and
not have work like is there so many
broad like the matrix of whether you
agree or disagree is itself very complex
and do we cancel women for lesser acts
than we canceled in that was actually
what came up for me this week and I it's
like I think we do but I don't know the
evidence right so is it just my feeling
or is it so have we been doing
as opposed to should we I mean I guess
your summation but have we been yeah
that might be going back go back to we
need to do a study on that not not that
we have to run an experiment but someone
needs to sit down classify what is a
cancellation what are the and then take
maybe a random sampling happy's in it so
that does I think get into a I'd be
interesting to talk to someone who said
we say we don't because I often find we
have higher expectations for how women
and people of color speak in general but
yeah whether there's evidence that there
might be studies I mean there has been
studies showing that women tend to get
on after up with more in meetings than
men so you could use that as evidence to
say well we can just kind of there's a
there's a high chance that that
correlates to social media right but so
that would be interesting to look to see
if there are any studies on that but a
lot of things like that and what reasons
for kind of leads me to is often what
it's great to kind of know whether
that's true or not but really what what
are what are we getting at when we're
exploring that issue we're we're trying
there's some sort of reaction it's like
should we then think twice before
canceling women that because we know
that there's a bias what's the action
what's the conclusion of that being true
that what's the action we'll want to
take and let's kind of debate that
action rather than whether this fact is
true yeah cos n it becomes the office I
think you're like well we're not gonna
cancel women when they say anything
because we know that we're biased
against them so then we never cancel
them and it goes the opposite way right
and it's like okay let's not look at it
let's look at the actual thing that was
said and do we cancel that we're not
based on this I do wonder how you handle
the opposite side of that which is I
think it's true that we probably do
cancel women and people of color easier
for sort of smaller infractions but I
think
also men people are more likely to
believe claims against them without
evidence it's like you know Johnny Depp
was a good example ever hurts a sense
has something about you turn it up great
you're canceled your movies cancelled
you're gone forever
and then the recordings come out were
like Oh turns out maybe that's not what
happened and then nothing really came
out of that like then finding out that
she was lying and you to me at least
that sounds like it's kind of two sides
of the same coin like how how are the
various groups treated in trying to
figure out if they should be cancelled
or not yeah when really I guess in that
whole situation is I would like to write
up a more objective way to determine
when we should so I'd have a proposal
saying we should cancel people win X
situation occurs and then that would
also that would help with both of that
canceling too much too little because
then it's not such so subjective it's
more objective of course once you have
stuff like that people will game it but
yeah it's probably better than in this
kind of group it kind of encourages mob
mentality when you don't have any sort
of guidelines and they don't have to be
rules I think it'd be guidelines and
people can point to it say well in this
situation you know I probably wouldn't
cancel this person because here's the
guidelines right do you have like a list
of sort of the higher level either the
questions asked about the topics or like
the different categories they fit in cuz
I found it like throw us trying to find
out where it was you seem to know it
quite well right like oh well that you
have to figure out the definition know
what this you has to do that you have a
roadmap for that part of it is that
might help figure out what we could talk
about couldn't talk about and sort of
where you have gaps in like oh this is a
cool topic but there there's nothing
there like many examples no so yeah
that's a good thing maybe we should do a
blog post on what makes a good reason
score or debate because yeah that I was
thinking too secondly well that all kind
of comes out in the debate but then I
keep thinking oh yeah I've been kind of
pooh-poohing ideas
let's throw out this whole thing and
maybe be easier if I would come up with
here's here's the the narrow topic type
that I think would be useful so yeah
I'll make the I'll put that on on a
to-do list and although a lot of times
I'm making it too narrow and I really
just need to play with it so I need to
stop being so over optimizing I know
habit one of the hard things that I have
to sort of come to grips with with wiki
election is when trying to solve
problems understanding that some
problems will be in that we don't have
enough information state right now and
like being okay with that because that's
actually the truth right now we don't
have enough information if that's the
answer
cool then we need more information but
right now you can sort of say you know
both sides are a bit right in a bit
wrong cuz there's parts but we just
don't know enough and that's that's
still very valuable because then all
these people kind of yelling about it on
social media you can tell them well you
know this we you you don't have enough
information to make that conclusion you
can keep tanked saying it but I I'm just
gonna ignore you now and move on to
other things because this one might be
too timely because it's gonna pop out of
existence at any point but the chazz
autonomous region in Seattle because
here Kirra just posted something that
you are going to commenting on that was
like whichever one you want that news to
be pay attention to the opposite right
so if you're a socialist utopian pay
attention to the like the ones that are
saying it's falling apart if you're the
one who's like it's falling apart it's a
nerd kids I'm pay attention to this
openly pick your bias be concerned what
your bias but I thought that was it
because there's what's actually
happening and all of that's happening
right but even if it pops out of
existence
what was it right and what was that
actually looking like what did it was
there a spark of something that could
have been bigger I don't know the
question is to say hey should there be a
Chazz should it exist should this happen
in more other locations cause my cell
phone
I think news poses an interesting
challenge for for a reason score because
if it's meant to be sort of like here's
what we know that's really hard whip
with news now because there's so many
different like we can't even agree
what's happening in the world and like
did this person die or not like what
happened and that yeah I mean at least
and the at least we'll know we don't
know but but yeah yeah yeah yeah and
that's part of the problem what reasons
course trying to fix is that this kind
of give us that what kind of agree at
least on what we do what's knowable
right I'm gonna leave you guys to this
and go and deal with some life stuff and
I'll see you later yeah yeah so I'll
make a blog post about that and in the
past I've posted some topics or actually
you can go to pro/con Oregon almost any
of those well I mean with some change
that's if it's still up there recently
bought by somebody I can't remember I
think this is the one that I yeah I are
checking this feed before it I just want
to see so it seemed like for her then
they always tried to keep the number of
points even mm-hm
which oh I wasn't a big fan up yeah it's
kind of cool though it's a good proof of
concept for what we're both working on
yeah yeah and actually the CEO from
pro/con dot org I have a friend who's
talking to him about some future work in
the debate space okay so to be
interesting
yeah yes so the top thing is the 20 20
euro selection right yeah so really
almost any of these would work if I
could find two people that were
relatively polite and we're willing to
work with a tool in beta right and I'm
thinking the best process would be to do
it like a game so each person gets two
moves before the other person does and
do it like that yeah I think that's got
more more pull to it to get people
interested what would happen there like
if the other side sort of didn't have
anything to add but the other other side
did right like so I go you go I go you
go I go
and then you add yours and I have any
more to add but you still have ten more
things well I think at the time you
don't have anything to add the score
theoretically should be for the other
person so if you don't have anything to
add then you have to kind of concede the
debate at that point because you may
intuitively think you may intuitively
feel that's wrong and the thing is well
come back to us when you have more info
but until now you have some facts the
other person will quote wins and then
you just have to find but usually though
we yeah so that's that's the goal is to
get it down to where someone has nothing
bad yeah that's the success it worked
[Laughter]
and it seems to out are actually facts
as improving documented facts well you
can that's kind of where liens but there
are times where you're also talking
about logic like that doesn't apply
because of X
and also you can put in things like well
there's a chance that X might happen so
if like we're talking about the disease
the the the pandemic you know three
months ago it's like well we don't know
the are number we don't know how fast
this transmits in it's like well in that
case maybe we should social distance
because we don't know so that's not like
links to a study or anything like that
that's just kind of like a logical
conclusion statement that then people
can pro/con and say well you know let's
wait for the data to come out because it
will run our economy and the other
person is like well by the time you have
the data if it is a high our number
because it grows exponentially it's too
late and a substantial percentage of
people will die
so that yeah it's not always facts but
we certainly encourage fact-based stuff
and and the other thing is no factors
ever really proven I guess it's proven
but a study doesn't prove effect because
people then come in and say why that
study was wrong and stuff like that but
they all have a certain probability of
accuracy right yeah I think with with
all of this and it's something that I
think people will have a hard time
grasping is it's not that we're saying
what's like 100 percent true it's what
seems to be most likely to be true based
on the current information available
yeah which is a mouthful and doesn't
give you a lot of confidence for like
that's what we're actually saying here
because people who make sweeping
generalizations bug this is 100 percent
true probably aren't pushing that on
evidence they're just saying that
because that's their side and that's how
they talk yes I think I'll do that blog
post then I'll probably link to Pro
condone or because I actually none of
these are phrased properly well let's
see but there it's a good starting point
for ideas I guess it's like even like
the homework one is homework beneficial
which really that's not the question the
question is
how much how long has been official and
what kind I guess I guess if you if
someone might be arguing if someone
wants to argue that any work outside the
classroom is detrimental then you can
that could be a debate yes so like even
the like they're pro one homework
improve student achievement and con one
is too much homework can be harmful well
those are not opposites yeah true that
can be the both of those can very much
be true at the same time yeah
and it's also like improved student
achievement okay but if you structured
your education around making it prove
that homework is useful like I was
terrible at doing homework and actually
doing so with that I still did okay and
tests I think you know everyone is
different it's the whole like trying to
teach a fish to climb a tree think yeah
yeah interesting yes that's where I took
a look at this site because it did have
some similarities to wiki lection where
I was trying to sort of compare like
apples to apples in that same kind of a
grid and then I saw some of them that
like when I've seen other people talk
about it it's a very one-sided debate
like one side has a thousand things to
talk about and the other one has like
two that it refuses to let get proven
wrong and then they had them like with
like three or four points each and I'm
like that it's not a representative of
what this this debate actually is yeah
yeah and I I thought it was great when I
first saw that I thought about yeah it's
kind of um yeah it's a bit misleading it
really seems to lead you to I don't know
despair because every point you look at
it's like well those are some good
points those are some bad points on one
side and then those are some good signs
those so bad points on the outside it's
like my brain can't I can't do anything
with this information it just leaves me
to believe that no one knows the truth
right and yeah on every issue you're
like oh we know nothing great right like
that one thing that you were scared
about with reason score there's a whole
psyche based on that like we don't know
yeah yeah so I found it kind of
in recent score might be the same way
might be like we don't have over 10
percent confidence in anything like oh
sorry although a lot of times if you're
talking about should we do this proposal
or not it's like well if it's one
percent better than the other side then
let's do it right yeah yeah and there
are some things luck you mentioned with
the pandemic thing we're like okay
there's the like what's happening well
there's all there's almost a pre
conversation with okay what is the level
of confidence like what are the numbers
that we need to see to say that one
thing wins over another because you know
if there if it has a certain like
infection rate then when we actually are
able to prove it it's gonna be way too
late and like my whole thing with with
global warming it's like it's pretty
easy to say whoops turns out you know
these parts weren't right okay let's
scale back up these industries as
opposed to it's hard to undo that yeah
and so like I haven't done a bunch of
research the the sign these science
leaving people I know it doesn't seem
that two-sided of a conversation but but
even just that pre conversation of what
are sort of the outcomes like what are
the risks involved and how much would
one side need to win over the other for
it to actually be like oh it's or even
you know we may still want to lead them
in one directional for another or at
least say you know ones like business
and one's personal health so however you
lean you know that's sort of the key
issues and yeah I've been thinking like
right now if it's between well right now
it goes from plus 100 to -100 so if it's
if it's like from minus 5 to +5 then I
have that whole range is undecided but
later it there may not be only if it's
like right in the middle would it be
undecided and that's like well maybe
true or slightly true would be helpful
yeah could be spaceflight
do we need it and oh it's too broad so
that differently
should we spend public money on speck
this light should be that to pry the
space to be privatized I've seen a lot
of debates on this one because of SpaceX
and Dragon and the booming private space
business so there are lots of arguments
and seen actually all that debate on on
the subject would be cool yeah that
would be really good one I guess there's
several debates in that area like yes
should we allow private corporations to
liftoff which I guess right now in the
United States they do have to have
permission from the government I think
internationally if you have a rocket
leaving the other atmosphere
I think there's I think you have to get
approval from some international body
right now yeah what are they gonna do
about it your jurisdiction now in space
a really gonna shoot me down it was fun
is interesting watching one of the Mars
things because right now no one can own
anything outside of the earth by
international treaty now not all
countries have signed that treaty and of
course if you if you're if you're a
space pirate flying out in space you
don't belong to any of the countries
that you know if you're your own country
you didn't sign anything but but the
other countries could come and wipe you
off the face of what our planet you land
on right but yeah yeah that so it'd be
interesting to narrow down those topics
I'd have to see the debates to see what
people are actually arguing about like
are they saying that no privatized
company should have the ability to
create a full rocket right in order to
prevent companies from being able to go
out in space or are they afraid of you
know companies owning asteroids and
stuff like that and so yeah it's best
what - get down - yeah really the the
more specific the better
we got about five more minutes I
appreciate everyone talking about reason
score anything any closing thoughts or
topics or anyone want to promote
anything in Marty so you're working on
another project in addition to
Adrienne's right and that's private
right now you have it you're not talking
about it
oh it's it's a project that I had in my
mind for like 25 years no longer
something and it mutated over the time
until recently I found that it has
something to do with mind mapping and
general mapping of stuff and yeah it has
discussions with the mapping people
again in general from game B and from
the brain as well the VRA I mean which
was very cool and very interesting and
some other people as well and yeah
fortunately for me the thing I'm working
on is slightly different from anything
else so I'm going to try very hard to
actually finish the prototype and show
it to ya and then it is something that I
am going probably I'm going to use for
my own making sense of my own salts any
information because you said something
that get like this before that you had
thoughts about other projects and you
found that if you only had reasons core
ready it will be easier for you to do
some other stuff a couple of meetings
ago so there
saying we with this I have lots of links
and information and knowledge pointers
to knowledge on specific topics that
would be very good so I put in order and
see connections between and make a like
seeing the big picture in one place and
in on one one screen
yeah it sounds like fundamental
technologies that maybe you should call
it since tech like sense making but it's
a core and the hardest thing about that
type of functionality is it cuz it does
so much people can't wrap their mind
around it and then people really need
you know if you're out trying to market
it you need a specific use case that
people can wrap their mind around and I
my problem with reason scoring you might
have this with yours as well as that is
it's hard for me to focus down on a
single use case because I hate doing
that but you're not even it but yeah if
you find something useful and I know
lots of people that would be interested
in seeing that if you looked in the
space you probably also have heard of
Jerry from Jerry's brain Jerry Michael
yeah he's awesome
and he's doing it Davey talked to him
about the new project he's doing the new
[Music]
yeah I'll send you links so but when you
get that prototype we'd love to have you
in the canonical debate lab just show it
off because they're always interested in
mapping tech even if it's not exactly
the argument stuff we're doing yeah we
hope to show it as soon as I fix the
last block in the problem all right so
it to James James we like some time ago
when it was much less read in and it is
now and this feedback was so
[Music]
great okay well I guess we're gonna go
ahead and finish up this call Hardy are
youtubing Facebook