[Music]
hi there welcome to the first of and new
series of videos I'm gonna be doing I'm
calling it the red pill I'm calling it
the red pill after the matrix I think
like most people I love the matrix when
it came out or what an awesome idea
you know creepy scary but what I did not
appreciate at the time was just how
accurate an allegory it was for the
world that we actually live in have you
ever had a dream neo that you were so
sure was real what if we were able to
wake from that dream how would you know
the difference between the dream world
and the real I wonder if they've you
have ever had a realization so profound
and so shocking that you actually feel
it physically you know the world shits
beneath your feet the ground is beneath
your feet and you'll dropped into you
know a whole different reality well
that's what I experienced a year or so
ago
this can be one
be real
[Music]
let's go into arrest lock I got him now
thanks now
[Music]
and when I did so I realized at the same
time that actually I'd always known this
I'd always known that there was
something deeply wrong with our society
and the way that we've done things and I
believe that all of us carry this
knowledge around and they did it they
did it you know it's a spike in our
brain that it bugs us all the time and
ultimately it leads to so much of the
damaging stuff we see in society
addiction and many other things which
I'll get to but if you believe that each
of us knows if you look honestly into
your heart and honesty and truthfully
into yourself that each and every one of
us realizes that there's something very
wrong and that we just don't really know
what it is let me tell you why you're
here you're here because you know
something what you know you can't
explain what you feel it you felt it
your entire life that there's something
wrong with the world you don't know what
it is but it's there like a splinter in
your mind driving you mad it is this
feeling that has brought you to me and
so what I'm hoping to do with these is
to lay out not that I'm an expert or
anything but to lay out as I see it what
it is that's wrong what you know the
matrix if you like how the matrix has
been constructed do you know what I'm
talking about
the matrix do you want to know what it
is at the very heart of the matrix for
me lies the idea of authority at some
point along the way we accepted the idea
that rulers whatever they may be
Emperor's Kings governments whatever or
whatever they may be that rulers have
authority over us that they have somehow
the right to tell us what to do
The Matrix is everywhere it is all
around us even now in this very room you
can see it when you look out your window
or when you turn on your television you
can feel it when you go to work when you
go to church when you pay your taxes it
is the world that has been pulled over
your eyes to blind you from the truth
and by giving our consent and following
their rules we willingly enter the
matrix but actually the truth is that we
are free to exit at any time you know
change we can I hate truly be bound by
the trains that we refuse to see the
German author and philosopher Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe once wrote that none
are so hopelessly enslaved as those who
falsely believed themselves to be free
and it is the greatest deception that
has been perpetrated on us is the
perception that we are free and self
determinate and when in reality we have
very very little freedom is free within
the very narrow constraints that our
masters are happy for us to wander in
but you know you try doing something you
know out there a little bit and you see
how for you actually all you know you go
and try and plot up in a forest
somewhere and decide you want to live
there you know the landowners they're
going to kick you off in a letter you
know live violently on common land
you know you try educating your own
children try saying I don't want my
children to see GCSE war much of the
Citadel's I think it's pointless I'm
going to educate amidst what I think is
valuable you know you see how free you
are when you actually step outside of
that which the ruling
dictate for us you know and then I see
her for you actually are there you are a
slave neo like everyone else you were
born into bondage born into a prison
that you cannot smell or taste or touch
a prison for your mind the fact is that
we are born free in this world
jean-jacques Rousseau wrote that man is
born free yet everywhere he is in Chains
and when we come into this world
completely free but immediately I start
having constraints placed upon us and
you know it's reasonable in any society
that you have certain constraints placed
on your behavior you're not absolutely
unlimited in what you can do but those
constraints should be based on simple
natural laws you know not causing harm
or loss to other people and being honest
and forthright in your dealings with
others you know and beyond that nobody
should have the right to tell you what
to do if you will be respectful of your
surroundings and of other people and
nobody to be able to tell you what you
can and can't do but somewhere along the
way we had our freedom taken from us or
more accurately we would tricked into
giving our freedom away and that there's
a very clever con the world we live in
is a complete lie of fabrication which
is based on money based on power
conflict and fear and which is a holy
odds of the true nature of reality which
is harmony symbiotic interdependence
oneness and above all love but this
fundamental truth has been obfuscated
and has been concealed from us and
overlaid with a false construct this
corporate state machine apparatus that
we're that we're all living as a part of
and which in a very very real sense in
slaves as it takes away from us our
labor it takes our time it takes our
love it takes our creativity
it sucks our very life force from us and
turns us into nothing more than simple
production consumption units what is the
matrix control
The Matrix is a computer-generated dream
world built to keep us under control in
order to change a human being into this
and because we've been duped into
thinking that we are free musters
dunedin seek freedom any points that of
those opposed to say most of us can't
even conceive of what actual freedom is
anymore
that's how profoundly conned we've been
unfortunately no one can be told what
the matrix is you have to see it for
yourself
this is your last chance after this
there is no turning back
you take the blue pill the story ends
you wake up in your bed and believe
whatever you want to believe you take
the red pill you stay in Wonderland and
I show you how deep the rabbit-hole goes
remember all I'm offering is the truth
nothing more but each of us is
responsible for our own freedom each of
us has to find it for ourselves and the
first step feeling freedom is to first
see the trains that bind you and that is
what I'm trying to do here so that's
about it for this I hope you will take
the red pill and join me for future ones
of these I'm going to be doing quite a
few of them over the next hour along and
I'm going to cover a wide for a broad
variety of topics and the next one is
going to be on money or possibly the
next two are going to be on mind is such
a huge topic in in it feeds almost all
of the other tendrils but money is but
one aspect of a huge octopus with
tendrils in all aspects of our lives
we're going to look at the media and the
way that they propagate fear and
misinformation and propaganda in look at
the educational system the way it's used
to indoctrinate and and encourage
obedience so that we listen and do as
we're told and don't challenge too much
I'm going to look at the military and
the police and how they have been
misused and abused and so that they are
no longer doing what they're supposed to
do the police no longer uphold the law
of the land the military are no longer
fighting for you know the king and
country both both of these organizations
are now fighting for keeping corporate
and political rules you know Dineen
they're not actually fighting for the
people anymore and then the false flag
has false flag operations you know
things like 9/11 things are the Kennedy
assassination things like the Gulf of
Tonkin you know all of these lies that
we've been told Iraq you know all of
these lies that we've been total in the
years and I'm hoping that I will be able
to create a picture of a completely
false paradigm that we've all been
sucked into and it's not real the
reality is that we are all one and we
are all one love and that's all there is
to it and we to treat each other in any
other way is a contravention of natural
law and it's as simple as that but many
many many aspects this so not something
I can cover all
one video this is just an introduction
to the series but as I say the next one
is going to be on money and I will
produce that over the next few days I
can't promise exactly how long I'm new
to this it takes it's taking hours and
hours to do it but yeah if you like this
if you find it informative and easy to
watch then please share them spread the
word that is the most important thing
that's why I'm doing this is to try and
get the idea out there because knowledge
is power I know it's an old Nexus an old
almost all systemic cliche but cliches
are cliches because they're true right
and being armed against the matrix is
understanding what the matrix is and how
it works and if you understand what it
is and how it works you can to a
reasonable degree free yourself from it
I mean it's impossible for any of us to
be completely free of it but you can do
what you can and the more of us that are
freer of it the faster it comes down and
we can build something more resembling
an actual human society in its stead so
thanks for watching and I'll see you
next time
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
you
[Music]