it's just to have an answer why are we
here what's the purpose of humanity what
am i a part of - I think we need an
overarching story to animate the stories
that give meaning to life like what is
ownership what is capital what is money
these are all functions of collective
agreements so to me that the real
question is is what agreements shall we
have - that define money and property
not should it be public or should it be
private it's what what are the
agreements that are consistent with the
world that we want to live in
welcome to the collective insights
podcast where we explore topics and
technologies revolutionizing human
well-being Charles Eisenstein joins
Daniel schmock Tim Berger for this
episode to explore the many facets of
the global issues were facing and
discuss what it will take to heal
ourselves our environment and our
civilization Charles is a speaker and a
writer focusing on themes of human
culture and identity he is the author of
several books most recently sacred
economics and the more beautiful world
our hearts know as possible stay tuned
as Charles and Daniel explore hard
opening questions like what does it mean
to exist how do we heal from our
addictive need to consume and how can we
stop fighting each other thank you for
joining us for this amazing discussion
so hello everyone welcome to the
collective insights podcast my name is
Daniel I am delighted to be here with
Charles Eisenstein Charles is a friend a
really insightful thinker and brilliant
educator on many of the issues that are
most critical and that I care about the
most regarding humanity writ large he's
the author of a number of really
exceptional books most famously I
believe is sacred economics which is a
fantastic place to start if you want the
footnotes version there's a wonderful
like 15 minutes video that was produced
on sacred economics that is it
a good introduction beyond this to some
of the ideas there you had a book called
the ascent of humanity and recently
wrote a book on climate change and it's
called climate a new story and in a way
it's about issues associated with
climate change but it is also in some
ways inclusive of many of the deepest
thoughts throughout much of his work to
date and so I'm excited for us to dive
in on this topic and he's sharing an
alternate narrative about how we
approach climate change to the standard
environmental narrative that is as a
deep ecologist and yeah I'm excited to
dive in Charles thanks for being here
yeah I'm excited also so climate change
is has become almost as polarizing a
topic as like gay marriage or abortion
in terms of how radically different
political left and right views on it are
and you are bringing about a view in the
book that is none of the standard
narratives and while discussing the the
perspectives of both what people would
call climate denial and kind of standard
narrative climate change can you just
share for people who haven't read the
book kind of high-level overview what is
your what is your primary thesis on
climate change how we think about it how
we approach it how we could or might
want to approach it differently yeah
what's the what's the kind of entry
point yeah there's a few a few different
entry points I could talk about you're
right in saying that it's not not only
is it not the left narrative or the
right narrative but it's also not
compromise between those two narratives
but really off the spectrum because you
mentioned a polarization what I find to
be true in any polarized issue is that
the key to resolving it or to
understanding it even lies in the things
that both sides in
listen agree on without knowing it and
on the questions that nobody's bothered
to ask so in the book I'm offering a
different framework a different
viewpoint I call it I guess one way to
talk about it is from the living Earth
perspective the living Earth paradigm
which recognizes that the planet is a
living being that the forests the oceans
the rivers the water the elephants even
the whales the Wolves the salmon the
seagrass Meadows the mangrove swamps
especially the Amazon the Congo these
are all organs of a living being and
that means that if we even if we cut
carbon emissions to zero and install
giant carbon sucking machines in every
city and go into negative emissions if
we continue to destroy these organs then
the planet will die of organ failure
whether or not that goes along with
rising temperatures so it it offers a it
could even be a bypass in a good way a
bypass of entrenched political positions
they say actually you don't have to
believe in greenhouse gas gas induced
global warming to still be opposed to
say seismic testing seismic surveys of
the ocean floor to the drill for oil and
gas because it's deafening the whales
and killing the whales and and causing
mass plankton die-off and those are even
if you're completely and this is another
perspective I'm offering in the book an
invitation away from instrumental
utilitarianism that values nature for
its service to ourselves and holds it
yeah holds it valuable only in what it
can provide to us and instead to say so
it's not just that the planet will die
and bad things will happen to uh
if we continue our ways but it's also
calling on our innate Biophilia like
suppose bad things don't happen to us if
we commit ecocide suppose we could
produce a future where he live in bubble
cities and all of nature is dead and we
grow that in foods and food and vats you
know and and we regulate the atmospheric
composition with machines and we have
high-definition VR experiences of the
nature that's been lost like suppose we
could do that do we want to or are the
beings of nature valuable in and of
themselves as objects worthy of love and
that connects back to the liminal from
going on too long here but that connects
back to the living earth paradigm
because it's totally irrational and
delusional to love something that's not
even alive or something that's not a
being so like so like this kind of
practical level or or utilitarian level
of we better respect the organs of gaia
or the planet will die and the heart
level of we love these beings let's hold
them as sacred these these two are
intimately entwined these two levels so
that the paradigm shift is both a shift
of our mental perspective and
understanding and also a shift into a
different heart relationship with the
rest of life
okay so just even in that brief
introduction you touched on a lot of
topics I want to get deeper into the the
inadequacy of utilitarian ethics and
what love means beyond that and the
problem of over focusing on a few simple
metrics and living earth rather than
kind of geomechanical earth so let's
take them one at a time okay
so I think a lot of people who would
identify as caring about climate change
and maybe identify as environmentalists
would say yes climate change is one of
many environmental issues there's plenty
of other environmental issues species
extinction pollution but this is such a
large and pressing issue that focusing
on it doesn't automatically mean we
won't have all the other problems but it
does need deep focus within a timeline
and so can you kind of respond to are
you just saying climate change and other
stuff are you saying something other
than that yeah I'm saying something
other than that I'm arguing for a
reordering of our priorities because I
think and this is where I get into
trouble this is where I deviate from the
conventional narrative I am not so
convinced that we understand the climate
and the biosphere in general very well I
think that our quantitative models are
inadequate and that the critiques of the
skeptics who actually are deniers in a
certain sense I could go into that later
like they're more hostile to what I'm
saying than environmentalists then
climate activists are but I think that
some of their critiques have merit and
especially the critique of science as an
institution I am skeptical of a lot of
what scientific Authority says or what
scientific convention holds is true it
is you know due to problems with
peer-review academic publication this
kind of collective confirmation bias
that that it's not that I don't think
that greenhouse gases are day
but the narrative that puts them front
and center and equates environmentalism
to greenhouse gases I don't trust that
especially because it's it's so
comfortably in our society's customary
ways of tackling problems it fits so
comfortably into an accounting mindset
where you have a carbon budget and you
you add a little here you subtract a
little there you evaluate policies based
on metrics you find a one cause of
everything so I can go into more like
all the different reasons why I distrust
that narrative there's also my
interaction with indigenous people and
their worldview that they cite very
different reasons why the climate is
becoming deranged so okay so that's one
thing I don't blindly trust scientific
Authority or scientific consensus okay
anything I just want to say something
before you continue for people listening
I want you to notice if you just if you
I want you to notice as we go if you
have reactions and notice if you might
have certain kinds of confirmation bias
notice if you're running in group out
group type modeling where you just said
oh he said that earth is a living thing
and he has problem with science he is a
pseudoscience hippie and you know he's
not part of our kind of like science is
the way of making sense of the world in
group or now he is part of our in-group
because he's denying climate change
which is awesome so we don't have the
environmentalist cause problems to the
economy just kind of notice if you're
flipping between existing sense-making
scripts and trying to then say okay he
he probably didn't do a good job of
studying the research and he's doing an
irresponsible thing right now you you
might not know until we get further what
the degree of actual research into the
science and literature that he's done is
and so I just want you to notice because
we're actually going to be exploring
very deep things here Charles in the
book writes about problems of the
philosophy of science not as wrong but
as inadequate
and of academic process and of political
process and of economics writ large so
we're gonna be addressing all kinds of
like sacred cows here so just buckle up
and be ready for that yeah yeah like we
decide is this guy on you know our
sliders he on their side well it's kind
of hard to say cuz it seems like he
really cares about the environment and
but but he's denying climate change
which I'm not actually what I'm saying
is that I don't know for sure but what
do I know for sure I had this
interesting interchange with a um
climate activists recently who just you
know in a public forum he just you know
excoriated me as being a threat to the
planet because I'm minimizing the
urgency of cutting greenhouse gases and
I said actually as far as practical
policies we agree on almost everything
like from a living Earth perspective and
from us from a perspective of reverence
for the living beings that we call soil
that we call a river an estuary etc etc
a forest
well I'm opposed to fracking that
pollutes and insults the water I'm
opposed to offshore oil drilling I mean
look at the oil spills due to marine
life I'm opposed to mountaintop removal
tar sands excavation pipelines down the
line every single thing but what so so
functionally the living earth
perspective also means drastic
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions
the result would be the same or even
better and this goes into the issue of
what actually is greenhouse gas
emissions a symptom of how do you
actually change it is it what are the
underlying conditions that generate
endless consumption endless economic
growth endless growth in the use of
energy like if we want to change change
the expression we have to look at the
route so yeah
okay so before we get into the root of
what drives some of the things that
cause climate change and related issues
I don't I don't think anyone has I don't
think most people are clear of what
alternate narratives on the cause of
environmental issues is it seems like
flooding and wildfires and coral die-off
are pretty obvious signs that that's
that the main thing that we should focus
on
so can you offer some alternate
perspectives that are compelling for you
as to how you examine those yeah the
first thing I would say is to be wary of
a single cause like an explanation for
for everything that appeals to one thing
that is so comforting for us that's what
we are comfortable with because then
there's an enemy that we can address so
like what about cancer I mean for
decades they've been trying to find a
virus if it were only a virus then we
would have something to kill or a gene
then we would have something to alter
something to control this mindset of
find the enemy or find the cause extends
to politics extends to criminal justice
the recent terror medicine yeah so so
and it also is part of the mentality of
money which is the one thing that will
solve all your problems
if only I had this one thing so the the
unitary means to the universal and I
guess you could say or the universal
means so that said that's my disclaimer
so then I would look for a matrix of
causes that that maybe don't distinguish
all the time between what's a cause and
what's in effect what's a symptom was a
cause as far as sir lists so like I
don't have a one thing but I could talk
about a few things I think the biggest
one is the water cycle I think that if
we focus on a substance as the most
important thing to it
change our relationship to it would be
water and not carbon so a lot of what is
ordinarily blamed on global warming I
think is actually due to disruptions in
the hydrological cycle through
deforestation and what I call soil abuse
which basically means plowing exposing
air soil destroy but also destroying the
microbiota of the soil destroying the
earthworms destroying the ecosystems
that that interact with soil and keep it
alive and intact and able to absorb rain
in a healthy ecosystem there's almost no
runoff everything soaks into the earth
into the soil or down to the aquifers
and then trees and deep-rooted grasses
and then some grasses have roots that go
like 10 20 30 feet
they transpire the water long after the
rainy season has passed and they say so
they extend the rainy season they
stimulate the formation of clouds
through their volatile compounds through
their there through even bacteria that
live in the plants that seed the
formation of clouds because they
nucleate ice on them I mean it's super
super complicated but you cut down the
forests and the rain stopped coming
not to mention so not only do they they
recycle water back into the air and then
it rains again and they keep the rain
going but they also bring in water from
the oceans because when this huge amount
of moisture evaporates and then
condenses the condensation creates a
low-pressure zone that creates what they
call a biotic pump that's responsible
for the flying rivers of Brazil that
that just draws in moisture Laden air
from the oceans into the continental
interiors so but you get the sense of
Earth essence as a physiology there's a
physiology here so you cut down the
forest
where you destroy the soils ability to
soak in the water and you have flooding
because there's no sponge anymore where
you fill in the wetlands that's another
big one you have flooding and then after
the flooding there's no water in the
water table or in the soil so you have
droughts and rather than indict our
agricultural practices our development -
the whole ideology of development of the
whole relationship to the land boy it
would be a lot easier just to install
some carbon sucking machines everywhere
do a little bit of of geoengineering and
continuous business continue business as
normal which is often what is meant by
sustainability like what do we want to
sustain here and I think that in a way
the carbon narrative is more friendly -
at least superficially more friendly to
the status quo because it suggests that
we can just come up with some other
fuels and essentially continue business
as usual and I think I guess I'm arguing
for a deeper radicalism that says no no
no what needs to change is our entire
relationship and way of seeing the earth
to hold every place every bio region
every every ecosystem every species as
important valuable and even sacred
nothing less is going to bring health -
to this earth so when you started with
the hydrological cycle someone could
have almost got excited for a minute
that you were shifting the focus from
carbon to water but they're still kind
of one thing to pay attention to but
then of course what you said about the
hydrological cycle wasn't actually
addressing water directly it was
addressing plants and soil man hugs and
etc so when you say water you're really
paying attention to a cycle that depends
on a lot of things other than water
right including carbon I mean the things
that that improve the hydrological cycle
are also things that improve this so
and which also happened to sequester a
lot of carbon so if you want to look at
it through the carbon like it's not that
the water the water paradigm is inimical
to the carbon paradigm they're they're
deeply intimately connected and that's
why there's actually a lot of overlap
with with you know say the drawdown
perspective which puts regenerative
agriculture pretty high on the on the
list so what you know you're talking
about understanding flooding and then
understanding droughts and correspondent
lis wildfires as not just a result of
greenhouse gas based climate change what
about I mean what about ocean
acidification and coral yeah here again
I don't know let's let's start with that
I don't know but I am when I when I look
at the ocean as alive and want to
understand its physiology then I look at
things like maybe there's many
perspectives one would be the
perspective of fish and whales I read
one paper that said that 50% of layer
mixing in the ocean is generated by the
kinetic mixing effects of fish and
whales and and just marine life in
general like life contributes as much as
wind and geomechanical currents to the
mixing of ocean layers as as as don't
member the beginning of that sense but
you get the picture like life is really
important to bringing the cold
nutrient-rich water to the surface and
you know you remove keystone species
like the I mean populations of sharks of
bluefin tuna like the big predators
orcas sperm whales I mean these these
the populations of these creatures have
precipitously declined due mostly to
overfishing and to commercial whaling so
these organs of the ocean aren't
functioning anymore so of course things
are gonna go awry of course the all
systems will become less resilient I
mean that the trophic cascades you know
that it's that start when you remove all
of the workers or you edge the ocean
with drift nets like these these who
knows what kind of effects that they
produce and again I'm not saying that
like I'm not denying that higher
atmospheric carbon dioxide contributes
to ocean acidification but also you know
like if you I was some of the literature
I read was just about the incredible
abundance of wildlife before
colonization you know you had like in
the Chesapeake Bay for example just
massive quantities of shellfish just
just like unbelievable amounts you had a
stirs that were a foot long a foot
across you know so that wife was
removing vast amounts of carbon in the
form of calcium carbonate from from the
water and and when you have healthy
nutrient transport you have kelp beds
that that alkalis the water and then you
have the shelf there's feeding on you
know the different fish and shellfish
feeding on the kelp and sequestering
where fish even excrete calcium
carbonate as well like you have a
physiology that's functioning so I think
that I mean basically my perspective is
that greenhouse gases are putting
additional stress on a seriously
weakened physiology so I'm not saying
that they're no problem that they're not
a problem but I think that if we had if
we you know we had resilient robust
ecosystems if we hadn't destroyed half
of the mangrove swamps in the world and
eighty percent of the secret
meadows and and have 2/3 of the rain
forests etc etc etc down the line then
Atmos like changes in greenhouse gases
would not be much of a problem and I'm
not even like I could go more like as
far as these cup of causes of ecological
degradation toxic pollution
pharmaceutical pollution pesticide
pollution and we've doused the entire
land surface almost with pesticides for
90 years I mean what does that do to
insect life to to bacterial life to the
mycelial networks and then there's the
electromagnetic pollution
I've just been starting to look into
some stuff around 5g and you know what
that does to humans but also what is it
due to insects yeah so this is a this is
a really good point when you mention
kind of Ubiquiti pesticide use and you
know even even things that aren't
intended aspetta sides that end up being
pesticides like glyphosate which is
intended as an herbicide but it's also
an antibiotic and an anti-parasitic
which also means NT bug and you look at
the graphs of the usage in tonnes per
year and then you look at the
correlation of species extinction of
flying insects there pollinators and
there's strong correlation and this is a
good example of like you know 50 percent
of die-off of flying insects in the last
decade is more concerning to me as an
ecological crisis than atmospheric co2
levels and so one of the things that you
bring up is hey what that doesn't get
that much attention because we're saying
all the environmental attention has to
be funneled into carbon sequestration or
you know cap-and-trade on missions and
so not only might there be more critical
environmental issues that are going but
the approach to climate change won't
even work because to the degree that
animals are actually serving a role in
the carbon cycle or the hydrological
cycle that there's a deeper process
you mentioned the topic of trophic
cascades and I just want to say anyone
who hasn't studied trophic cascades the
classic example that made this famous
was the Yellowstone wolves and just go
to youtube and check out the video how
wolves change rivers it's mind-blowing
how a single keystone species the top of
a predatory ecosystem ends up changing
the whole ecological niche and so the
reintroduction of wolves not only
increased all of the species but because
of the way that the trees stabilized the
soil it changed the actual hydrology of
the space the river dynamics so now when
Charles is talking about what we have
done to large fish species in the ocean
and you start to get a sense of like oh
yeah there's no there's very little
whales left and if the whales are
bringing nutrient-rich water and then
coming up to the photic Renee and
defecating and that's a part of what
allows for the kelp blooms that are part
of what supports the coral you're just
not and and also even if you look at the
hydrologic cycle and you say how it's
not just water going into the atmosphere
but it is bacteria they didn't up being
a part of cloud seeding it's not even
like we can say okay well let's study
nature better to then find a couple more
active metrics rather than one let's
let's make three metrics and try not as
for those its what is it how does a
complex self-organizing system actually
self organize and how do we support that
as opposed to things that it's broken
and override it yeah that's that's very
well said I came across another good
example of trophic cascades in a
conversation with Brock Dolman who Lisa
he co-founded the Occidental arts
educational center what's it called
exactly anyway he was he was describing
the effect of dams on creating forest
fires because the dams prevent the
salmon from
coming upstream so the salmon are no
longer available for the Bears and the
Eagles to eat so the Bears and the
Eagles are no longer defecating
nutrients from the ocean into the
forests so the forests which he says
some of them isotopic analysis says that
half of their nitrogen is coming from
the ocean so the forest now become less
resilient and more susceptible to forest
fire so like how do you encompass that
in a metric and then of course they're
gonna release carbon dioxide and no
longer hold and then once they burn no
longer holding down the soil so the soil
oxidizes and runs off and cetera etc
okay
so how are you going to encompass that
in your metrics it's almost impossible
to the metrics as far as dams go they
give dams a carbon positive you know
they allow the generation of electricity
without fossil fuels so dams are of
benefit in the existing metrics so the
metrics based mind wants to extend the
metrics and say well let's take into
account the methane from the areas
inundated by the dams and balance that
off with it like you can extend the
metrics to some point but how are you
going to extend it to the salmon or
beavers or wolves or whales because the
the their effects are so diffuse through
the ecosystem through the highly
nonlinear cycles of cause and effect
like you can't you can't do that and the
delusion that you can that gets to one
of the deeper metaphysical principles of
science that that or maybe it's more of
a well it starts with a metaphysical
principle that that the whole world can
be reduced to number and is therefore if
you ignore chaos theory that is
therefore amenable to prediction and
control and that the improvement of the
human estate depends on improving our
ability to measure and control
everything and that we are
becoming better and better at that and
that yeah that progress consists of
extending our measures to a greater and
greater area but in practice what
happens is that the things that you
can't measure you just don't bother to
measure and they get left out even if
they turn out to be more important than
the things you do measure or you decide
not to measure the things that are going
to harm your personal economic
self-interest or that of the
institution's you're working for it's
very convenient to leave certain things
out if they harm your profits so forgive
me for being a little bit cynical but I
think that yeah it's not just a matter
of including more in our metrics thereby
preserving our quantitative
decision-making processes but it's
really - and it's not - Anna it's not to
abandon the quantitative method it's not
to abandon science it's not to ignore
those things but it is to put those
methods and that way of seeing the world
in its proper place we could talk full
soft forget about that but but yeah yeah
okay so people who have listened to this
podcast historically you'll recognize it
what Charles is talking about is
something we've talked about quite a lot
and particularly in the area of health
care and because setting a body which is
obviously a living self-organizing
complex system is a really good way to
pay attention to this we try and reduce
health to some small set of metrics we
end up doing things like saying okay
we're gonna pay attention to your
cholesterol to your low-density
lipoprotein and then we're gonna give
you a statin to lower it and it actually
worked and yet it increases liver
toxicity and neurotoxicity and a number
of other things so the question is can I
sink of low density lipoprotein or LDL
HDL ratio or whatever increased metric
complexity I try to look at as an
adequate measure for health B
because I in that statin approach
pharmaceutical approach in general we're
not asking well what else is going on
associated with the LDL being high what
is what are the underlying causal
factors maybe it's not only one maybe
there's a number of them why is the body
not self-regulating as well as it used
to how do we support its own
self-regulation nope the numbers too
high we're gonna give something external
to lower it without paying attention to
what else that might have been a symptom
of and now the fact that we just made
the regulatory system weaker and
dependent on that intervention yeah
perfect example like so it's so
congruent to what we're doing to the
environment like like yeah like you
extend the metrics further and further
and then you look at well who benefits
from those metrics and who benefits from
the entire metrics based approach the
entire approach of find a number find a
thing that you can control obviously
it's the purveyors of technologies of
control ie the pharmaceutical industry
it's like they're really happy if you
can find a biological marker that in a
confusion of cause and effect they can
identify as the cause and then you you
take that sucker down you know you
reduce those levels
problem solved and like you were saying
you know in the training in C yeah so
first it was cholesterol right just
cholesterol levels and then it was LDLs
and then it was something else and the
whole time higher levels of cholesterol
that could just be a symptom of like
chronic inflammation cause perhaps by
the very unsaturated fatty acids that
are were being prescribed as beneficial
you get into a morass where you don't
know you can't find one thing that
causes it so yeah I think it's really so
let's play with this example so let's
say we look at the pharmaceutical
approach so we have a regulatory system
where the FDA says in or
for a doctor to use something to treat a
disease first we have to diagnose the
disease and agree upon disease diagnosis
process we're treating disease right
we're not promoting health us first kind
of thing and then we have to have an FDA
approved process to treat the disease
and so then the drug or whatever it is
has to go through FDA approval and the
process of doing that is an expensive
process right I got to do phase 3
clinical trials I custom most of a
billion dollars sometimes more than that
and where does the money come from to do
that well it comes from patenting a
molecule that I'll be able to because of
the patent cell for a price much higher
than if I didn't patent didn't there
could be competition on it once I had
invested all the research and it makes
sense if I'm doing a billion dollars
with the research to get it through so
I'm only gonna study patentable
molecules then we look in patent law and
we say well we can't patent molecules
that occur in the body naturally or the
environment naturally synthetic ones so
I'm not gonna look at what was happening
in the body differently when it was
young and healthy or things in the
environment that we co evolved it I'm
going to look at synthetic there
was never part of a healthy human being
or a healthy environment because it's
the only stuff that I can patent that I
can make the money back on to get to the
FDA trials you say ok there's nobody's
fault actually I'm actually not the
pharma companies it's a system that is
oriented in a way to do a fame and there
is actually like so I want to say I want
to study inner bro I want to study diet
I can't get it through FDA approval
because there's no we're gonna get a
billion dollars from for something I'll
never be able to make money back on well
I can sell the herb but everybody can
sell the urban undercut my price because
they didn't put the billion dollars up
upfront right so then we now we're
starting to look at okay well that's and
then we say even deeper we say well it's
also the fact that the high cholesterol
didn't necessarily have one cause it
might have been partially inflammation
from eight different things it might
have been mycotoxins affecting the
vascular system it might have been so
now we recognize that inadequacy of the
epistemic approach to medicine mm-hm
so now we just said our underlying
epistemic approach and our regulatory
systems and our fiscal incentive systems
and our patent law
are all part of the problem and so what
is the solution well that that's kind of
like a deep civilization restructure
that is necessary because it's all those
things now that's a pretty obvious
example because most people don't have a
hard time thinking about the body as a
living interconnected system now as we
start to look at the plan and say well
it's actually pretty interconnected
whether someone takes the metaphysics of
it is living or not we just say it's
very interconnected we'll get to the
living part in a moment and it is
self-organizing actually ecosystems are
self-organizing and so we get that
distinction of complex versus
complicated right that there isn't there
isn't an external blueprint that built
it like there is a laptop there is this
ongoing set of interacting generator
functions we really do need a different
way of approaching it writ large so what
you're bringing up here is there's
financial incentives associated with
what drives climate change and there's
regulatory issues and there's epistemic
issues that's right it goes all the way
to the bottom and it's actually no bad
guys fault right
it's not like the oil company's a bad
guy it's like economically can't do
something very different than they're
doing in the presence of anyone else who
would do that saying in the nature of
regulation and the nature of market
supply and demand right and and to like
I mean I would say I would I'd be in
favor of a carbon tax but I understand
that it's not going to work because we
have you know if you have a system that
constitutionally requires more and more
input of energy especially concentrated
portable energy like like oil and it's
like trying to go on a diet without
changing the underlying drivers of your
cravings it's like or if you're an
alcoholic and trying to quit cold-turkey
when nothing else has changed when the
trauma and the wounds and the pain that
you're medicating with the alcohol is
still there no amount of willpower is
going to be enough to stop yourself for
very long from drinking and the same
thing is true of our addiction to fossil
fuels so yes it doesn't it's a fool's
so this an interesting example if we
think about someone who's got a drug
addiction issue that is actually related
to numbing some pain they don't know how
to resolve and we see military veterans
come back running PTSD from their pain
or traumatic brain injury or whatever
and now they're they have an opioid
addiction and I'll call it that's right
so we can't just willpower them off of
it or shame them off of it there's
actual healing that needs to happen so
you're describing something like healing
that has to happen at the level of the
collective mm-hmm yeah and it's not
because it's not that those military
veterans are bad nor are there drug
dealers bad there there there are
functional necessity of the system
they're generated by the system they're
there it's it's unavoidable that you're
gonna have people playing that role so
yeah I mean that's the question how do
we how do we change the system and can
you repeat what you were your question
there ABS so how do you when you think
about the underlying healing that happen
and you know there's a reason that you
discuss story and narrative law but also
system so it sounds like one could take
what you're saying as oh that's a good
critique of the inadequacy of the carbon
tax approach with no good suggestion so
how do you approach how do you suggest
we actually approach acknowledging the
complexity of the issues yeah well so
there's there are different approaches
one is the on the level of narrative and
the others on the approach is the
approach of of of healing I would I
would call it and they're related but on
the level of narrative I think that too
you know as a replacement for the carbon
narrative it is the living Earth and
sacred earth narrative that also
corresponds to systems theoretic
thinking so the first so like I'm like
there's a chapter of the book that's
very very concrete says here's 17
priority 217 things we need to do and
then I've kind of condensed them into
four so number-one priority is to
preserve any pristine ecosystem that is
still left
especially the Amazon and the Congo as
long as they are intact there's still
hope because to use more woowoo
terminology
Gaia's memory of health resides in these
places they are biodiversity reservoirs
they're there the dream of the planet is
still intact there and health can
radiate out from these places as long as
they are still there so that's top
priority second priority is regeneration
so first conservation second
regeneration we which means
reforestation and regenerative
agriculture rebuilding soil restoring
wetlands undamaged using beavers and I
guess establishing marine sanctuaries
over at least half the ocean would be
necessary to yeah so that to strengthen
the planet on the organ and tissue level
and third priority has to do with the
pesticides the herbicides the toxic
waste electromagnetic pollution etc etc
and then number four is cut greenhouse
gases however that is already a side
effect of the first three you cannot
treat earth as sacred and continue to
develop fossil fuels so it is really
really practical but it still brings up
the same question how are we going to do
those things when we still have this
addictive need to consume and to
recognize then well then and then so to
ask the question where does this
addiction come from
I like to take the addiction metaphor
seriously and not to translate it into
just a vector of blame you know usually
when people talk about our addiction to
fossil fuels they say so in term and in
tones of disgust like oh we were just
addicted we're just addicted like
there's some self hatred there which is
just an internal internalization of the
search for them for an enemy which has
everything to do with the polarization
that we were talking about earlier I
mean this is all tied together in one
big tangle but yeah like yeah so to find
the bad guy that's not the solution that
is a false solution that is a diversion
from actually changing the circumstances
from which the bad behavior arises or
from which the addiction arises so you
know I think that I mean not to
oversimplify it but I think that you
could say that the driver of our
addictive consumptive society is
disconnection disconnection from place
from community just being alienated
looking outside and how many how many of
these trees do I actually recognize a
few hundred years ago pretty much anyone
would have been able to even in
wintertime name exactly which which tree
every single one of them was and the
qualities of the wood and what kind of
bird nests in that tree and what are the
seasonal habits of those birds and and
what kind of soil does that tree grow in
and what kind of other plants grow in
that soil like indigenous people can
still do this if they're you know truly
indigenous truly of a place and that and
to be alienated from all of that leaves
us so hungry so desperate to recover our
lost beingness which is a function of
relationship and this goes down to like
the you know ontological level like like
what is it to exist
is it just is existence a single
predicate no actually it is a
relationship it's a function of
relationship the more cut off we are
from relationships from intimacy to
place community nature etc the smaller
we are the less we exist and so this
hunger to exist to recover our lost
beingness that feeds consumptive habits
acquisition and the insecurities we get
from not belonging that feeds the quest
for a substitute which is money
investments now I feel that I'm okay
here but really what we need is to be
imprisoned in nature and community so I
think that and then there's also the
ideological level the ideological cutoff
from nature that says that yeah it's
just a bunch of stuff out there it's a
bunch of generic particles bouncing
around according to mathematical forces
there's no beingness there there's no
intelligence except what we impose upon
it we're alone here and I think that
ideology that ends that that charts out
the end point of of existence in that
ideology is that you grow old you fight
to survive as long as you can you suffer
more and more and then you're snuffed
out like a candle so there's a deep
anxiety built into the separate self and
and yeah no wonder we are so driven to
consume and so I think that also offers
a a through-line
to a healed future that says it's about
restoring our lost connections in our
perception in our narrative about the
world and then like really practically
in our systems like like how what kind
of systems could we have that we store
community that restore our connection to
place so it does get very very practical
and it's also philosophical ok so I want
to explore deeper the way you're
describing addiction because I thought
you were gonna and I think you would do
both I thought you're gonna describe
addiction at the kind of macro system
level of saying hey if by addiction we
mean some kind of repetitive compulsive
behavior of something that we know isn't
in our highest good buts can't seem to
stop then there's plenty of reasons at a
system dynamic level where you say like
okay the fact that we have a monetary
system that requires exponential growth
of monetary supply which to not debase
the currency requires increased goods
and services kind of fits that right
like a deep economic monetary structured
change but you went to the level of the
personal and the interpersonal which i
think is a critically interesting thing
had Tristan Harrison on this podcast not
long ago talking about the addiction
properties associate with Facebook and
smartphone use obviously they're getting
more back with us and worse than sugar
and opioids because sugar and opioids
don't get fully personalized to someone
psyche with real-time biometric feedback
and being able to hijack that social
connectivity impulse in a way that
actually drives more and more separation
mmm-hmm but the gist like I heard you
saying hey we're filling a void and like
Gobber Montes work on addiction is such
such beautiful work that the main cause
of addiction as he's looking at it and
again it's easy to want to say the main
cause of anything and be over reductive
so I'm not I'm not gonna do that but the
thing he's focused on is the main cause
of addiction statistically they notice
is loneliness and when people have deep
rich connectivity they heal better and
now we I'll put one more part of this
together now curious your thoughts on it
when we look at this going forward and
we look at the issue of existential risk
catastrophic risk associated with
exponential tech which is something
people heard me talk about here right
now we have the ability for
someone to go take an ar-15 and shoot up
a bunch of people right and whenever
that happens and they interview
afterwards the neighbors the neighbors
all say yeah we never saw him he kept to
himself he was a super quiet guy yeah we
have a society where he can progress in
psychopathology because he doesn't have
to interact with anyone he can use a
little money and go buy some food in the
store without making eye contact with
anyone and progress in psychopathology
then have access to something like an
ar-15
but with exponential tech that could be
access to much more stuff right - drone
Torme's - whatever
like how do you prevent that how do you
make a world that is resilient in the
presence of that well you can't have
shut-ins right so some people say well
we must have Ubiquiti surveillance well
that's already a failed structure if
it's big with surveillance of the state
but families and communities address the
need of surveillance but in a healthy
way which was through connectivity yeah
yeah so again I want to go two different
directions with that yeah please
I did want to go in the economic
direction and I think that there's a
link the idea that I like to define
addiction as the attempt to meet a need
with a substitute that doesn't actually
meet the need and because it doesn't
meet the need you need more and more and
more of it to temporarily quell the
longing and I think that on the societal
level we're trying to meet the need for
qualitative things with more and more
quantity and that ties into the economic
system because only things that can be
quantified can be easily denominated
with in money and if that gets a bit
complicated I mean obviously things that
are not better they're qualitative or
still bought and sold for money but the
anyway there's
there's a link there but what I would
really like to explore is Thea
the second thing that you were just
saying loneliness yeah and shut-ins
right yeah and and surveillance yeah so
it's it's similar to the mindset of our
metrics aren't working so let's fix the
problem with even more metrics so more
generally it's our technologies of of
control are not working so let's fix a
problem by extending the control even
further so you know we've had like so
you have school shooters you know and
it's like well I mean gosh we had our
our fence around the school we had our
surveillance system we had our metal
detectors we were locking every door and
the shooter still got in and we've been
surveilling with students you know and
the student and so it didn't work so
let's do even more of that whereas in
the 70s when I was in school we had open
campus in the high school like all the
doors were open to the community there
was none of that surveillance stuff
there were no dogs sniffing the schools
for weapons there were no cops in the
schools and there was even a shooting
club where the kids could like bring
their guns to school and like there was
a shooting club you know or they would
practice their target practice you know
like so it almost seems that that the
intensification of control actually
creates the conditions where you have
shooters it's like you take an explosive
force and you confine it in a smaller
and smaller container and what's gonna
happen eventually and when the explosion
happens you say well the container
wasn't strong enough so it's it's so
we're seeing something you you're just
bringing up that you hold an alternate
view on one of the other most polarizing
issues which is gun control and because
you just said we had more access to guns
and schools unless shooting
yeah I mean again that is a polarizing
issue and it's another issue in which
the key to the debate I think lies and
what neither side is talking about
I don't want detour into that because I
want to say one more thing okay we can't
wait no I'm wanting to detour not into
gun control but the topic of
polarization itself but finish
everywhere and we'll come back to it
yeah so so it like the surveillance and
you said this is what I fought a long
time there's with two paths in front of
us one is increasing government
surveillance over everyone and
everything and that's the pathway seem
to be going on but there's another path
which is increasing surveillance of
everybody um on everybody which is also
could be called increasing transparency
yeah right now we have increasing
transparency of the population to the
government you know there's also
possibilities like kind of hints of
another path which would be and and it
comes out in in like the videos of
police brutality and police shootings
like the government is in some ways
starting to become more transparent to
the people as well or through WikiLeaks
things like that if and so for me a
dystopian future is one where the
government total eise's its surveillance
and control over everybody and the other
is a utopian future in which everything
is transparent not to say that there's
no privacy or whatever but because
invasions of privacy would be
transparent to you know there's certain
you know realms and boundaries and
things but yeah like if the government
if every financial transaction were
transparent which blockchain technology
offers the possibility of if you can you
know attach a biological identity to a
wallet etc etc we can't go into that but
but like there's so there's another path
that where everything is if
if all Trent financial transactions were
transparent boy that would that would
change everything
if all government decision-making were
transparent if there were no secrets and
so there's a movement like there's
there's two movements in opposite
directions at the same time one is
toward greater secrecy and greater
control and and the weaponization of
narratives and the other is toward
greater transparency like we hold that
now in our relationships as an important
virtue to be transparent with each other
so yeah those are the two roads ahead of
us I think it's the bifurcation right
now the choice that we face and it's
like these two timelines that both
converge at the present and I want to do
what I can to strengthen the timeline
toward a more utopian future so it's
interesting when you're describing the
difference between transparency and
state-based surveillance a couple kind
of like underlying math ways of thinking
about it one has to do with increasing
symmetry and the other increasing
asymmetry of power because the
information becomes power and so if you
have one surveilling everybody and
radical asymmetry then you have a
situation that maximizes the opportunity
for power over dynamics but if you have
a situation of everyone being connected
to which includes having information
about everyone then you have a
many-to-many transaction rather than a
one-to-many type dynamic you have
cemetery rather than a cemetery and you
have decentralization of the information
processing rather than centralization
centralization is always going to lead
to capturing corruption and now this
brings up your point around restorative
or regenerative work because that is
actually regenerating elements of the
human ecology that used to exist more
like families and communities yeah
mm-hmm so I want to come to this
polarization topic because whether we're
talking about climate change or the
specifics of weather we do a
cap-and-trade system or I mean we just
started to critique capitalism itself
right and you we get some of the hottest
kinds of debates there or any of the
issues gun control nationalism we see a
movement to increasing polarization and
radicalization around almost everything
currently and decrease conversation
quality mm-hm and speak to that a little
bit because you're obviously addressing
that in a lot of areas facing that in a
lot of areas what do you what do you see
are some of the causes or system
dynamics that give rise to that yeah
gosh I think that polarization is
actually the biggest problem facing
civilization right now because if we
cannot come into coherence and stop
fighting each other we're never gonna be
a healing influence on the world when
the most important goal is to defeat the
enemy everything else becomes
subservient to that goal and you're not
gonna worry about the environmental
effects of bombing Iraq which were
horrendous because you gotta kill the
terrorists you know you gotta win so and
it's also a matter of priorities and
where do we put our energy I mean
imagine what we'd be able to do in
energy technologies if we took all of
the scientific talent that's devoted to
weapons and turned it toward energy
storage
you know batteries making better
batteries like I mean our problems would
be solved you know in five years it's we
can do anything we want we can create
any world we want if we put our
attention
into it and our imagination into it and
so much of it now it's siphoned into
diversions into fighting each other and
so yeah like like socialism versus
capitalism that's a good good one III
read left wing and right wing websites
and and some that are hard to tell if
they're right wing or left wing because
of the everything's turning upside down
now and the so-called liberals are
telling us to trust the CIA and and the
Conservatives used to be pro war or now
anyway it's getting all mixed up but
some of the libertarian anti-war
websites that I appreciate are also very
dismissive and contemptuous of socialism
and so there's this polarized socialism
versus capitalism and as usual look at
what are the hidden agreements and what
are the questions that are not asked
well one of them is what is capital what
is ownership capitalism is supposed to
be about private ownership socialism
about collective ownership well actually
this is always a continuum because to
own something is always a social
agreement it's not that it's that your
land or your car or anything is attached
to your body like what is ownership what
is capital what is money
these are all functions of collective
agreements so to me that the real
question is is what agreements shall we
have to that define money and property
not should it be public or should it be
private it's what what are the
agreements that are consistent with the
world that we want to live in and then
that leads to what capitalism another
way to put it is that cap that that the
nature and effect of capitalism depends
on the nature of capital
and how does capitalism change when
capital changes and this gets into the
some of the economic proposals I work
with to change the DNA of money so
anyway that's fear I veered off a little
bit but but yeah so as far as
polarization goes when the most
important thing becomes to win over the
enemy everything else gets sacrificed to
that including the truth because if you
say you get some new information about
something if you are in the mindset of
defeating the enemy then the first
filter that that information passes
through is not is it true but doesn't
serve the narrative so you're an
anti-trump and some you know the steel
dossier comes up and oh yeah you know
here's something we can use to attack
Donald Trump whether or not it's true
you don't if if it's something that it's
gonna harm Donald Trump and you're a
Donald Trump opponent then you're not
gonna scrutinize it too much
you're not gonna question that source
you're gonna tend to accept it even if
in the back of your mind you you know
that it's not really true you know that
it is as fan Jones put it a nothing
burger but you're still gonna use it and
you're still going to attack anybody who
who is skeptical of it because they
wouldn't be skeptical of it if they
weren't on the other side cuz you cannot
understand even if you're immersed in US
versus them you cannot understand
somebody having a different priority
which might be truth you can understand
your enemy very well because they're
operating in the same way you are and in
fact you depend on your enemy for your
own identity there are the bad guys
you're the good guys you need them in
order to maintain your identity as the
good guys what's much more threatening
than the enemy is the pacifist
in a time of war it's the person who
doesn't participate in the polarization
because they cast into doubt the very
premises of of your identity and your
sense of belonging and I think that one
reason for the polarization of our
society is the crisis in belonging and
the crisis in meaning as the modern
modernist you know modern in that sense
meaning making apparatus has fallen
apart and as the the promise of
technological society to create a utopia
like that whole narrative that's fallen
apart we don't know who we are anymore
and and and we don't and also yeah add
to that the dissolution of community and
civic culture and the intensifying
crisis of belonging that makes people
susceptible to these in-group out-group
dynamics because they're offered ah
here's a way you can belong here's a
meaning you can make of your life here's
the here's the way the world is so to
define ourselves in contrast to an enemy
that's like the most simplified form of
meaning-making that that is available to
us and yeah and so I agree with you that
it's really dangerous like this is
really disturbing because you said
something about how it simplifies the
dialogue or destroys the possibility of
conversation yeah
when truth is sacrificed when you're not
open to new information when every piece
of information is evaluated on is this
gonna help us win or not is it gonna
help make our narrative a better weapon
then of course there's no conversation
to be had yeah yeah so I actually want
to drill down here the most because when
you said the biggest issue facing
civilization is you call it polarization
you know this is another way of talking
about when I when I described rivalries
games and yep I rather escapes
necessarily cause harm to each other and
or the Commons and with exponential tech
exponential harm is
so like we either get this now or that's
the fork in the road our ability to
address any of the issues requires our
ability to sense make together
what addressing the issue would actually
mean and then our ability to choice make
together and if that's broken down then
failure of everything is eminent right
and so just as we unpack this a little
bit
the focus is winning against whoever the
other is and whether that is us versus
USSR or China or whatever or political
left versus right or our religion versus
the other or and then as it starts to
become about any specific issue right
those who are for or against a
particular proposition or who have a
particular stance on Me 2 or whatever it
is yeah
climate change obviously and then we go
to the movies or the TV and we look at
what we grew up with and almost every
single movie like unless it's maybe a
romantic comedy in which case it has
another bad mean and then we celebrate
when the bad guy gets it at the end like
that's the whole thing is there's a good
guy vs. a bad guy that built into the
structure of the hero's journey and we
all feel great rejoiced when we finally
killer her to that guy and we started
that celebration with hyper normal
stimuli as little children imprinting
being able to decouple our well-being
from someone else as so much and not
just decoupled but antique outlet mm-hm
and then we look at our relationship to
sports and we started training that we
want to be able to celebrate a lot when
somebody else loses and if I want people
who will go to war later because war
doesn't feel good I have to train people
to have an anti coupled sense of
identity with others and so we start to
look at what is a culture that grows up
with zero-sum sports and where all of
the movie memes are we win when the bad
guy gets it and when you start to look
at how Vic Watase this is it's really
profound yeah the programming is so deep
the movies yeah
the problem in the movie is that there's
this bad guy in the solution you should
kill the bad guy before you lock him up
it's it's almost ubiquitous it's almost
universal in in action movies very
rarely is there an exception to it and
usually the bad guy loses and and
everyone lives happily ever after except
Ian not what was it Avengers what was a
thing called God infinity Wars where guy
actually wins and then it's dystopian
yeah right but yeah it's it's deep deep
programming and then the hero's journey
as you mentioned which is about the
triumph of the heroic individual and you
picture of Luke Skywalker up there
getting his medal and you know that's
the end when actually the hero is a very
juvenile archetype in in in the lover
magician warrior king schema it is the
immature form of the warrior so very
very far from being the king which does
not seek glory for himself but it's so
secure in his place in the world and so
sovereign that he wants to Olivia other
people and treat conditions for other
people to rise to their sovereignty like
anyway okay so this is interesting
now we connect when you said earlier the
addiction to consumption being partly
related to disconnection mm-hmm so the
disconnection is I'm particularly
susceptible to hyper normal stimuli
whether it's cocaine sugar porn whatever
when I live in a hypo normal stimuli
environment where I not connected to
people and trees in place and and most
everybody notices that when they go to
Burning Man or
or whatever they aren't checking
Facebook as feverishly as they normally
do because they're around people right
right and so now you're talking about
the immature hero's journey where I'm
seeking identity on the outside and now
we start to look at polarization and the
way that identity is tied to in group
dynamics in-group out-group dynamics and
all right so we're lonely we're seeking
to belong and now I belong by sharing
the world view of a particular in-group
and that that group is people who are
actually very very different but they
cohere and their other Ness to an out
group right and then everybody
normalizes their thinking to whatever
the center of the standard narrative of
the in-group is right yeah yeah and
everybody believes that that they're on
team good and that serving the good of
humanity
and if that's true then anything that
you do to gain more power is justified
George Orwell had very very acute
commentary on this when he described I
don't know how well you remember 1984
but there's so he talks about power and
doublethink and that the party on the
one hand unapologetically or that's not
the right word um they have no delusion
that they seek anything other than power
but its first own sake and at the same
time they hold the contradicted belief
that they only want power temporarily in
order to produce the perfect society
so the result
those two things is that they have no
hesitation in doing whatever it takes to
gain more and more power interestingly
the opposition to the party which in the
end turns out to be just an organ of the
party but that's called the Brotherhood
has the same ideology there's this
really famous scene this really famous
passage where where Winston the main
character is being recruited to the
Brotherhood or he thinks he is he's
actually being entrapped and O'Brien the
inner party member asks him I have had
the passage here alumni yeah he says he
says you were prepared to commit murder
yes to commit acts of sabotage which may
cause the death of hundreds of innocent
people yes to betray your country to
foreign powers yes you are prepared to
cheat to Forge to blackmail to corrupt
the minds of children etc etc he goes on
yes yes yes and he's revealed thereby to
actually have the same mindset as the
party I will do whatever it takes to
gain to overthrow the party and and so
this to me is like this distilled
version of what's happening with the
weaponization of narratives where and
sometimes I get the sense that that the
talking heads in the pundits don't
actually believe what they're saying on
some level but they have to pretend to
believe and that pretense has to even
fool themselves so that they can exhibit
genuine indignation at somebody who is
contradicting their narrative even
though they actually on some level agree
with that person so the silver can I
read another little passage from Orwell
it's just so delicious yeah yeah it's
it's like a textbook ah
example of doublethink and I think that
that like we all recognize the brook is
so prophetic to tell deliberate lies
while genuinely believing in them to
forget any fact that is becoming
convenient and then when it becomes
necessary again to draw it back from
oblivion for just so long as it is
needed to deny the existence of
objective reality and all the while to
take account of the reality which one
denies all of this is indispensably
necessary and it goes on to know and not
to know to be conscious of complete
truthfulness while telling carefully
constructed lies to hold simultaneously
two opinions which cancelled out knowing
them to be contradictory and believing
in both of them okay anyway I could go
on but but um it just gives me chills
that someone could be so so prophetic
well this is not a new phenomena right
if we go back to the court of Versailles
and the way the politic dynamics worked
with Louie the fourteenth or we go back
to the Roman Empire the Egyptian Empire
like this is kind of the history of
Empire it's the history of control
structure one way of thinking about it
is up to the size of a tribe up to the
Dunbar number which was almost all of
human history everyone can know everyone
be connected to everyone and all be part
of a conversation that's going to create
a decision that affects their life and
so the group would always cleave when it
would get larger than that because
nobody if they if the group gets so
large we can't all be part of it a
conversation then a decision will be
made that will affect my life that I
don't get a say in so in remembering be
part of a small group and so the only
thing that ended up leading to or one
way of looking at what led to humans
doing groups larger than that where they
were willing to give up some freedoms
was this seemed need
for security because tribal warfare
started the other tribe was bigger they
were gonna kill us unless we fused with
another tribe and now we start the
process of being held together by
out-group identity driving an in-group
identity beyond actual connectivity and
this was Machiavelli's enemy hypothesis
right people are tribal mm-hmm they're
gonna separate into small little tribes
that get along well where they have
enough power and influence in the system
and the only way to get the tribes to
unite is having a larger external enemy
than they are with each other and I
think one of the things that you're
trying to do is to say we don't need an
enemy to unify we need to come in
something it doesn't have to be a common
enemy it can be a common sense of shared
values and narrative and
interconnectivity which is a pole vector
rather than a push vector on a basis for
yeah just to have an answer why are we
here what's the purpose of humanity what
am i a part of - I think we need an
overarching story to derive or animate I
would say to animate the stories that
give meaning to life and we had that a
century ago when when you could aspire
to be a captain of industry and
participate in the conquest of nature
like that was a good thing then the
conquest of nature was celebrated we had
a unifying story as a civilization
certainly not all the planet
participated in that story were agreed
with it but the dominant Society had
that story and we do not have one now
and I guess what I'm proposing and not
certainly not me alone proposing but but
the story I would say that wants to be
born now is a story of we're here to
heal the damage that's been done to
earth and then to participate in the
unfolding of the
dream of the planet in partnership with
a living earth that feels pretty
exciting to me and I think even without
that story being fully conscious alot of
people are already gravitating toward
that like the really intelligent dynamic
young people that I know they are
generally speaking way more interested
in you know permaculture design rather
than nuclear engineering or rocket
science maybe I have a you know self
selected data set here but I don't know
forgive me for being optimistic so if we
come back to how easy in-group out-group
and identification is that it is
necessarily destructive that we you know
I'll actually construct this a tiny bit
I don't remember who won founding
fathers had a statement that was
something like voting is we've discussed
this voting is the death of democracy
because the key insight into a democracy
working well was actually the quality of
conversation that happened in the Town
Hall and it was only if we couldn't have
a good enough conversation that led to a
synergistic satisfier for everyone that
we were stuck with a boat and but we
don't even have that conversational
process to say can we collectively sense
make the choice we have here and what
are all the values that matter what are
all the pieces of data that mattered
that every different sense maker has a
novel perspective on and what would a
good proposition even be we go straight
to here's a proposition that some very
limited percentage of the population who
didn't have all the values and all the
data clear made and then we get this
binary choice of yes or no in the
proposition the proposition is always
based on a theory of trade-offs because
in benefiting that one thing if prop aid
goes through it'll damage other things
which is why everybody doesn't vote for
it
and now so the process of voting itself
ends up being necessarily polarizing
right and the idea that we go straight
to choice making before sense making
what a good choice would even be is kind
of ridiculous and you know like that's
what we think of civic engagement which
is actually a form of frame control
right but now rather than those of us
who want the proposition versus those of
you who don't want the proposition being
able to work together to what a good
proposition would be we need to spend
most of our time fighting each other
because you're the bad guy because I
want the proposition to go through that
allows better jobs cuz my kids can't
 get jobs right now and you want
to protect the damn owls and the
proposition is structured in such a way
that if you get what you want for the
house my kids can't eat and if I get
what-what I want the nature that sacred
to you dies but it was just because of a
shitty proposition where had we done a
better job of trying to say what's
meaningful to everyone can we craft a
better synergistic satisfier we'd
probably come up with things right yeah
certainly because if that's the choice
presented to us then
then there's it's inevitable that people
will cleave into opposing camps when the
and and prevent that from happening like
you say there has to be a conversation
that transcends that setup it's a setup
you know it's a polarizing setup and
looks at well what is the nature of the
system that constantly asks us to
sacrifice nature for the sake of jobs
and does it have to be that way and is
there another kind of system that place
can only be reached through a
conversation where each side is willing
to let go of some of their
preconceptions some of their identity
with their opinions conversation is the
only way to get there and a conversation
that isn't debate a lot of what passes
for conversation is or with the
political system holds as a conversation
is a debate you know the presidential
candidates they don't have a
conversation to have a debate which side
wins and
debate doesn't get you to anywhere new
all it does is help one side win over
the other for for a conversation to
happen genuine conversation there has to
be some degree of humility or
non-attachment
to an opinion you've identified with
where at least awareness that you've
identified with an opinion and you
actually wish that people would study
this part of American history and
Western history of like so the when you
think of the founding fathers setting
the country up there's obviously plenty
that retrospectively we can criticize
about that but the meaningful advance in
social structures that did occur there
occurred because those people were
products of the Enlightenment they were
all people that were studied in
economics and ecology and agriculture
and natural philosophy and the sciences
and they were all trained in dialectic
and you'd see the letters that they
would write to each other and there were
these like profoundly thoughtful nuanced
respectful types of letters and the
nature of the conversation and so they
would have a conversation where they
would actually listen and learn from
each other Rachele collective sense
making was happening and they made a
system that works for people like them
and this is why they said we've given
you a republic if you can keep it and
education and civics have to be the
center of keeping it because if you
don't really engage in the conversation
and civics then you are consenting to be
governed by those who will to power
which is exactly what happens and if you
go back to where all of the knowledge
was generated in the Greeks it was again
because of the orientation towards
quality of conversation and dialectic
and so you say we have to have real
conversation that doesn't just mean
conversation with people that already
hold the same views as you think
reinforce your cognitive bias yep so how
so how we changed the system writ large
is a big topic
you already said what the for kind of
pillars for environmental focus you'd
like the world to be focused on when I
think they're actually very good for
pillars but on this topic of
polarization and sense making what are
some things that just listeners can
start to implement to move in the
direction of addressing those issues at
least in their own life and locally yeah
I think one thing that's useful is to
start noticing our own tendencies to to
engage in this kind of debate in this
kind of will to dominate the other to be
right to notice to like to become aware
of our own cognitive biases of our own
confirmation bias for example like do
you if you read something that disagrees
with you how do you deal with that are
you open to being wrong or are you gonna
find some way to demonstrate that you've
been right all along most people are
gonna like like this came up oh my god
what was it oh yeah I mean here talk
about a polarizing issue the Mago teen
you know in his confrontation with that
Native American guy and like you know
then there's this and there's this video
that shows that there's a little bit
more to the story and then you know and
then I just looked at I just looked at a
little bit of this on Facebook or
whatever and then this guy says but that
video came from this notorious
right-wing propaganda site so shouldn't
pay attention to that yeah like find
some way to exclude data points that
don't fit into your narrative but do you
do that and if so why why is it
important like I think that in order for
us to be catalyzers of a different kind
of conversation we have to
bhadiya embody and exemplify it
ourselves then it becomes infectious
because if you approach somebody with a
willingness to listen a willingness to
be wrong willingness to learn that
itself is an anomalous data point mm-hmm
because you don't encounter that very
much and so it's an invitation for
somebody else to join you in that
because people are defensive especially
people who have a strong intellectual
attachment to their opinions in other
words educated people people feel maybe
because an attack on your opinion is an
attack on you if you're identified with
it and if it's part of you being in team
in team good and right and good so it is
a peace offering to tell listen to
somebody and an invitation into peace
okay you actually said something there
that addresses one of the reasons why
this is hard so he said notice our own
confirmation bias and seek to get more
earnest seek to be willing to listen and
inquire and learn new things and and
update our views which looks like saying
hey I was wrong or at least incomplete
about that yeah and separate our
identity from our views so that our
views can change and we don't take
personal ego offense now one of the when
you said identity connected to team
right in-group identity structure I am a
trump supporter I am a trump hate or
whatever it is
now the in-group out-group dynamics do a
good job of keeping people from leaving
through social pressure that says you're
either with us or against us yep and so
if you're willing to engage in listening
to the people on the other side at all
you're not with us you're against us and
you just lost all your friends yep even
to listen to the other side is an act of
betrayal yeah and so you now get
villainized
and you know let's let
say that you're willing to hear
perspectives of scientists that don't
think climate changes mostly from
anthropogenic co2 and is a major issue
or whatever it is if you're even willing
to listen to that you are a direct
threat to what matters most to all life
and survival right right and so what can
you say to the courage it takes or how
you process the loss of identity and
in-group in a place where propaganda
narrative warfare is ubiquitous yeah
where does that courage come from I
don't know
I think courage comes from the
experience of unconditional love if I
have experienced that I'm loved for
myself and not because I meet some kind
of qualification then I'm not risking as
much by violating social norms or norms
of a particular in-group I have a
solidity in myself that that it's like
yeah okay I don't care that much fun
rejected but I don't want to trivialize
it in that way it's it's I mean there
can be real consequences toward I mean
there's certain opinions that I have or
even not opinions that I have even
certain like you were saying like even
to countenance the the possibility that
there's a valid alternative viewpoint
um there are certain issues where if I
do that publicly
I could lose half my audience yeah like
I don't even want to name them but I
don't know maybe I will because like I
just have this kind of attitude
I like mature if it's a good thing but
you know if I say if I said hey vaccines
like there's validity to some of the
criticisms of vaccines or climate change
or so so since you did it you just you
just went to maybe the most polarized
issue in a particular perspective there
is that I say something about the
inadequacy of the epistemic process
that's connected to this so anti-vaxxer
is a word that is designed to bring as
much kind of negative sentiment as
possible that someone must have
shit-for-brains to right like believe
conspiracy theories and nonsense and
they don't know science and they want to
damage the herd immunity and have
everyone get smallpox and you know and
yet that's why I'm anti backs and plan
this thing's so ignorant of actually I'm
not gonna say I'm anti Beck's I'm just
saying okay right so then you've got the
other side that says no the vaccines are
exclusively created to mind-control the
whole population by the evil Pharma deep
state complex as part of their eugenics
plan or whatever the it is right
and so we can see like ridiculous
polarization and but then we say wait
are all of the scientific
events develop nations in the world
today all of the identical vaccine
schedule no they don't have an identical
vaccine schedule so that must mean that
earnest regulators in Denmark and in
Japan and in different places it
associated with earnest doctors and
researchers said the conclusion that say
the u.s. came up with is not the only
conclusion on the topic all right well
that's interesting and then to even say
vaccine as one thing to say like okay
the smallpox vaccine and the flu vaccine
and the Gardasil vaccine or however or
I'm against all vaccines versus some or
at what times are at what load and you
can see that like when I've looked into
this topic and I haven't looked into it
deeply enough I'm pretty sure that I
would come to a very nuanced complex
view that doesn't fit into any of the
norming views like if you have the
marisol that is mercury based in it and
you don't need it in and their problems
associate with that you get it out the
same vaccine might not be as problematic
if someone has genetics that orient
themselves towards th1 th2 imbalances if
we look at how many shots happen at once
or which type of shots and so to even
make it I'm Pro or against vaccine means
that you just had to stop thinking right
but to introduce thinking into it um
will harm the narrative of both sides
right nobody is gonna welcome what
you're saying and so I can I can refute
you easily what you said is very logical
but I can refute you by saying four legs
good two legs bad four legs good two
legs bad conversation is over yeah yeah
so this is now here's one of the big
points in polarization that I'm very
like is maybe the most concerning thing
to me is if I look at a town hall in the
early phase of this country or I look at
a Greek dialectic they were long
conversations yeah they were not short
conversations and there was a lot of
updated view on every one side there was
a lot of nuance
perspectives that ended up mattering and
if I look at the bit size the small bit
size that increasing hyper normals
stimuli decreased attention span allows
I cannot put a nuanced perspective in a
tweet right or in a snapchat or and so
the the movement towards me and I'm
going to get more clicks if it hi Jax
your limbic nervous system more right
and so there is a kind of platform based
disposition towards more and more
inflammatory shorter and shorter pieces
of information which will automatically
move everyone towards radicalization of
every view it'll make the left more
radically left to right more ethically
right and everybody's stupider right so
yeah there's more pissed off right and
as you say it's built into the platform
and in the incentive structures of the
platform and also programmed again into
children in a very young age as as
children's cartoons and and programming
and movies thanks to technology have
become more and more fragmented you know
one intense stimuli after another after
another one intense stimulus after
another after another after another a
rapid montage of intense scenes where
the future of the universe is at stake
every two minutes they used to be really
expensive to make programs like that
only advertising had such a rapid
transition from one attention in
grabbing there's a technical word for it
they get keys into the orientation
response where it's like a deep
neurological principle that if something
new comes into your environment you
better pay attention to that could be a
leopard right and so you hold attention
by presenting one new thing after
another after another every one to two
seconds
and then the attention span atrophies
and people become cognitively unable to
even hold attention for long enough to
absorb and integrate a nuanced view okay
you just said you just said it in a very
interesting way you said it atrophies
and they become unable this is from
 key right which is I I have to
work out to gain muscle I have to keep
working out to maintain the muscle I
don't have to do anything to lose muscle
right and basically hormesis the the
nature of adaptive systems to need to
continue to be stressed to maintain an
adaptive response to it this applies to
cognitive and emotional capacities as
much as it does to muscle and so if I
don't if I don't lift an amount of
weight where I feel it in my muscle that
means I'm not up regulating new choice
anthesis if I don't engage my attention
span long enough that it takes working
to engage it my attention span will be
decreasing by entropy yeah so if you
want to work out read something
published in the 19th century yeah
the paragraphs are longer the sentences
are longer it's like it's hard to
understand it you have to really work
but it will make you smarter
the other way to become smarter is to
not be so attached to being right
because if you're attached to being
right then you're not going to think you
fault and the old thoughts aware deeper
and deeper rot in your brain I'm sure
there's probably a neuroscience
equivalent to what I'm saying there's a
there's actually just a very simple TED
talk that a lady gave put it in the show
notes later it was called something like
on being wrong she went into the Steve
study on the human psychology related to
being wrong to give a short TED talk is
really adorable but she started by
saying what does it feel like to be
wrong and everyone said like shameful
embarrassment ever and she's like no
that's what it feels like to realize you
were wrong what it feels like to be
wrong before you realize it is what it
feels like to be right
and but even more right well this is the
thing is so interesting when we look
back at previous cultures we say oh like
most of the things previous people
believed we nothing to be wrong and many
of the things I believe 10 years ago I'm
sure wrong now and most of the things
other people believe I'm pretty sure
wrong but I can't say a single thing
that I think I'm wrong about right now
yeah that's terrible because
statistically I'm probably wrong about
almost everything right now even to my
own future self yeah and I would I would
so like that knowledge and that humility
and the willingness to say maybe what
I've believed is wrong I would sure like
that to to be embodied on the collective
level because so much of what our
civilization is convinced is right about
the world
I think it's wrong and it hasn't
produced very good results you know I
think maybe what what brings people to
humility I don't know if there's
anything other than humiliation that
that brings maybe that's why it's called
humiliation and I think that perhaps our
society is going through the humiliation
of collapse of our aspirations and our
pretenses to to create a better world
through the technologies of control no
there is something else that creates
humility thinking well creates humility
this is actually it's very interesting
because if I think well I can start to
enumerate all the things that I'm aware
that I don't know rightly the known
unknown set is very large and I can be
aware that the unknown unknown said is
even larger
and when I start to study nature and the
complexity of it and so this is where
like Carl Sagan would talk about the
humility that comes from studying
astronomy and the size of the universe
yeah you would see this kind of radical
humility that Einstein had and like most
of people who studied nature and thought
thought well they recognized that the
sphere of what they knew as it was
increasing that the unknown unknown that
they didn't even know that they didn't
know stuff about is moving into the
known unknown there there's more stuff
that they know they wish they knew that
they don't know than they did previously
yeah and and so there's a humility
that's possible just by recognizing how
easy it is to believe you're right well
being wrong looking at how much you
don't know
studying the complexity of nature
experiencing all at the complexity of it
imagining if you had to manage the
metabolic processes of a single cell in
your body consciously yeah totally they
used to be like these metabolic Maps you
know like these little flow charts of
cellular metabolism and now it would
take like you know a fine print poster
covering like three walls to include all
of that that's central ions
yeah that's my office those metabolic
charts oh really yeah because there's
and they're so read they're so
oversimplified for what it really is and
still so complex and so beautiful
well I was talking not just you know
because some people might interpret what
you're saying as simply well there are
facts that our way of knowing has not
discovered yet so there's a lot we don't
know but we know how to know and when
I'm suggesting also says that our ways
of knowing have built-in limitations and
are insufficient to discovering the
things we really need to know right now
and our ways of knowing come from our
metaphysics again I would say that if we
if we are really endeavoring to think
well what you real
lies to their which is that their upper
limits on our epistemic capacity people
recognize right like girdles and
completeness theorem is something that
if you're a mathematician
you're not saying eventually we'll know
all math no actually we'll never know
all math that's an upper boundary on the
know ability of math itself if you study
Heisenberg's and determinism I can't
actually know position and momentum
simultaneously for fundamental reasons
or Bell's Theorem on locality and
mechanism like the highest principles
and almost all these disciplines are
actually limits on the knowable we just
don't like to pay attention to that as
much because the stuff that we know we
can control reality with and get
adaptive advantage from mmm-hmm yeah
well it would be fun to talk to you more
about Goodell's theorem I that was my
area of study in college and I went
pretty deep into it but I feel like now
it's not the time for that like there's
long like there's something you said
like well yeah but there's like there be
interesting that would be fun to do
sometime I agree that would be fun okay
so I would also like to go into why
virial and post-modernism is not the
answer to excess of certainty and what a
mature relationship to certainty and
uncertainty is that neither villainize
is uncertainty nor villainize a
certainty but that's also a long a kind
of long deep topic so we've we've got
plenty of things we can flag for a
future conversation yeah as we wrap up
here for time reasons what are some
things just the people can do to
increase the quality of their sense
making in the current world we've
already said some of them but I kind of
want to like leave people with some
clarity yeah
what are some of the main ones you pick
well
I hope that just listening to our
conversation might have caused some
gears to start turning I think that you
know what you and I are saying doesn't
fit into existing polarized narratives
and is also hard to dismiss as being the
result of having shit-for-brains
you know like there's there's something
that that I mean I guess you could just
make a story about how we're you know
idiots and delusional and stuff but
think just that data point it's like a
pinprick in the veil and there's light
coming in from the outside no I don't
want to like you know inflate our our
intelligence or our conversation but but
I think as people here hear information
and and alternative sense making that
comes from a place unfamiliar to them
like there's there's a sense of of
invitation of freshness because I think
that more and more people are really
impatient and frustrated with the
structures the conceptual structures
that that have been offered them that
that have been indoctrinated or that
they've been indoctrinated with and I
think to trust that frustration would be
a good step and to validate that and
just end and that feeling like there's
something I have not been told here
there are new thoughts that are wanting
to come and to give attention to your
willingness to engage those thoughts
to the willingness to have been wrong to
have that realization the willingness to
let go of your identification with
dearly held viewpoints to notice how
those have become part of an identity to
feel the wound of separation the trauma
of of alienation of having been cut off
from community in nature and to be like
yeah that really hurts no wonder I
gravitate toward simplified opinions
that give me a sense of inclusion I
don't think that there's an easy
shortcut to resew to to rebuilding the
lost connections you know I mean we are
we are in a hard situation I mean but at
least it's not your fault you know it's
not because you're bad we've been cast
into a really dysfunctional sick sick
civilization and hopefully and I believe
this we're approaching its nadir and the
age of reunion is underway yeah and it
also you mentioned Carl Sagan and the
feeling of awe and wonder and this this
new territory that becomes available
when we let go of of what we thought we
knew what we thought was true what we
thought was real but we thought was
possible it's really exciting and fun to
be there and and I think - uh yeah to
engage that childish playful spirit
I don't know I can't offer much of a
formula beyond beyond those things so I
I'm gonna go ahead an appeal to the
shortened attention span decreased
sovereignty need of people with
something like a bullet point list of
things that I've heard you say in this
conversation so far so for summary I
heard you say that you intake thinking
and news sources from what seemed like a
diversity of perspectives things that
look like political left and political
right and etc and things that not just
saying okay I'm taking in the narrative
or fair on all sides but I'm taking in
it what seems like actually has some
good thinking and so one thing that
people could do would be to readjust
their Facebook newsfeed or to get the
 off their Facebook newsfeed is
their primary source of news and say for
any issue they want to become educated
about if everyone doesn't agree
can we actually study the various
perspectives and look for partial truth
first and then see can I actually do
synthesis on that and that of course
requires giving a little bit of respect
to someone that you might have thought
of as the enemy before enough to
actually listen and see if there was
anything to learn and you know when we
had Jordan Greenhalgh on he he's taken
this movie further than most people I
know where he has a curated like 165
different news feeds that he that he
checks every day that were from the
Russian the Chinese the Israeli the
left-right the hacker the etc
perspectives and tries to run air
correction parallax on that so but again
I think this is something that everyone
who thinks well ends up saying is taken
a variety of perspectives in your study
on things yeah and then I'll sort it can
I add to that yeah of course off your
bullet point I mean
and also what what I do is I try to
really go into it and do my best to
believe it okay what has to be true for
this to be true or where does this
person have to be seated and how how do
they how where does it like to be them
for them to believe these things what's
their experiences life because there's
truth in everything because it's coming
from a person's seat in the world okay
you just said something very deep which
is like a two-fold one is you're running
a Hegelian dialectic or something like
that that says okay let's make the
thesis first then we can make the
antithesis then we can look for the
synthesis though rather than read it
looking to debunk it can I read it
looking to say what is the truth in this
and that's from a rational point of view
but then also from an empathetic point
of view what are the values and the
needs being met of people who are
believing this and can I actually feel
that right because actually the opinions
are just like the outer clothing on a
state of being that that that magnetizes
those opinions to it and that's why
people do not change their opinions
there's not a deeper change right the
opinion that our presidents with with a
state of being so there is a obviously
the invitation you're giving here is for
people to dis identify with their
opinions writ large which allows their
opinions to continue to grow and become
more accurate and more complex and more
nuanced and that requires some change of
being that says I am NOT the being that
works with this particular in-group or
that is getting a need met from a sense
of indignation or that is responding to
trauma and doing in group norming on
that and that's deep right like so
partly what I heard you say beyond the
news thing was be introspective about
your own cognitive biases and the way
that your own reactivity patterns happen
notice when you go straight into
indignation and being pissed off and
justice and be suspicious of those
things yeah but then practically in
addition to read new sources for it's
also have conversations with people who
hold different views where you're
earnestly seeking to understand their
come from mm-hmm yeah and actually
engage attention where you read things
more than bullet points and can hold
multiple perspectives or multiple data
points simultaneously yeah yeah I mean I
could say a lot more about that but
maybe about judgment and the filters
that we put between ourselves and other
people the filters of judgment and how
those judgments prop up a self-image I
mean it gets into what you might call
spirituality or work on self mm-hm and
comes down to the trauma that our
civilization and our personal
circumstances have handed us all these
levels you know from the most personal
to the to the civilizational are just so
interlinked and I guess I mean partly
part of the the mindset of find the
cause wants us to say okay so I'm just
gonna work on the personal or here's the
cause it's trauma or here's you know
it's a germ it's information no it's
trauma not that trauma is not an
important piece of the puzzle but I
believe that we're having a kind of a
gestalt happening like a transition to a
new or a different next complex of that
ink that encompasses everything from the
civilization all down to the personal
each of which holographically mirrors
the other like we're in a transition
from one self sustaining self
consistent civilizational psychological
complex into another one so as one piece
changes the other pieces it induces the
a change in the others as well and maybe
for each person the the invitation or
the healing the the specific healing or
the specific new information that comes
in is different you know for what is it
that rocks your world what is it that
that dissolves your story what is it
that makes you feel no longer at home in
the story that you've been in for one
person that might be seeing a UFO for
another person that might be that their
brother went to an alternative healer
and healed from stage four cancer for
another person it might be an ayahuasca
a trip that they stumbled into like you
know so yeah I would I resist not that
you're that you're doing this but but I
resist my own impulse just like okay
here's the key thing that changes
everything else yeah I think when we say
increasing the quality of our sense
making it's not the one key but it's
also of a different type of thing than
saying carbon or GDP because it isn't a
metric right it is how do we relate to
understanding the nature of the world
we're in and the nature of ourselves in
the relationship between it to inform
what we think is real and meaningful and
how to act yeah it is different but on a
more meta level it's still kind of like
okay what's the one thing you know yeah
and maybe for
one person that is the one thing but I
just want to keep the door open for not
understanding how this change is gonna
happen mm-hmm I imagine you read bomb as
one influence wholeness in the implicit
order yeah yeah yeah I actually did read
that book which is a book that almost
nobody actually reads but everybody
cites yeah that thing is of to spam that
book it's manageable but I just for one
labored through it yeah and his work
with Krishnamurti with some of my
favorite work also and his work you know
on all of these crises come down to
perceptual issues regarding
fragmentation I hear very much echoed
and what you're sharing because if if
you wanted to have the one key and need
to talks about wholeness that is
actually the that is the most
fundamentally anti reductive way of
thinking about it right yeah
Charles this was really fun so I hope
that people are interested in learning
more about how they can take their
climate activism and deepen it into an
effective ecological relationship
support and to the book climate a new
story I think is a excellent starting
place I'm going to go ahead and put
links to a handful of things that we
discussed in the show notes here for
people who want to check it out and I
look forward to those future
conversations on curdles theremin other
fine thanks yeah yeah me too this is
super fun yeah yeah all right thank you
all and thank you Charles
yeah thanks thank you for being with us
for this conversation with Charles
Eisenstein if you liked this episode
then please share it with a friend and
leave us a review on iTunes if you're
hungry for more information on these
topics check out Daniels blog
civilization emerging calm and also
Charles's website Charles Eisenstein org
for access to books courses and more
make sure to subscribe to collective
insights wherever you listen to podcasts
so you don't miss an episode
see you next time