[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
hey folks welcome to the dark horse pods
vodcast we are doing our fifth
livestream with dr. Heather hang to my
right we are going to be talking today
as we have been about the developing
situation with the Cova da by rescind
the global lockdown that we are all
facing first we are gonna start with
some business and then some Corrections
the business I think involves alerting
people to the fact that we are as we did
a couple of weeks ago we are still
experimenting with different ways to
make this all function but we are going
to do something on the order of a half
hour to 45 minutes of live discussion
you can file super super chat questions
during that time and then we will
address those questions in a separate
livestream which will be linked in the
description to this live stream after a
few minute break hopefully this will all
work out hopefully you won't face any
lag on your end we are still working out
the technology behind having the podcast
here and so if there are any technical
glitches please bear with us we're doing
what we can
so just to be just to be clear just like
in our third live stream we're gonna
have a conversation with each other here
for half an hour to an hour 45 minutes
so or so please feel free to ask super
check questions during that time we
can't see any of the chatter the super
chat Zack our Sun and tech support and
producer is doing all that work behind
the scenes and then we'll take a break
brief break and then come back with a
second live stream immediately
afterwards and address hopefully all of
the super chat questions that you have
asked during this and during the second
Q&A live stream great all right so let's
start with two Corrections I have two
Corrections this week and then I have a
note about something we just discussed
at the end of last week the two
Corrections are as follows one I said
that I thought it made sense for the
Pope to issue a decree which I think
would be called an encyclical that
declared cremation to be a viable form
of body disposal for Catholics and the
Pope has done this but apparently he did
so in the 50s so I'm a little bit behind
the curve on that now it doesn't change
the point very much I still think it
would be wise for the Pope to say
something clearer about the desirability
of dealing with bodies fast enough such
that even if people in Latin America are
desiring of a more traditional burial
that the priority here probably involves
bending those expectations a bit and and
getting the system back to functioning
which could mean larger scale cremation
or it could mean temporary burial of
bodies in a way that they could be
exhumed and reburied later which one of
the Ecuador and officials did release a
statement saying that it was very
important that these berries these
bodies be buried individually with
proper ceremony so anyway these two
things are in tension even if I had the
the cremation point wrong the second
issue involves the the Theodore
Roosevelt the aircraft carrier which
docked in Guam and the commanding
officer was I believe suspended by the
Navy and I had declared him an admiral
which involves two errors he apparently
was not an admiral he was the captain of
the Theodore Roosevelt but not an
admiral so that's one errand the other
areas I apparently don't have the power
to promote him so yeah you're bad yeah
maybe that can be addressed before the
next podcast but all right the third if
you want to promote a now-cancelled
oh no I want the power to promote I see
him to the rank of Admiral I support
this okay good all right third thing
involves
a weird bit of happenstance as we were
doing our last livestream Joe Rogan had
my brother on which I did not know was
coming and they had a discussion which
caused a lot of interest in which Eric
said something very much like what I
said about if the Democrats were to
nominate Biden that we would be unable
to vote for Trump but wouldn't vote for
Biden and Joe Rogan said something truly
provocative which is that he in fact in
that event would vote for Donald Trump
which which is which is a match for what
you said and what you've said to me for
weeks now which is that the DNC
promoting Biden and having Biden be the
other candidate is perhaps the only
argument that you could see for voting
for Trump yeah I want I won't do it but
but you could but you could see it being
the only argument that said what I what
I said last livestream was that in the
event that the Democrats make the
incredibly foolish choice to nominate
Biden and I realized nomination is
supposed to be a result of the way the
party votes but that in effect there's
been a very coordinated effort to rally
around Biden and to shame Sanders for
example in - it's supposed to be the
populist votes but it appeared to be
top-down from the party at some level
top-down from the party and of course
the party is structured to game its own
convention and there's a lot of a lot of
behind-the-scenes stuff but in any case
what I said was that in the event they
nominated Biden that it would justify
what I called mutiny and I wasn't
deliberately vague about exactly what
that meant
however in in if we put that up next to
Joe Rogan's
statement that he's going to vote for
Trump in that case I would say voting
for Trump would be a pointless waste of
the opportunity that we will have been
forced into and anyway Joe I'd love to
talk to you about what a proper mutiny
would look like
all right you have any Corrections for
this live stream not that I remember to
put together so they'll come later if if
I am if they are brought to my attention
all right great
so where should we start well we wanted
to I think spend time today talking
about whether or not Cove at night teen
is being treated the right way and
understood the correct way with regard
to its mechanisms of action right yes so
you know it's some level the question is
if this is a this is a respiratory virus
and it appears to be it it has been
widely reported as producing pneumonia
which causes people to be unable to pull
enough oxygen into their lungs and so
respirators and then ventilators are the
go to go to treatment and once people
are put on ventilators the rate of the
fatality rate is incredibly high higher
than it is under normal cases of people
with pneumonia having to be put on
ventilators which just just that single
observation right there begs this
question of what what is so different
about pneumonia caused by SARS co2 than
other pneumonia pneumonia being a very
broad description of a sort of a class
of of respiratory situations that can be
caused by any number of things and I
would just you know caveat again as
we've done in at least a few of these
other ones we are both we both have PhDs
and evolutionary biology but we're not
biochemists we're not molecular
biologists we're not MD is so you know a
bit outside of our wheelhouse with
regard to the molecular mechanism here
but the question the question that's
being raised is what you know at one
level why our ventilators proving the
thing that is necessary for so many
people here and yet so much less
effective than it is in other cases of
pneumonia therefore is it in fact
pneumonia and is it acute respiratory
distress syndrome ARDS which has been
raised as a particular issue in a
increasingly popular now YouTube video
Zaki
just put this up before before we get
there let's let's talk about some of
these let me just say that so that you
don't to put it up yet Zack but this is
dr. Cameron Kyle siddell from or if it's
Bronx or Queens but New York City area I
see you in which he says I don't think
we're doing this right so I should say
this was a topic of discussion for us
for several days now I not yet this
video came to our attention which
reflected a theme that we were beginning
to wonder about for other reasons so
that's doubly confirming that there
might be something down this road if we
were beginning to think something about
the story isn't right and then we find
another source especially somebody who's
on the front lines of treating these
patients that that reinforces the idea
that there's something to it you want to
talk about some of how you you first
came to be thinking the first thing I
want to say is that I think we're going
to get tangled in this question of
pneumonia and we shouldn't get tangled
in the question of the monkey the fact
is pneumonia is what we might call a
syndrome it is not the result of a
particular pathogen or even a type of
pathogen it's basically defined as
inflammation within the lungs that
interferes with gas exchange and that
can be caused by bacteria can be caused
by viruses it can be caused by any one
of a number of things but it shows up
more or less as fluid in the lungs which
is more opaque on a scan than the lungs
should be so a little a little bit like
HIV causes age age HIV causes AIDS but
people generally die of some secondary
infection right so SARS Cove 2 causes
Cove at 19 but people often are dying of
some kind of respiratory distress which
has been often classified as pneumonia
right now I've decided that I'm not very
interested in whether it is or isn't
pneumonia I think the point is there are
severe respiratory symptoms what is
important to figure out is in light of
all we don't know about Kovac 19 the
fact that there seemed to be I've heard
it described as - but I think it's
really three trajectories there's an
asymptomatic version
there's a relatively mild symptomatic
version and then there's sort of a
catastrophic decline and if you end up
in that third category what happens to
you is pretty dire but one question is
is it that at the point that you kick
over into this third category that
you're already in such serious shape
than a risk that a respirator or
ventilator can't help you or is that not
the right treatment because we've
misunderstood what it is that
characterizes that phase might in fact
be counterproductive right of treatment
right like might as can we just show
this not the video but if you want to
just put on the screen the thumbnail
from this video sack so people can see
again it's dr. Cameron Kyle's Adele his
argument is that what he's seeing in the
eye and his ICU is not people who look
like they have pneumonia with all the
caveats we just made but it's it looks
to him like people are on a plane at
30,000 feet and the pressurization on
the plane is gradually going away it's
like people are having acute altitude
sickness that they are unable to - they
don't have the oxygen that they need as
opposed to they cannot they cannot bring
up the muscular strength the lung muscle
or the neurological ability to to do the
respiratory actions that they need to
use the oxygen in their body it's like
they just don't have the oxygen actually
available and probably it seems this is
because the virus itself is grabbing
oxygen but that's what it's hungry for
well so as a virus it has no need for
oxygen so it's not grabbing it for its
own purpose hungry exactly yeah but but
the picture that is emerging and again I
don't know if this picture will turn out
to be false as well but the picture that
seems to be emerging is that the virus
as a matter of course is interacting
with hemoglobin molecules now for those
of you who have not studied this
hemoglobin is an absolutely stunning
feat of Engineering without an engineer
and ancient absolutely I'm so ancient
and necessary to the functioning of a
large creature like ourselves that is
very active and therefore requires a lot
of oxygen to do the metabolic work of
motion but the thing that's so stunning
about hemoglobin is that it has this
capacity to have an extremely high
affinity for oxygen in your in the
environment and then it picks up co2
with a very high affinity and drops it
off so it's picking up hema it's picking
up co2 in the tissues of the body where
metabolic work has been done and
dropping it off in the lungs where it
then picks up a lot of oxygen and moves
it into the body and so it is the
molecular mechanism of gas exchange it
is yeah it is the molecular core of gas
exchange and the thing is to the extent
that that molecule is failing it
predicts a whole slew of other failures
downstream including the heart obviously
so you've got this very hard working
muscle that even when the rest of you as
it rest is still pumping away and to the
extent that the hemoglobin itself is
under attack that predicts that the
heart the lungs and everything else in
the body is going to be facing this
extremely difficult problem to solve
which is how do you do the work of
repair and fighting when work is being
slowed down it's like a supply chain
problem inside the body
mm-hmm so there's a question about why
kovat 19 seems to be interacting with
hemoglobin but what does is becoming
increasingly clear and I must say the
one thing I'm learning is what happens
when normal academic publishing there's
no time for it and so there's now a
literature evolving that actually has
done something very interesting which is
it is bypassed peer review because
there's simply no time and it's now
happening on these preprint servers
where papers can be published by anybody
within a particular field and you can
read them right away
they haven't been vet
but they can be actively discussed and
it's actually a much healthier
environment in almost every way than the
peer-reviewed much slower more
deliberate and frankly more corrupt
there's more of them there's more to go
through it's too fast for a normal
situation where you might want to be
looking at topics across 300 top you
know 300 ideas right whereas right now
okay what's coming out now and the
preprint servers with regard to say is
you know this particular one you're
talking about is this view and Lee and
probably mispronouncing their names 2020
paper Kovac nineteen attacks the one
beta chain of hemoglobin and captures
the porphyrin to inhibit human heme
metabolism it's you know it's it's just
on a preprint server that's the only
place it exists it is clearly in draft
form some some of the language is not
yet not yet grammatically correct or in
some cases I think even quite
scientifically correct but it advances
several ideas that that the authors have
vetted it advances a few hypotheses and
it's got some some just extraordinary
ideas that under normal circumstances we
wouldn't have even been able to have
seen this probably for a year or more or
at least you wouldn't have gone looking
at the preprint server because you wait
for the journals to go through the peer
review and to put things out such that
if something turns out to be wrong the
editors and the journals and the authors
all have to answer for the fact that
they did something egregious so to be
clear what we've got is we've got at
least one emergency room doctor and I've
now seen others describe similar things
who is saying what I'm seeing does not
match what I would expect for an
epidemic of virally caused pneumonias
matches what I think I would expect from
hypoxia as a result of altitude but
these are people at sea level what's
going on and then you've got this paper
saying there's a molecular mechanism
whereby kovat 19 is attacking the
porphyrin molecules heme complex of
hemoglobin and it is I think freeing the
iron so again
the hemoglobin is a very fascinating
thing it's a protein that holds these
iron atoms in a particular location and
you know from elsewhere that iron rusts
that's irons propensity to interact with
oxygen so that propensity to interact
with oxygen is being utilized by
creatures like us to transport both
oxygen and carbon dioxide in this
reciprocal process inside of the body
and this virus is attacking it directly
and what it made and then releasing him
you said this but and then releasing the
iron which in this form is toxic and
it's becoming free-floating in the blood
so you have this reactive molecule in
the blood of the iron it's not being
held in the hemoglobin which is the
structure that facilitates the gas
exchange that would be useful you've got
patients who look like they're starved
for oxygen
you've got doctors putting them on a
machine that attempt to deal with the
starvation of oxygen mechanically right
when this may not be a mechanical
problem at all now again we do not want
to pretend that we're the experts on
what should be happening here we can't
even say that the story we've just
discussed with you is true that's right
to the extent that it's replacing
another story this one could also be not
true and there might be some deeper
explanation but there is a question
about if this were the case would it
explain anything that we're seeing and
does it suggest anything about what
should be tried so for example if your
blood is being denuded of functional
hemoglobin could you be saved by a
transfusion of blood that had intact
hemoglobin which also I would not just
not just a plasma transfusion has been
discussed with regard to getting
antibodies from recovered Kovan 19
patients but actually full blood that
that has hemoglobin and it has EEMA
globin in an again red blood cells and
things but it also raises the question
now I don't know somebody likely I mean
surely people know but the experiments
that suggest that there might be some
value of injecting is it just plasma
that they've injected from people who've
recovered and it seems to be protective
or I believe it was blood transfusions
was it not both have been both have been
proposed and I don't know if both have
been enacted
so this raises the question if it is
blood transfusions that have shown
promise in treating people blood
transfusions from people who have
recovered it is possible that we
misinterpret the reason that they
function it may be that they're rescuing
people based on just the simple fact of
functional hemoglobin that hasn't been
attacked by the virus yet so I mean
these are you you don't want to
experiment on sick patients but how
would we know right you know the
experiment would be that you give sick
patients intact blood some of which is
from people who have recovered from
kovat 19 and some of which is from
people who have never been exposed to Co
at 19 and the prediction here of the
hypothesis that it's not the antibodies
but the hemoglobin is that people have
no difference in recovery between those
two situations but you know under these
circumstances you don't want to argue
that we should be experimenting on
patients and yet that is exactly that is
the only way to know but I guess unless
we can use animal models we now know
that for instance cats can get it yeah I
don't know how good a model right other
creatures are but I would say this has
raised another question which is and you
can see this in the debate about about
chloroquine is there's a question and
you know this is a famous and old
question and there is a relaxed set of
standards for people who face dire
circumstances and you know drugs that
aren't known to be safe can be utilized
in some cases because the person has
very little to lose so in this case we
now have a number of things unfolding
together that force us to ask questions
we don't usually ask like what do you do
when a crisis is facing the entire world
your normal mechanism for dealing with
that where you might have too much of
some equipment one place but you can
always move it somewhere else you know
the way we do with firefighting
equipment when you know part of the West
catches on fire and crews move in from
somewhere else you can't do that if
everywhere is on fire and so we have
that problem
with this virus I know our governor okay
the state of Oregon
and the state of Oregon just arranged to
send
a hundred and forty ventilators to New
York I'm told that in exchange we're
gonna get the Brooklyn Bridge which i
think is gonna look great
across the Willamette River I was hoping
for the Statue of Liberty but really
yeah okay well either way I mean I'm
sort of hoping for the bridge it's a
pretty one but either way I've have a
lot of images yeah that's true but
anyway we've got these new these new
questions about what you do when a
system is stressed in every place at
once how you navigate a live-fire
exercise with respect to a health crisis
at the same time that you're trying to
study this that's that was that issue
was raised by the question of the
docking of the Theodore Roosevelt and
what I argued should have happened with
this unique isolated group of people who
apparently had been transmitting the
infection and how much we could have
learned and how much opportunity cost
there was for just docking it and not
just with I mean just to remind people
in the last livestream I believe what
you said was we at least just needed to
take the data the data that weren't easy
to take and it would have been great if
we could have asked for them also to
report out on who they'd interacted with
over some number of days but even just
collecting data on who was sick and
maybe what rooms they shared yeah well
and I I did more thinking about it
afterwards and I realized you know these
nuclear-powered ships especially an
aircraft carrier offers an entirely
other possibility which is if anybody
who was in the chain of command that
forbid the captain from from docking his
ship was thinking about the possibility
of understanding I doubt it was on their
minds but if it was on their minds that
this was actually a population worth
knowing something about the fact that
the ship didn't have the resources to
properly handle these cases and that
everybody was in tight quarters would
have allowed you know the thing at the
very least has an airport on its surface
that's what it is it's a floating
airport that's nuclear-powered we could
have docked it somewhere and we could
have brought in resources you could have
built
Hospital on those decks separate people
treat them properly you could bring in
whatever medical resources were
necessary it could have been done well
and I don't know what the value of the
information we would have gotten from
this population whose limits we knew but
the opportunity that was lost when we
just bypassed that over the human
concerns alone was large yeah for sure
one other thing I wanted to add with
regard to the question of SARS Cove to
attacking basically getting at
hemoglobin and get getting rid of the
iron and making it more difficult for
gas exchange to happen within humans and
some other mammals too is a prediction
that if this if this is true that those
populations of humans who are adapted
either genetically or otherwise but even
more so genetically to living at high
altitude will potentially be less
susceptible to developing extreme
symptoms of kovat night team I would not
predict that they would be less
susceptible to to being infected with
SARS Cove 2 but that once infected that
they would be less likely to to show
extreme symptoms and so we you know
there's a in in the homologous in
particular actually you know this was I
pulled up the paragraph in in the book
that we're writing right now on exactly
this and it's you know its first draft
form but in that in the homologous in
villages of 4000 meters or above it's
1,300 feet above sea level there's a
genetic variant in the oxygen levels in
blood that allows people to store 10
percent more oxygen in their blood and
women who have this variant have much
lower child mortality rates than women
without it which suggests that absent a
lot of gene flow between between these
populations and populations at lower a
lot of lower altitudes rather that you
would expect this to spread absent
whatever cost there is right there you
know this this thing this variant this
genetic variant and this
case must have some cost else presumably
it would have spread through the limited
gene flow that does exist between the
himalayan populations and the rest of
the world and we'd all have it so there
must be some cost which is unspecified
but right now it's probably mostly
benefit again the prediction being that
this would be beneficial in the fight
against being highly symptomatic with
covered 19 so there are a bunch of
things actually that's that fit in this
rubric a we can infer that you're right
there must be a cost to this extra
capacity to deal with low oxygen because
we also know that when people who live
at low altitude go to high altitude over
time they accumulate the capacity so it
must be an efficiency concern that
causes it's an acclamation process
rather than a genetic change of course
whereas individuals within a lifetime so
that validates the the point you're
making it is also likely that this plays
into the fact of this having originally
apparently come from a bat whether it
came directly from a bat or it came
through another species like pangolins
the thing about bats one of the things
about bats is that the very fact that
they fly means that they are incredibly
high throughput with respect to oxygen
and carbon dioxide you can imagine the
amount of work that is necessary to keep
a you know a small mammal in the air
that that requires incredible feats of
both mechanical breathing but also gas
exchange and in fact if you listen to
the calls of flying echolocating bats if
you have a detector that allows you to
listen you wouldn't you do well sure the
animals echolocate under normal
circumstances they echolocate in rhythm
to their flight so you can actually
watch them fly over and you can hear
them coordinating their breathing
because they're basically their flight
muscles are doing part of the work of
this basically functioning like a
ventilator or like an accordion in terms
of noise making yep so anyway the fact
that bats have this very high throughput
oxygen and that when this virus has
gotten into people it has caused what
appears to be a kind of oxygen oxygen
starvation may not be they may be two
sides of the same coin and it may
suggest things that we should research
about it about the virus even farther
afield and I really don't know what to
make of it but it is conspicuous that
chloroquine or hydrochloric Lane is it
it's hydroxychloroquine chloroquine has
been implicated as a potentially useful
drug against kovat 19 which is at first
pass not it seemed like it was
completely out of left field because
malaria which is the drug for which this
is usually used is not a virus
it's a Plasmodium and so the idea that
these two drugs that the drug would and
sorry to interrupt but other than fever
it seems to have nothing in common
really right very little but on the
other hand you will maybe remember from
a biology course you took at some point
that people who are heterozygous for
sickle-cell anemia so this has been a
common trait in African derived
populations people who are heterozygous
that means they have one gene one allele
for and one allele for the normal
wild-type for sickle cell anemia are
actually resistant to malaria so let's
just spell it out that most most people
who don't derive from African
populations within the last 30,000 years
or so are homozygous and do not have the
gene for in quotes and some people who
are homozygous for it and have both
copies those people tend not to survive
into into adulthood and reproduction but
people who are heterozygous who got a
copy of the allele from one of their
parents but got a copy of the so-called
wild-type allele from their other parent
have increased resistance to sickle-cell
anemia
yeah wild-type is the wrong yeah it's
totally their function of the standard
type would yeah the way to say it but
the reason that this is important
is that sickle-cell disease is actually
named after something you can see in a
regular light microscope which is the
distortion of the shape of red blood
cells as a result I believe of the
hemoglobin molecule actually gumming up
the cell in a way that looks sickle
shaped so it creates these sickle cells
now if all of your blood cells look that
way because you have two copies of the
sickle cell allele you can't transport
enough oxygen to survive into adulthood
but if you only have part of your blood
compromised then you find yourself in a
situation where you would pay a cost
under normal circumstances but in a
place where there's malaria your blood
doesn't carry enough oxygen to support
the Plasmodium so you're effectively
immune to malaria so what the connection
means I don't know so I think I just
misspoke when I was talking earlier how
being heterozygous for sickle-cell gives
you a slightly increased chance of being
sick from sickle cell anemia than if you
have no copies but it creates a great
advantage with regard to fighting off
malaria I think it creates a sub
symptomatic sickle cell disease which
means if you were to measure the ability
like you might actually gonna be a star
yeah but under normal circumstances you
can move enough oxygen to be to be
functional so what then is the
connection between hydroxychloroquine
which is fighting malaria and the oxygen
capacity of the blood which is manifest
at a low level which is protective
against malaria in heterozygous sickle
cell carriers and this novel coronavirus
effect where it is apparently depleting
or seems to be depleting blood of
functional hemoglobin the connection I
couldn't spell it out but there does
seem to be something in that grouping of
observations that suggests a potential
mechanism for addressing this and raises
real questions about whether or not
ventilators being applied to the most
sick are doing more more good than harm
or more harm than
good that's right yeah so it's a it's a
very interesting puzzle I would say it's
it's incredibly interesting boy I feel
like there are a number of things that
we wanted to go to but maybe well
there's one more thing I wanna okay yeah
I was doing a little reading on the
mechanistic side of Co of 19 and I ran
across a bunch of stunning facts about
how it functions it's really how the
disease functions how the virus function
SARS comes to function how it gets into
your cells what it does once it's there
it's really you know if you can put
aside the the massive damage it's doing
to humanity you have to marvel at what
gorgeous feat of engineering this thing
is I mean it's just stunning and when
you say engineering you're not
suggesting that it was engineered by
nope engineering without an engineer the
evolutionary probably this is an ancient
ancient object this thing is a machine
that has been traveling with mammals
presumably for who knows how many
million years but probably tens maybe
hundreds of millions of years it is an
amazing object just in terms of what it
is capable of doing automatically upon
coming in contact with a cell for which
it has the correct apparatus to invade
but among the weird things about it it's
an RNA virus which we've talked a little
bit about before it is a it carries the
sense strand of RNA which means that the
genetic material inside the virus is
directly readable by the ribosomes of
the cells that it invades it has a bunch
of tricks for how to take this long
genome and get it transcribed by these
ribosomes which in general limit their
transcription to one protein at a time
so it has to fool the ribosome into
doing its bidding
which it has all these elaborate
mechanisms for doing but the thing that
struck me most was apparently this thing
has an in
ibly large genome for a virus it's
actually right at the limit of what we
think is possible for an RNA virus
without it succumbing to so much
mutation that it can't be coherent so
somehow this thing is full of
information and why it's so full of
information I don't think we know yet
but that raises all kinds of
possibilities about what it will do in
response to the evolutionary environment
it has just discovered that is us how
will it evolve and as we've talked about
earlier you know how will it evolve both
with regard to in our bodies but also in
the environments in which it finds us
you know will it become seasonal will it
become inversely seasonal in the north
and northern and southern hemispheres
will it do better in say humid
environments than dry environments etc
and maybe most importantly at the point
that we do come up with some sort of
vaccine will it be a vaccine that
actually addresses this virus or will it
be like the flu where we're constantly
chasing it because it has a mechanism
for morphing so that it is no longer
effectively dealt with by the vaccine we
come up with which maybe this is the
last point I should make on on these
technical side but it appears that it
remember it's an RNA virus which means
one strand which means there's no
built-in automatic mechanism for
correcting mutational errors right if
you have two strands you can always
rebuild the strand based on what the
inverse strand says in an RNA virus
that's not true but one of the things
contained in this very long genome
apparently is a mechanism that is now
thought to be an error correction
mechanism so there's a lot to be said
for what might happen if that mechanism
is sometimes turned off in other words
for a virus there's really some moments
at which it makes sense
to go into a high rate of change mode in
order to evade a successful strategy and
a successful counter strategy so is it
is there a switch to turn it on and off
don't know oh that's so beautiful and it
just it points it points once again to
our arrogance
right that that we imagined we imagined
in the 1950s that with the discovery of
DNA the shape of DNA that we had it we
knew what was going on and and that was
it
DNA to RNA to protein boom and done
right and and because DNA is
double-stranded and therefore has this
error correction that we can all kind of
Intuit that you know if you've got two
strands that match each other basically
that if one mutates you can it can be
corrected with the other I know that
there are people who have been working
on this further but at least in terms of
you know biology textbooks outside of
the research on that in particular like
that's error correction that's where it
is that's all that's all you need to
know but the idea that within an RNA
virus there is an error correction
mechanism the likes of which we can't at
the moment neither of us can describe
particularly and it may be able to be
switched on and off at particular
moments for particular situations the
world is stranger than we can believe
and imagining that we are dealing with
simple systems that will have simple
solutions will be our downfall we need
to recognize the complexity and and
admire it and work hard to understand it
well the other thing I would say is you
discover that such a creature I used the
term creature loosely but you discover
that such a creature exists at the point
it starts making people sick the proper
thing to do is to manage these things so
they don't get into the human population
once the thing is loose in the human
population and we're spreading it to
each other this is a you know we are not
going to win this battle we might
eventually drive this virus to
extinction but well we will have lost
many many people before that occurs i
mean i think as you said on maybe our
very first live stream it doesn't want
to kill us right that is that is not its
goal and so what would win mean you know
if win for us if the only possible way
that win looks for us is driving it into
extinction that is a that is a much
harder situation
to to do whereas if living with it
extent for some number of its
generations such that we can come to
coexist peaceably ish hopefully more
like we do with the cold and less likely
we less like we do with say the flu and
certainly far less like we do with say
HIV or Ebola then it was is that a win
you know can can we really imagine that
the only way to beat pathogens is to
drive them into extinction
it is really unlikely and even if we do
that with one or two we will never do it
with all of them well therefore we need
to rethink what our relationship is with
them we do need to rethink our
relationship I still say the the best
bargain is always to keep these things
from jumping the gap true fronts there
once they're with us we're managing them
at great cost to ourselves so the gap
that you mean it's the host gap yes and
you know I've been thinking a lot I've
been through so many discussions now
about whether a bandana is an effective
remedy not an effective remedy and this
has got me thinking a ton about this now
as I mentioned you know I think our
first live stream before the covered 19
phenomenon years ago I had wanted to run
this experiment with a class of students
where I had them wear bandanas over the
winter to see if we could manage you
know reduce the level of common colds
and flu and I never did it but I'm
realizing that okay I'm now finally
weeks after I started wearing this thing
I'm finally seeing other people wearing
them and other kinds of masks as we
interact with each other
I am wondering what this will do to the
the flu and the common cold but I also
think what I really don't want to see is
we win against kovat 19 and we forget
everything we learned about how we've
been transmitting viruses to each other
you know every winter for you know
longer than any of us have been alive so
why are we not talking about bringing
this into future winters in order to
just reduce the level of transmission
of the flu to as close to zero as we can
get it I really think it's a an avenue
we should be thinking about reduce
transmission of the flu but increase
stick ups at liquor stores well of
course this has me thinking about
something else though which is that I'm
seeing now a lot of people talking the
CDC is now talking about make your own
masks they're bought there lots of hotel
instructions out there I don't know why
it took people so long it was obvious
from the very beginning that to the
extent that anybody was saying masks
don't work that they were telling you
that they either didn't understand or
weren't being honest it couldn't
possibly be true that they don't work at
all well or they or the argument
actually was we know there's not enough
we don't have the capacity to make more
we need them saved for the health
professionals who need them more than
you do but instead of telling you the
truth that you should cover your face
but you should not buy or hoard these
because we need them for someone else we
got fed a overly simplistic and frankly
wrong message but they don't work yeah
but she serves no one that's covered by
they're either uninformed or they're
lying
that's lie and the fact is that's not
just lying that's lying that kills so I
have no sympathy for anybody who fed us
some kind of garbage message in order to
preserve those masks for the health care
professionals I would far prefer that
they had said look somehow we got caught
off guard we don't have enough of these
things their very nature is that they
are disposable we can preserve them a
little bit but they're not going to be
enough so let's do a crash course on how
you can make your own mask and protect
yourself so that's on the professional
side on the side of the public I have to
say and I'll say this is gently as I can
but I believe that we have a crisis when
it comes to extrapolation that people
have lived in circumstances where
they're so used to having what they need
delivered to them that they have in some
sense forgotten what to do when
nobody shows up to help and I'm seeing
them bootstrap those capacities but it's
late you know weeks late on in the case
of the most basic protections that you
already have the materials in your house
there's no question about it
so how many people will die because it
took weeks for it to catch on that you
could actually make your own mask and
that it had some value I'm reminded and
you saying that of one of the many
bullet points that I used to go over
with my students before running study
abroad trips and which we did with our
students on the final study abroad trip
the first and only one that we ever did
together in 2016 one of the points was
you know sort of advising people as to
whether or not this was really a good
fit for them is spending five eight
eleven weeks and sometimes pretty
challenging situations at field stations
without regular electricity but you know
it's really really quite comfortable
compared to how most of the world lives
it is this right for you one of the
things I would say to them was you need
to be the sort of person who when
something goes wrong or when you feel
like a problem needs to be addressed
your first thought is how can I fix this
if your first thought is who can I ask
there's a good chance that you're going
to be more of a burden than a help here
and so all of us you know this that you
started with saying we have a we have a
crisis of extrapolation we have a we
have a crisis of self sufficiency as
well people people need to begin to
assume that they can have the tools on
board and if they don't yet they can
develop the tools on board themselves to
address many of the problems that they
are dealing with on their own and this
is not to say that we aren't deeply
social creatures who need other people
around us to solve problems but if you
first thought always when encountering a
problem is who's going to help me you
are going to be up a creek without a
paddle which which is not a good
situation to be in
no so the crisis has learned
helplessness yeah and unfortunately it
runs pretty deep
yeah I kept thinking okay what if
instead of this having been covered 19
with all its various idiosyncrasies
you'd been somewhere and a dirty bomb
had gone off where somebody had released
a weaponized virus in a crowded place
you have a shirt would you know that
you're supposed to use it would you
understand that pulling it over your
head is not protective but it's way
better than nothing and so I also think
I'm watching people put out these
instruction sets on how to modify your
bandana so that it you know has elastic
what the heck is this why are people so
focused on a device that you're using
for a medical purpose looking like a
medical mask the fact is those medical
masks are designed the way they are to
be disposable the whole purpose of them
is so you have a sacrificial layer that
you can dispose of you're not living in
that circumstance you're living in a
circumstance where you have a washing
machine and you don't have the materials
to make a high-quality disposable mask
and why would you go through the effort
you've got a square of cloth and even if
you don't have this surely you have a
bedsheet you're not using you could cut
it out okay right and you know I've seen
people have forwarded me this this paper
that says I'm convinced it's incorrect
because the model they used to test how
effective it was was I believed not at
all accurate for a situation like a
virus that travels you know through the
air and water Moloch what a droplet s--
but even if the worst were true in this
paper were right and a bandana were only
20% effective that's not really the
question the question is first of all
let's say it's 20 percent effective when
you're doing nothing you're walking
around normally nobody else is wearing
one how effective does it become when
everybody's wearing one you know you
take the 20% on the intake side and you
take everybody who's coughing has one
between them and the environment you're
gonna be way up closer to 80 or 90
percent for those two things and that's
before you get to regular hand washing
before you get to having a
a regular cycle where when you get in
your car from the place you've gone to
buy your food you come in and you
sanitize your hands before you touch the
wheel so the more of these things you do
the safer you are they're additive and
with each thing that you do that is that
brings less efficacy there is less value
and so at some point everyone makes a
decision about the limits of their own
behavioral modifications but everyone
needs to be washing their hands
carefully well everyone a hundred
percent probably everyone should be
wearing face coverings when they're out
and you know the enemy is the perfect
the perfect is the enemy of the good so
you don't have an n95 mask as most
people on the streets probably don't at
this point because there aren't enough
to go around for the people who really
really really need them you wear
something and it gives you an additional
boost of production yeah it's it's it's
very hard to understand what people's
psychological orientation is especially
in light of the fact that let's face it
civilization has come as close to a halt
as it can that is an amazing level of
shift from normalcy so simply getting
everybody to wear something to block
what they may be exhaling is a tiny
change compared to nobody's going to
work who's not in an essential job so
we're already making all kinds of shifts
in order to prevent the spread of this
but to me the most obvious one which is
let's I've meant the value of whatever
masks people are wearing by getting
everybody to wear a mask you know just
as it is now impolite to shake hands or
stand too close to somebody it should be
impolite not to be wearing a mask of
some type as you walk around how much
more effective would we be if everybody
was doing it good all right
so other matters that we should be
covering I think maybe we should sign
off come back in a few minutes and do QA
alright I've got something more no so
there will be a second live stream the
link to that second live stream will be
in the description of this live screen
stream you can click it you can go over
there and we will answer super chat
questions alright see you shortly
you