welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
okay once again welcome to the stoah a
place for dialogue around what matters
most at the knife edge of history so
what I thought maybe we could do spend
10 minutes if you are holding some
insight are some powerful meaning you've
been making about the trust exercise or
a question or just something that seemed
yeah that kind of surprised you so just
let's just go to the quarter hour and
see if we can share some of that some
some of what you expected or didn't
expect or surprised by that exercise and
I have you all muted so you can just
unmute yourself to share
you
and I have no idea how relevant this is
Bernice you asked at one point whether
there was anyone that you would believe
them even if you couldn't see it for
yourself
right and I put my hand up immediately
to that because as there is there is a
person in my life who I absolutely would
and yet that same person was not one of
the first people that came to mind when
I first started doing the exercise so I
don't know if that means anything but
that was something that struck me as odd
at the time yeah you know this is this
is fun we don't have to analyze
everything but that's interesting that's
an interesting data point
yeah there's when you talked about you
were looking at people's what people
were saying I'm Bonita and you said
something about how if we have few
people we can trust in that center
circle as compared to the people in the
outer circle that that system is fragile
and yeah I've been I'm in feeling really
connected to that and looking at my you
know I often will go oh I have to reach
out to these bigger sis you know and
then I'm like I don't see what I could
be nurturing close to me and I feel like
there's patterns that have instantiated
that needs to be important or all kinds
of yeah interesting stuff there yeah
this is a this is a kind of predicament
we're in because we're introduced to a
lot of people we don't know by artifacts
of their highest self like a novel they
wrote or a piece of academic writing and
these make them highly desirable trust
 points for us
and then the people next to us we see
them in all their glory and that is both
a challenge but as someone said last
time it's it's signals if you if you
figure it out it signals an opportunity
to deepen trust and we tend to look at
quantity so if we're in business for
example a lot of us are independent
contractors we used to having a large
rolodex and I think focusing on building
was a very small very strong small world
network and you can look up some cold
Interactive's on small world networks
and why they scale better than these
kind of flat either hub-and-spoke or
these flat kind of cross connections so
so that's just something to think about
again I always want to remind myself
that these are just variations as I said
when I first started doing this about
seven years ago I really thought I had a
handle on what trust in the human system
was and it turns out there's many many
variations so it's always about what's
what feels right and speaks to you but
no that's a good noticing neither can I
jump in on that yes please mate what you
were just saying about many different
kinds of trust I've been noticing for
the last I think since the last session
about we talked about that all the
different ways that we don't have to
trust people because we get to trust in
in more abstraction like law or you know
other institutions and I've been
noticing well I've been thinking about
what would my life be like if I trusted
if I could find ways to engender more
trust in the people that I'm close with
and also noticing how in the absence of
having to trust people for like food
survival protection things like that
I sort of default two ways of trust that
feel really natural to me and that makes
me like select a certain kind of person
that I trust like it's one of the
reasons that I'm here listening to you
talk and spending time at the stores
because I trust people who can express
themselves in certain ways and see order
and patterns in certain ways and can
talk about that but that means that I
sort of default to trusting a certain
kind of I don't know just way of
expressing themselves I select that and
I've been thinking about how I could
find more ways to trust people more
broadly and to trust people who make
sense in different ways than I do just
to experiment with that I guess yeah I
think the point is that all of us
interested in moving to a different kind
of society let's say distributed economy
or gain B ish type thing this puts us
right in front of one place where the
work needs to be done just to examine
this on a more phenomenological level
you know what is it to trust and what
are the different types of trust and
what kinds of trust networks do we need
to pull off this the the future of the
society we see and there's a lot of you
know we take it for granted that we can
trust people who drive for example you
know they're not going to run red lights
and stuff like that but we begin to
think that people the road is
trustworthy because we have rules and
laws and stoplights when in fact what's
really cool is when the power goes down
you see people they are an expression of
the kinds of social dynamics and
behaviors that we are as humans
pro-social dynamics and so you see those
crazy videos
traffic and Indonesia or India where
there is like all this stuff and people
are driving really fast but they have a
way that you know they know how to flow
so we don't want to go too far into
thinking that people don't kill each
other because the law you know I mean
because it's illegal and there's a sense
in which there are certain incentives
for people in power we've been talk
about power today for us to think that
that's why we don't kill each other or
that's why things work in fact in times
of crises like this little one we're
going through it's the opposite the
large system has to decompose into these
person-to-person type dynamics so maybe
we could talk about that another day but
yeah that's a really good noticing
anything else did anyone think about
trusting nature this is another place
that we need to examine ourselves
there's this person last name Chandler
wrote on toe politics in the
Anthropocene it's a horrible title
because the book is much better than
that we talked about him the first day
because he talks about hacking tracking
and mapping but he notes that we tend to
have as late modernists even post miners
we've tend to frame nature as predatory
so the Darwinian attitude like if we
weren't pushing back on nature all the
time it would kill us or something and
there's this book called I'm so bad
something about killed
I don't nest isset e or something any
and there's some research on foraging
societies and you know they're just
half-naked people that live in the
jungle and he's like they're not afraid
they're not afraid that they're gonna
eat in every single day you know they're
not huddled around their campfire
waiting for like a monster to come
that's what modern people do we're
huddled at home waiting for the virus to
come and it's really you start to really
examine some of these assumptions about
who we are as a people and what we trust
and what we what we do not trust and
yeah so that's a whole nother place to
go with the trust exercise civilize to
death yes that's the book thank you very
much yeah when I read that and I could
see it that I imagined you probably can
hear my dogs sorry that yeah I imagined
that was the case and actually when you
look at that first impulse to huddle and
be really afraid this is in the medieval
religions so there's a there's a famous
Cathedral in intron time that if you
walk through you can just see how this
religion came from people feeling very
very insecure about their place in life
so that's another that's another way to
weave in your trust network to trust
that the earth can produce food and that
you know the hydrological cycles can be
be resilient and stuff like that and so
yeah that's a that's a good kind of
follow-up thing to think about anything
can I just make a just Express something
that I'm thinking there um these this
idea that you know don't worry you can
trust nature because it provides x y&z
to me that you can trust that trust
isn't necessarily a always good
they trust being a function of capacity
reliability and stuff so I can trust a
bad actor to always be bad in a certain
way so it's I just don't want it to be
that people have to find the good in
everything they trust I still think it's
very not only useful but well Lucille
informative to actually trust in both
sides of things and the good bad and
indifferent I know I just opted off
there as you were mentioning it yeah no
this is excellent and maybe we don't
have to we map it strongly on to power
but it has something to do with power
you know and like in organizations when
people complain about their supervisor
or their boss and they're like well
whatever we do he's going to be against
it or she's going to be against it trust
a thief to steal exactly but what I say
is that's no problem because you can
trust you know you can just
operationalize that it's predictable it
actually reduces some of the complexity
the worst supervisors are the ones that
are just like the worst parents they're
so disconnected it's this one day and
that you know they're there and and that
can create you know that can really
drive you crazy but yeah you can trust
the law one of the reasons why nature is
trustworthy is because many of the laws
of nature are quite predictable not all
of them but you can trust that certain
very large animals are going to behave
in some ways and not other than others
and things like this and so we need to
even that is cool to try to on is to
honor that aspect of nature and one of
the things that I teach in my course is
whenever you know eventually the
question of free will comes up in my
course and it's a really big rabbit hole
and I use a metaphor based on process
philosophy and that is that agency is a
participation of promise and possibility
so I say if the rock did not promise to
lie upon the earth I could
pick her up and throw it so the laws
which seems like determinism that put
hold the rock and gravity together
actually create a kind of agency and if
those of you that saw Dave Snowden
yesterday he would say it's an enabling
constraint so if you could and you start
to see you start to see a lot of things
turned around so for example we think of
gravity as the limiting condition for
flight but actually without gravity
flight itself would not be possible so
you start to see there's always a
partnership between predictability which
is a enabling constraint for other
possibilities and that predictability is
where that trust comes in that some of
some of our that you're speaking to so
yeah cool
all righty excellent
so he's encouraging when there's stuff
going forward into the to the next
session okay today I'm going to talk
about power and I let's just get some
ideas is that horribly disturbing this
is just okay it's okay okay it's fun
let's get some ideas of how power
manifests in your life is it like do you
think about it pal oh the dogs are fun
power like power let's just say
something about power what are do you
feel empowered do you feel disempowered
do you feel like you have a lot of power
now you postmodern about power is power
patriarchal what's on what's what's in
our consciousness about power well I
feel like power is sometimes very
counterintuitive that's like when I feel
myself most wanting to control things
and like get a grip on the situation
I feel most empowered poo and I I guess
that's a way that it's related to trust
and I trust in like the process or that
everything will unfold the way it should
I feel more empowered so that's my what
I quite like the framing they give to
power in the Game of Thrones right where
power is where people believe it is air
power power is where people look for it
I met them and si Academy and I believe
they define power as the ability to hold
your own perspective and then also get
other people to do what you want the
liminal space agency talked about how
there's different kinds of power
concepts of power it's sort of course of
power to make things happen make people
do things and then then just going up a
level to this power being the capacity
to influence what's happening yes so
there's coercive coordinated cooperative
collaborative and co-creative look we
might get to that that series anything
else you know was I think the first
thing that popped in my head was the
word alignment it's being in alignment
with something and also fully embodying
that that you're aligned with okay yeah
has something to do with agency there's
there's a distinction between doing what
what you have to do for others like men
are often powerful because they're
they're trying to satisfy other people's
needs rather than their own internal
needs this could be true for anybody but
power coming from the ability to yes
that satisfying meet your own goals
rather than somebody else's even though
that looks powerful yeah intrinsic
versus extrinsic power self authored
power versus reactive power there's a
different way to say is a different
thing but similar and then money as
power come up through the chat room here
okay anything else my experience power
as the ability to be with whatever and
remain and not disappear and remain yeah
how do we experience power I think of it
as opportunity to impact things that
have a will of their own and that could
be system another person even parts of
your own psyche ah yeah okay so we're
getting really close so I want you to
write something down and this is this is
the source code formula for power one we
could see if it's powerful or if it has
some limitations power equals well power
first the definition of power I'm going
to work with is the flow of force so
there's a
action powers always relative to
movement in a certain direction and some
of you talked about that and again this
could be internally psychological so if
I'm reactive than the flow of forces
from my unconscious drives to my
behaviors right so power is not a static
thing it's related to a flow of force
and and we're interested in what
direction that flow is power can only be
experienced if it flows from more power
to less power or else there's you
wouldn't use the term power and now I
want you to write power equals skills
and resources
/ needs and wants okay so if I'm
standing in a path in the woods and a
bear comes toward me then I'm going to
experience a power gradient based upon
my skills and resources / - and montz
relative to the bear's skills and
resources divided by its needs and wants
so if I have a gun in my hand right
that's a resource and I know how to use
it then I might feel powerful relative
to a bear who's equally startled as I am
and just wants to walk off into the
wilderness despite his larger power full
body but if I don't have the skills the
resource of a gun or the skills to run
faster than the bear and the bear has
the big powerful body and wants to
protect her cub from me then we have a
different power equation
you
now the difference between skills and
resources needs and wants our skills and
needs are used up all the time you
employ your skills to solve you employ
your skills and these are constantly
arising I need to pee I need to eat I
need this where as resources and wants
are aggregated like I have money in the
bank there's I have I have lots of guns
or someday I want to have a new house so
resources are skills applied that build
up by applying skill over time and wants
our needs that are scale over time does
that make sense okay
so when you think of now now this is
what's interesting about this is this
explains a lot of the phenomenology of
power if I am a young college student
female heterosexual and I walk into the
pub and there's a great big looking
really attractive guy is kind of like on
his game I may feel transgressed upon
just because maybe I need him to like
acknowledge me or he's just just because
he's got more skills and resources less
needs and wants
he doesn't care anything about me but
I'm psychologically emotionally and
maybe even sexually moved he is moving
me right so power is who gets to move
who and so just by a certain presence
a person can psychologically move
another person and you will feel that
they're exercising power whether they
are thinking about it or not because
you're moved by someone else who's
moving you this is always this is often
a big insight for not only women but for
men who you know don't understand why
the world reacts to them the way they do
because it just exude power and that's a
good thing but they don't understand
that it will force will flow based upon
this power formula
this is also the shadow and a lot of
relationships with funders very hard for
them to become your peer because there's
always they have more resources and you
so there's always a power flow there's
always the felt sense of power the flow
of force that is is pretty much
inescapable
you
you
now as this formula works of course many
of us when we feel disempowered we work
really hard at improving skills and
building resources but in our world
today it is often the case that our
needs and wants grow faster than that
and this is underlooked
this is underlooked the the exponential
growth of our needs and wants
continually disempowers us and then we
project that onto an aggressor so when I
saw occupy kids the Occupy movement give
us free this give us free that it's
completely disempowering and anyone with
power just knows it just feels it
they're completely disempowered
you
so one of the greatest ways to work with
power if you feel disempowered or you
feel they don't have power what are the
needs and wants that are disempowering
you and literally like the story of the
taoist who had to meet the taoist who
didn't know how to use a sword had to
meet the samurai on the bridge and he
went to the guru and the Guru said you
know don't do anything just be prepared
to die just reduce your need to live to
zero and that's what he did and in the
in the samurai felt like oh my god I'm
not going to try to strike him he has
too much power
right so literally this is part of the
equation this is part of the equation
when you look at coercion in modern
society be careful cuz coercion can
arise because the person at the bottom
of the power equation has too many needs
and wants and not that the person on the
other side is exercising too much skills
or resources
I feel coerced to do this by my husband
why because they'll get mad if you don't
that's not necessarily coercion it's
more complex than that
it's most often the case because you
can't self-regulate your ability to
endure the fact that he's going to have
a tantrum like a two-year-old
so that's your need and want
lack of to not have that feeling that
he's mad and your lack of the skill to
self-regulate that feeling
it's also why there are
passive-aggressive forms of power
which leverage the other person's needs
and wants it's this form of power yeah I
have a question I think about this a lot
actually in terms of the multiplication
of needs and wants but I'm wondering if
there's a flip side to it where people
say something like you know living up to
your potential
what do you want so little yourself how
do I make sense of that yeah so
potentials not the same of need and want
your potential for what to be creative
your potential to be happy your
potential to be what you know versus
your potential to minoo consume a lot of
stuff based upon needs or the need to
have external affirmation about your
life yeah
I have a question I guess the natural
thing to ask then is how does one reduce
or control one's needs and once I'm
reading a lot of laconian psychology
right now where he's talking about the
lost object of desire that we're kind of
all hoping for but it's not a defined
object it's a really like obscure and so
it's just a photo yeah so I'm gonna talk
around it and then we can deepen it
because I think you're asking a deeper
question but I think to give you some
flavor of just the formula we'll start
at a higher place a more surface place
so I ran a landscape design build in
contracting company for many years and
we worked for the rich and famous and
and all of us loved to do beautiful
landscapes and here out here in
Northwest Connecticut and the rich and
famous would come and buy you know 75
acres and have all these ideas and you
know we would compete with other
designers to get those projects and
every once in a while the sales people
would come like the sales of the
designers would come and they would be
really excited oh I'm gonna get it I'm
gonna get it I'm like be careful you
want this project more than the client
and that means you're just going to cut
cost cut costs until you're gonna do
either lousy job or you're not gonna be
able to finish it you know and so one a
lot of times it's really working with
yourself psychologically so you it's a
tricky thing you know you aren't
acknowledged that you want that you want
that job but you have to get some sense
of base reality of when is it
diminishing your when is it diminishing
reality and in a case you know and so
this happens a lot when we chase after I
mean the whole marketing and consumerism
is is built to increase our needs and
wants and you know you have to get
really kind of try to make sense get
very practical like some like the
Quakers the Quakers are not against
technology they are trying to be
reasonable so if you say well you know
it takes a lot of time to get into town
if we bought a car we could get into
town faster but then they reason well if
we bought a car then we'd have to sell
more goods and at the end of the day
they realize that the initial need to
get into town faster is not satisfied by
that in that by that method so they they
don't but they're interested in solar
power because it seems to satisfy the
need of having more time to be
contemplative and to do community stuff
so one of the so then what is the need
to have the car it's not a need to
satisfy the original desire it's kind of
looped around some other kind of needs
so there's a there's and a lot of times
when you do this work you say I do it
myself I'll say the need is just
manufactured like okay here's one I
don't have a smartphone I don't like
them I think you work for your
smartphone your smart phone doesn't work
for you and so yeah so it creates a
certain type of liberation it's hard
when you travel to Europe and you don't
know what you're going but then you
depend upon other people but then you
can't speak the language so it gets
really funny stuff like that but I
really really want the new Microsoft duo
you know the thing that opens up like a
book right like because it's like a book
and
I want it so bad and I'm already telling
myself it's not even out yet and I'm
already trying really to ever you know
know don't get it don't get it don't get
it you know and so you can see I can
feel I can feel that moving in me look
at the way I do this I mean like I want
it so bad so you know and sometimes you
say yeah I'm just gonna get it you know
you don't always like it's not um it's
not necessarily that you don't do you
know the completely rational thing or
something like that yeah it's like a
rude Rube Goldberg and and so and it's
not about just being efficient you know
we don't want we do a lot of things like
grind your own coffee and make it you
know because there's a lot of value and
beauty in that and we can really enjoy
it so it's not about efficiency but it's
just about coming to terms with what's
driving this equation especially when
you're in a situation where you're going
to have to work with someone where the
power there's a power there there's a
flow of force either as Authority or
supervisor or yeah so like in
coronavirus where my local community not
my online community is pretty skeptical
about how serious it is we think it's a
thing but what we noticed is then we get
really mad because the government has
power over us you can tell us to stay
home and then you can't do anything
about it so but you can ameliorate your
need not to have the government tell you
what to do you know this can cycle so
then you can kind of like
position yourself in between what's
going on in a way that yeah so so in
when you're when you're fighting against
the fact that the government has power
over you you're just empowering yourself
even more so how can i reclaim my
sovereignty in the face of something I
can't really do anything about or don't
want to do anything about I'm not I'm
not I don't want to you know let those
people to take my gun into the
Statehouse and make a ruckus so it's
always kind of balanced it's a balancing
act between between both those things
is it possible to store this potential
energy so for instance in Corona you
have a situation where you can't do
anything about it and what you're
suggesting is sort of cut off your needs
and wants which is a which is very
interesting because in the way it's very
it's a very retreat mode approach life
is my sense to it we're sort of not even
trying to build our skills we are saying
you know what the grapes are sore
because I can't have them that's the
flavor I get and instead why not sort of
take that feeling of maybe frustration
or disempowerment and transform that
towards maybe I can't do anything now
but five years down the line I don't
want to be in a similar context how do
you apply it because I don't see how we
can sort of say okay fine if everyone
decides to do the thing like Quakers are
doing we would not even have the
technology move forward right so what's
your comment on that yeah okay so that's
perfect so now you understand why it
skills and resources divided by needs
and wants because I can turn the needs I
can't satisfy today and I can work on
resources that will be helpful in the
future and so and then I bump up my want
I don't need the government to do
anything different today but what I want
is a new type of conversation
you see the difference so now and that's
how those two categories move they're
they're they're they're both work you
work on them more in the future and I
think that's you said stored potential
resources and wants or stored potentials
I want a more beautiful world the heart
knows as possible right so I move that
into this so I can always yeah so I'm
trying to build a sort of other type of
potential and when I in them if I move
my knee to a want then I see well what
kind of resources do I need for that
kind of one and so you the the
conversation switches but it but it's
it's it's in that it's in that formula
because you can't just want and then say
well I want this and then yeah you have
to then if you have if you move into
want you have to build future resources
so you start to do things like this
right this is building future resources
yeah I'm getting how the letting go of
the need want in the moment can free up
like my system will be less anxious
disempowered and I would be able to
potentially think more laterally you
know into you know space and time the
future as your point yet or maybe there
are other people that I can connect with
that have the skills and resources or
yeah I'm getting that
yeah once more of a potential built
state built up and another is but they
move back and forth you know depending
upon context and they can and needs can
draw off of resources
and skills can build up want so it's not
they're not just packaged but they're
all there they're like the four sides of
the equation and the thing is you know
we're not guaranteed to you know if if
if power is who gets to move who we're
not guaranteed to be the mover you know
it's it's not it's not assured but this
gives us more
I think conceptual distinction or the
source code to really examine these
things a little more closely and you
know also you know one of the things we
started about what one of the benefits
of working with source code is you're
not like we're not fighting about we're
not at the point where Jordan Peterson
and Sam Harris talk about power it's
already way too complex and filled with
projections and all this like the
territory is too complex can we come
back down to something that can be
sourced by a feeling a phenomenological
feeling in our body who gets to move ooh
even if I if I move psychologically Orma
medically but this disempowers me if I'm
on the internet and I'm my limbic
systems like this I'm constantly
disempowered if I can be on the internet
and have it work for me right because I
want to understand the information
ecology so it's a completely different
different mode of power that seems like
a really interesting lens into like the
aesthetic life the monk is is renouncing
and and reducing his needs and wants as
a way of well I mean when he does that
then he feels like he has far more power
in his own experience because other
people have less
other people or you know nature is
unconscious or whatever has less
leverage over him and also like when you
said one person excited with it one
person can move another person like if
one person moving another person if the
other person their needs and wants
like you said about the government don't
include not being moved then the one
person feels like they're applying power
and the other person does not feel
powerless in that situation which is
exactly that's a Tai Chi move right so
I'm going to be moved this way by the
state and neither do I and then I see
okay
what's possible from here you know at a
certain point I can and this is another
interesting thing about power we relate
to what can move us in different ways
and here's a little trick so if the tree
is falling on my house or if the
tornados coming to my house I will move
away really fast right but it won't piss
me off in the same way is if a burglar
came and ran me out of my house in the
fact that I respond to the burglar in
that way disempowers me right like when
if I respond to it like just a situation
of we in reality a situation in nature
then it doesn't disempower me the same
way but it's this this inability to be
with the fact that other people have an
occasion more power than me dis empowers
me this took me a long time I had this
this is a pattern in me like Trump got
elected many people who are upset for
various reasons
I'd lived through Reagan when we all
just sounds ridiculous now you would
never know that we had we it affected us
the same way we had no idea of someone
like that to be elected okay so did it
affect me the same way but it bothered
me a lot right and so I had to try to
figure out why because I wasn't worried
for the same reasons other people
worried I wasn't like a lot of the other
things that bother me but what bothered
me is it really bothers me when
someone's less like someone less
intelligent cognitively complex than me
has the power to make me do things
that's what really bothers me right
because I'm like a cognitive type right
so now I also see that you know he's a
man of action but he's not driven by his
own you know he's he's reactive and
stuff like that but it took me a while
like well what is it Bonnie
like what is it you know and once I saw
that I would say oh that's it that's it
because to me the way the world the fair
world is not that there aren't people
with more power but as you rise the
power they're more intelligent right
like so so then and so that's that
people part that the inability to be
with what is there's something we
there's there's usually some story in
the fact that we get disempowered when
more when were moved by other people
that we don't want than if it's you know
then if we're running away from the
Bison in Yellowstone Park
we love the Bison it was like oh my god
it was so powerful but if that's a
person moving us then we start to have
meltdown and that's interesting to look
at for different reasons I was thinking
about the ways that people have power
and aren't aware of it at all or you
know and the ways that they are moving
others and have
no consciousness of it and then of
course the ways that there's unrealized
power and that other people can see it
so clearly I just think that's an
interesting relationship to it as well
yeah and so for me power is the felt
sense of the flow of force it doesn't
make sense to say to look at two other
people neither of whom feel the flow of
force and say there's a power thing
going on there have to be very careful
because we tend to then project we
project that someone's being coerced and
maybe they're having fun we don't know
so power is the felt sense of the flow
of force in this in the human in the
human realm if I am walking you know
there's some great videos where people
are walking across the street and then
like two cars hit each other and the guy
almost gets kills but he doesn't he
didn't he didn't even know it well he
wouldn't have felt a power coercion or a
threat or anything you know and so one
of the things so so that's an
interesting thing you have to be really
careful - yeah this happens a lot when
we look at societies with older
structures the men have too much power
we might say when maybe the women have
the power we don't you know you have to
be really careful to feel what is the
felt sense inside this situation now you
could come in and many times like little
dogs have all their all the power over
the adult because there's so much
projection and they're really good at
instincts and getting and stuff like
that so I think if you're in
relationship counseling or when you work
on
if you can get the conversation around
skills and resources and needs and wants
then you can get a sort of baseline of
where powers flowing the other way we
use this is someone talked about
coercion up to co-creation so if you
have a large difference in skills and
resources and needs and wants then you
might see it let's say two people have a
large difference in skills and resources
and needs and wants and they're they're
coming together to do something together
it can look like structurally coercion
right but it's actually the only kind of
structure that is capable it's the only
way those two people can self-organize
is because just that the power asymmetry
is so large
now what that also means so you can
think of it the next level up is
coordinated coordinate if you're very
very strong and I'm disabled and we want
to coordinate to move something heavy
it's not going to look like coordination
because the the power equations are too
asymmetric so as you move up these what
we would call higher action logics if
you think about collaboration
collaboration many people are working in
teams and they are saying they
collaborate but it's not true
collaboration it's distributed roles
because the power asymmetries are too
large so there's a direct relationship
between working on the power equations
and teams in order to move up to
collaboration and certainly co-creation
I can't call create with you if we're
working on software code I don't know
anything about it you know so a lot of
times coaches and as a society we have
these words we want we don't want people
you know we want people moving into
collaboration and co-creation but it's
not possible if there's too much too
large
asymmetry in their power equation it's
just not possible
so you have to work on what would what
is you know called fit the the power
equations have to fit the team you're
building if you want these higher action
logics and too often we just think these
higher action logics our product of the
values we have no it's not a product of
the values we have it's a product of
self system self organize and power and
Trust are always part of that they're
the protocols for a self organization
could you go could you a little more
about that so you're saying that when
people are collaborating or co-creating
it's not really about value alignment
it's about power asymmetry yeah so for
example it's pretty easy to see if I'm
very weak or disabled and you're really
strong and we'd say we want to
coordinate moving this very heavy thing
even the strong person can't do it
themselves well it's I might be my value
that I want to coordinate but the
eight-pound symmetry is too is too
skewed right we won't be able to
coordinate our bodies well it's the same
it's true in the information ecology we
cannot cope we cannot collaborate are on
a project if the skill asymmetry is too
large or the needs and wants are out of
out of line you know I need to work
three hours a day I don't care I'll work
as long as it takes so to get true
self-organizing collaboration to get
like team flow at these higher action
logics like co-creation and true
collaboration you really have to have
the right fit in the ecosystem a realtor
you know you can most teams that they
think they're collaborating are
coordinating distributed roles because
there's too much power asymmetry in the
in the ecosystem
so you know you try to you try to train
up but there's also a certain amount of
reality about these higher action logics
noticed a lot of folks talking about
kind of a monastic approach to reducing
needs and waltz or reducing the
attachment to meeting needs and wants
and I'm wondering whether you've
encountered or how what you would say to
someone who looks at this equation and
says ah well then I'll just not mean
love or companionship or you know I'll
just
they might naively do a move of
compartmentalizing or not feeling in
order to be powerful yeah I mean people
can snooker themselves you know so the
need to reduce your needs is can be a
huge need right or if you have to put
all your energy into warding desire that
arises naturally and that's probably not
very resourceful if you can take the I
mean now we're getting beyond just a
simple formula but in general you look
at needs and wants as energy for free
and then you need the skill to say I'm
going to take this energy and put it
with and put and put it in the direction
I want it to go that's different than
just just saying I don't like the energy
of need and want I'm going to suppress
it or you know a lot of these monastic
Academy not men asked Academy a lot of
these monastic moves are you know you
fast and you do all this because that
will really suppress the energy of your
potential so the idea is you have this
need and want you have this energy that
arises its energy for free it has a
certain amount of power then how do you
take that thrilling out up to you that
it comes and put it in the direction
that is like positive behavior or toward
a goal or a resource or your own
potential or in York the contribution
you're me you've been created to make in
the world now that could be to be a monk
that could arise authentically in you
but if you're looking at the monk as an
archetype and wishing you or that and
working tirelessly you know that the the
big giveaways if you get more energy
from it or less and people who are like
Tai Chi masters or so Chen Tantra
teachers to have like literally
limitless energy hey other people by
contrast seem disempowered or tired or
distracted and reactionary you know so
there is something about this that
appeals to that kind of archetype but
yeah there's a hundred ways to snooker
ourselves I don't think the monastic
path should be prescriptive cuz it's not
it's not everyone's thing you can you
can take a shins and yang says you
nibble
he said all Dharma is like date on a
hook you want to nibble what works for
you you don't want to suck you don't
want to swallow the hook
but neither can I ask how you would
frame the giving of respect or deference
in terms of a Power Exchange yeah so
this is this is similar to the thought
experiment on nature if the if the bear
is really powerful right you you're not
you don't resent that I moved that you
have to move off the path you're kind of
like wow that wasn't that cool you know
but this is something that this sense of
resentment when other people are
powerful and that means they move us
this is problematic you either respect
you know you can both respect and try to
win at the same time or but also the
opposite is true people often present or
they'll shame themselves because they
don't have as much power right so yeah
so so so don't you just sort of put your
answer backs you in another way and see
if that and see if that's right would it
be fair to say that respect is the
allowing of that force to move between
you because you feel like it was
valuable to you to do so right so you
willingly allow force to move in that
direction is it something like that is
that what respect would be exactly and
that's if you've honored your own self
like if you allowed that force to push
you over because you were merely you had
the need to like not put the effort in
or you didn't want and he pushed back or
something this would this is not respect
right yeah but if you played a really
good game and you lost or you're
starting to play you're like no way I'm
gonna win you can I mean you laugh at it
because it's like I remember one time
what's his name I'm not gonna remember
this great relief
baseball player a pitcher for the
for the Red Sox Manny Rivera he threw a
fastball in the World Series past Jeter
and Jeter didn't even see it and we had
this biggest smile on his face because
it was a thing of beauty it was like a
thing of beauty right this that empowers
you over and over again because you
don't have all these other kind of
disempowering reactions to power you
don't even want us it's necessarily suck
up to it you know like I get power off
of this that's not there it's there in
its own sovereignty so and that's when
Trust comes in because if you can trust
there's people with that kind of power
in your trust Network it no longer
becomes you don't feel the flow of for
the flow of the force of power you feel
the expansion of a trust network ok
these hours go by very fast
hopefully there's some more to to being
things you know to thinking about this I
offer these as you know a result to not
get caught up in the kind of discourse
around power of postmodern discourse
around power but come back to kind of
square one and really understand what it
is from a lived experience the
fundamental protocol of power and how it
manifests in different ways I think it's
easier than trust this lesson there's
less diversity there's only like a
handful of patterns I think we all share
so yeah now I'm supposed to say
something about the store the store
operates on a gift economy and we
received many gifts from you just from
your presence we hope that you feel that
there's a valuable contribution coming
back at you and if you feel like you
want to make a contribution there's some
how to do that which I don't know how it
is that you do that but I think there's
a patreon page and I'll try to get
better information if I have to do this
again next time thank you so much have a
great day everyone
and you