good morning welcome to meditating with
Chandra Viki we do this live stream this
every morning on YouTube at 9:30 a.m.
Eastern Time that Monday is alternating
between newless and Dharma day and
reviewing the whole ecology practices hi
a day a reminder that there will be no
stream next Tuesday or Wednesday due to
scheduling difficulties I strongly
encourage the Senate to meet together on
the discord server so I hope that
happens or if you're joining us for the
first time you're most welcome please
continue to meet and sit with us
whatever recommend you do is immediately
go to go to the links in this video once
we're done today and find links to
previous lessons and sits do lesson one
right away and then once it once a week
maybe twice a week do the following
lessons and you'll very quickly
integrate and catch up with us I would
ask you all to please like this video
screen to video stream to increase its
visibility and they do YouTube algorithm
trying to help as many people as we
possibly can with this valuable set of
practices at the end of every said there
is a QA please limit the questions at
that time to questions from anywhere but
anywhere in this course but limited
questions to this course for morning
compass in broader questions please come
to the general Q&A that's live streamed
on YouTube every third Friday of the
month at 3 p.m. Eastern Time and so
we'll be doing one this month July 17th
so as always we're going to now we'll
begin with some chanting so and then I
will say going to your salat your salat
sitting I saw in practice so get
yourself in position please set your
phones on do not disturb and we will
begin when I say begin begin
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
Oh
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
you begin your asana practice
you
[Music]
slowly come out of your practice trying
as best you can to integrate what you
cultivated in your practice with you
everyday consciousness cognition
character and communitas perhaps by
reciting the five promises to yourself
so let's address a couple questions of a
question from Karima you mentioned
something about time yesterday seems
like so long ago that's a bit of a
metaphysical pun well done
have you read this book or would
recommend it existential and ontological
dimension of time in Heidegger and dojin
I read a similar book by Maseo Ave I
wonder if that's the same one
it sounds like an excellent book the
book I read by Ave comparing Heidegger
and dojin on time was also very good
let me check into this crema and Alaska
Mar to repost that question tomorrow and
see if the a by book that I'm thinking
of us is the one that you're thinking of
if not I'll try and take a look into it
and get back to you but that's that
that's very good so pleasure doubt Brett
when you do solo let's do to get you
 do you do it aloud or in your
head definitely aloud it's very
important to do the recitation it's very
important to be hearing physically
hearing and even sometimes resonating
almost like the chanting so times the
Luxio becomes almost chant like for me
so definitely you should say it aloud
you should definitely say it aloud so I
know we need to end right at by 10 today
so I think that's all we're gonna have
time for for questions I want to thank
you all for joining it's always a great
pleasure to be here and to participate
in this wonderful Sangha I want to thank
my dear friend and technomage Omar for
making all the magic happened and for my
beloved son Jason he was always
pinch-hitting he was been cheating today
making stuff happen behind the scenes
please subscribe to this channel to be
notified of the next video you'll also
find links to the lecture series
awakening from the
crisis Nvidia logo serious voices with
verb a key that explore a lot of the
themes that we're talking about in this
course as well as other related ones and
situating at all within a more
encompassing framework invite others who
might benefit by sharing this series
please check the link to the discord
server in the notes for this video I
strongly recommend joining the discord
server you'll find people who do this
sit I do the moving practices to Alexio
discuss the broader framework and it's
my understanding that they're offering a
home for next Tuesday and Wednesday for
the Sangha to meet and do the practice
together so thank you for that reminder
that we're doing this every weekday
morning at 9:30 Eastern Time a reminder
again that there is no stream next
Tuesday or Wednesday to schedule early
but again please make use of the
hospitality offered by discord server
please remember that continuity of
practice is more important than there's
your quantity of practice there is no
enemy worse than your own minded body no
friend no ally no two companion on the
path better than your own mind and body
we lamps unto yourselves and to each
other take good care of you one I'll see
you all tomorrow all right