welcome to the stoah the stoah is a
digital campfire where equal hear and
dialogue about what matters most at the
knife's edge what's happening now
[Music]
all right everyone welcome to the first
session of the stoah i am peter
lindbergh and some of you may know i'm a
practicing stoic and run the stoic group
here in toronto canada we obviously
can't meet in person right now
so I've launched the stoah which is a
place I see where we can gather around
the digital campfire and discuss what
matters most at the knife's edge of this
moment in a moment Jordan Hall is going
to give a situational assessment I may
have some questions afterwards and then
we'll open up for a group dialog and how
the group dialog will work you have a
question just write it down in the chat
box and I'll call on you just unmute
yourself or if you want me to read your
question just indicate that when you
write it down and then just keep it nice
and crisp because we have a lot of
people in the chat and we probably won't
get to everyone's question so that being
said let me unmute Jordan Jordan are you
here yes can you hear me yes beautiful
so Jordan I'll hand it to you my friend
what's the situation Peter can I assume
that everybody's read my medium piece
Josh are they recapitulating some of
that I do not know that's a good
question maybe people in the chat box
can just say you've read it do the
opposite if you haven't read it please
give it a signal forget a critical mass
then we'll have to recapitulate it with
all reddit's as nicholas great all right
so so we have a baseline recognition
that the the perspective from which to
perceive what's happening is the level
of a meta-crisis and I did not include a
particular element in that conversation
because it's not the kind of thinking
that can be brought all the way to the
highest level but the best way of
holding it is in fact a spiritual crisis
so we're actually right now in the
process of working through a spiritual
crisis that all fractal levels of
identity of which the objective piece is
showing up enormous length
we can make it very practical already
and it's in an accelerating basis in
physical health crisis is cascading into
a mental health crisis and we're going
to begin seeing that more and more that
has more and more people are actually
forced to simply get out of their
comfort zone often times it's very rapid
and intense way and then be put into the
things that they simply aren't prepared
to be put into
in addition the real circumstances of
life are actually changing rapidly and
for many people they are active actually
in some deep sense a powerless and be
their best interest aren't in fact being
well served so I'll give you an example
if it's zoom in on the economic
subdomain of the meta crisis in the US
and that's a pretty good bellwether of
our o W in this case we had a level of
unemployment that I don't say it well
it's actually shocking it's astounding
as of yesterday Goldman Sachs indicated
the 2.5 million Americans will be
applying for unemployment this week so
in one week 2.5 million that's something
like
fraction of the total number of people
who ended up going into unemployment
during the financial crisis is ten times
the peak have been any given period of
time in the financial crisis so right
eight times the peak and this is just
the first week okay now the point of
that is
it's like a big wave nice we've got all
these different systems and each of the
systems has a certain level of
resilience which of course has been
moved into a pretty high level of
fragility and the primary characteristic
of the phenomenon that we're witnessing
right now is a singular level of
velocity complexity and magnitude in a
short period of time the thing about the
virus is not necessarily that it's a
really really bad sickness the thing
about the virus is because of its
characteristics it ramps very rapidly
and by the time we know that it that
it's actually real it's so big that it
hits as hard and it overwhelms for
example the medical assistants these big
waves coming through and hitting systems
faster than can react with a magnitude
that's well beyond their capacity then
they break and that then spreads
contagion outward into other elements of
the meta system so in this case all at
once
but it work and all at once for example
if you look at the system fragility
Bridgewater Just's put out an analysis
that they think in the u.s. four point
five trillion dollars of earnings will
be lost by public companies over the
period of the next two months which is a
lot I a really astounding amount of
earnings but that's just public
companies and if you look at the impact
on public companies there are some of
those public companies that are gonna
break meaning that they don't have the
earnings capacity they don't have the
ability to reduce costs that they don't
have the bank account to absorb the
amount of reduction in earnings they're
going to have and they'll just break and
that will of course then bang in two
directions little being sideways into
for example their employees who will
either be laid off to help the company
survive or will be laid up because the
company didn't survive and it will go up
into the political environment
but
Goldman Sachs and Bridgewater so far at
least haven't said anything about B
people in the middle class which is
where the wave is actually hitting the
hardest because it's where the Thrilla
tea is the highest restaurants and
Pilates studios and nail salons and hair
salons and etc etc etc all over the
world are really shut down and they
rarely have a million dollars on the
balance sheet to weather the storm and
they don't have lobbyists and they don't
have public company metrics to show that
they need to be bailed out and there's
an India mechanism to bail them out so
without any real mal-intent
and to be sure in situations like this
there are also groups through operating
with malcontent but without any real
mal-intent
the choice-making infrastructure and the
sense-making infrastructure to perceive
what is really happening is well this
used verbe keys language it has a
salience landscape it is not mapped to
the relevance realization so we're going
to be perceiving things like oh no the
stock market is crashing and fortune
1000 companies need to be bailed out
because we could perceive it we have an
infrastructure that has capacity of
perceive it particularly our choice
making infrastructure has that capacity
they will then be scrambling like crazy
to figure out how to engineer solutions
to address that problem which is let's
say for example a meaningful problem
well this will come at two costs one
cost is they then won't be allocating
their scarce attention to it maybe a
vastly more relevant problem which is
small businesses and people just people
and to the solutions that they design
are quite likely to throw externalities
into that domain because they're a not
schooled in complex systems and be again
they've got blind spots in that
environment so that's kind of driving
right into the middle of it but I
thought in this particular group would
be useful to drive driving right into
the middle of it and then to begin to
work out from there because well we are
all of us in that spot I don't think any
of us right now are CEOs of Fortune 1000
companies or you know heads of state so
we are in a position of saying okay how
do we respond to that reality how to
respond to the reality that the sense
making capacity of our governance
institutions and their choice making
capacity is likely to throw a lot of
errors they're going to be operating
from a lot of bad perception and they're
going to be creating solutions that lack
the right level of design sensitivity
and because of the bad perception we'll
be throwing externalities into places
that they just don't even necessarily
notice until it's too late
until something in their perception
actually kicks off okay great that's the
thing and I think I hope that this was
clear in our diagnosis of the blue
church and of gaming in general this is
just a known problem with the underlying
I want to say topology didn't really
methodology I've since making a choice
making that was built up in the mid
century so it's not a surprise and now
of course dealing with it as a practical
element so that's one side so then it's
the other side and listen some sense
just used the language that I've been
using the gaming a game a game B
language what's the situational
assessment from the point of view of
game B and I think one of the big things
that's happening right now
is
if again acceleration of that particular
developmental process punctuated
equilibrium is a fundamental
characteristic of evolutionary dynamics
and as it turns out also largely of
developmental dynamics you you go
through a lot of loops experimenting in
liminal space until you've built the
right kind of sensitivity to the
holistic of the environment that you're
in then you go through a very rapid
transition of synthesizing that and to a
new competence then you're in a new
competence and then you level up that's
kind of the process of development and
it happens in evolutionary systems as
well but in a slightly different way so
there's a kind of a breathing in right
now of the field of game B and in here I
think it's a it's important for me to
indicate that which calls itself game B
is in game B this has nothing to do with
anyone who has self-identified with
Orion is aware of the phrase or term it
has to do with the transcendental
operator the
spiritual practice of having already
come to a capacity of endeavoring to be
able to perceive reality and to respond
to it
with increasing capacity elegance and
good faith anyone anywhere who has done
that on their own is what I'm referring
to as Gabey and then as that particular
cohort uses the Kairos of the moment to
upgrade their individual collective
capacity which is to say finding each
other we
each other building trust and now
learning in the context of a real-world
experiment where choices matter how to
actually do this thing better we're kind
of moving to early adolescence I would
say right now I think I've mentioned the
past that game B was somewhere in late
childhood and write it right now
entering into the the early teenage
years as far as I can tell and so one of
the big question is how rapid the
development actually happened in these
environments I'll give you a concrete
example over the past three days I
believe that I have created
I've personally created
90 new high-quality edges so think of a
graph and there's nodes which are us for
each individual nodes and if we have a
relationship it's an edge you can have
it imagine it's like a drooly dark line
if it's a really good relationship and
really thin line if it's a small
acquaintance and an awareness of the
reality of the existence of the
relationship
at a at a graph theoretic level the
problem statement of game B is creating
the right network topology which is to
say creating the right relationships
with the right bindings meaning the
right strengths and the places where
they need to be
three days I have created 90 edges these
relationships that up until three days
ago people who didn't know each other at
all or at least didn't have any direct
relationship that may have been aware of
each other in sort of reputation and
using my discernment and by the way the
discernment of the much larger network
around me it is strongly sensed that
those are very very valuable
relationships to have so the network
topology of the graph around me has
become enormous ly stronger because each
one of these individuals are in fact
themselves connected to large
communities and those communities are
oriented by the discernment and
sovereignty there are competent people
who have been doing this kind of stuff
and we're getting better at knowing what
competence means in this environment
which is I think is a key question so if
we have questions around that let's talk
about it
all right I think that's probably enough
from the sort of view point of view so
where's the best branching point you
take this yeah so ask you maybe one or
two questions Jordan but if anyone has
questions just write in the chat box and
then I'll call on you so one question is
talking a lot of people and a lot of
people are confused about how to sense
making choice making this environment a
lot of people are just addicted to like
Twitter right now and just kind of in
taking as much information and it seems
unhealthy a lot of people have been
telling me so do you have any general
practical like advice tips heuristics on
how to essentially put the oxygen mask
on first yes and let me make a meta
point to be held because this is the
this is the way this thing happens like
why it works so well is it be the answer
that I'm about to give has many many
different synergies so the first answer
is to remember that since leaking choice
making always comes from sovereignty so
if you are not taking care of your
sovereignty you were by definition
degrading your sense making and choice
making so the first answer is begin at
the beginning
you know if you're not taking care of
your sleep your nutrition your food your
physical exercise and your you know
whatever it's still you know Buddhist
meditative yogic practice that you have
then do that
it's just 101 and if you were not a
tuned instrument prepared to engage in
wu-wei with the real flow of the the
chaos then nothing else that you do
relent to be mindful of addiction
be aware of the fact and I am first
among those who have had this problem so
I'm not speaking from a higher place I'm
speaking from right in the middle of it
I've had to be very careful to not let
those little flashing red numbers
particularly in places where my mind my
ego-mind
can tell me that it's very important to
grab my attention and so I've got I
don't know 50 what's that groups that
I'm not part of that are actually doing
things that I can convince myself are
very important and so
I finished a particular conversation
like this one and my ego-mind says sit
down at the laptop and look at whatsapp
oh my God look at all those little
circles with numbers on them it's very
important to whack that mole dopamine
hit you know the salience landscaping
that is designed or that has been
optimized around by social media is real
and as a meaningful negative effect so
here's the protocol that I'm orienting
towards
you
above your personal self-care your
personal practices
a significant amount of time to
face-to-face conversation with other
real humans so bias in your media stack
down towards higher bandwidth
make that time this is a good practice
peer-to-peer just talk to people
people are we're about to have a mental
health crisis that is going to make the
viral crisis look like nothing happened
begin the process of weaving a fabric of
relationality that has at least
something in the domain of humaneness
through these platforms go down and take
it into the embodiment layer dyadic
conversations triatic conversations four
five six as you start getting past seven
it starts becoming less human and this
conversation is much more than the
information I mean it's harder for us to
build relation a leti if you have a
community that actually has existing
relation allottee you can obviously get
those numbers higher but that's the key
real relationships real embodiment real
humanity still needs to be the majority
of your sense making time and don't
underestimate that a lot of insight will
come from conversations with just
regular people your friends you'll learn
things that help bring things together
that you otherwise couldn't perceive by
scanning the thin fast salience
landscape what's happening in high
refreshed social media
[Music]
Daniel cos engine can you read out your
question yeah I was wondering what are
the standard operating procedures for
engaging with people in the real world
given the necessity for social
distancing
you mean in the physical world yeah we
don't actually have high quality
protocols for that it is a project it's
being worked on oddly enough Bret
Weinstein took that as a personal task
so right now the standard operating
procedures are as little as you can get
away with and we're trying to evolve it
from there so the big work right now is
to try to figure out in parallel really
what can we do using a medium like this
because this is going to have to play a
big role over the next couple of months
and then backing that back out how do we
create appropriate protocols for
embodied like real embodied physical
interaction even simple like go to
the grocery store and then ideally
bigger stuff where we can actually be
back in real relationship with each
other
Ali can you unmute yourself and read
your question
yes thank you my question was I'll just
read it I'm responsible for three young
children how much effort
should I be making to get them to higher
ground for example I'm in Silicon Valley
in Palo Alto in a tiny apartment and I
have access to farm family farm in in
Quebec and I was thinking of driving
well I'll I'll just put my my sort of
own skin in the game I drove my wife and
I took our young daughter and we took a
road trip out to Texas and we're now and
sitting in our on our family our family
farm if you have access to a family and
a family farm and you have three young
children my basic senses that would be a
very good idea I don't know if you're
gonna be able to get across the border
we're all Canadian so they'll let us
through
well I'll tell my husband after this
call thank you yeah and this is like my
wife gave me this feedback so in my case
I I pulled the trigger gosh almost four
weeks ago so my sensors all went red and
said okay I'd like to I'd like to
suggest that we do something that seems
a little weird I'd like to buy a lot of
food and water and materials and put it
in the RV and drive to Texas and she
just looked at me going why we've got
you know lives and it seems really hard
so what do we what do we frame is as
road trips were fun are we frame it as
Camping's the thing we like to do and as
we move perhaps things will become more
obvious and I think two days ago she
actually just pulled me aside and said
thank you because we couldn't possibly
be in a better place and we would be
insane right now in our our little ranch
house in San Diego with the inability to
actually bring in any other people so
just be the two of us trying to deal
with eighteen-month-old
and that's not three young children
that's one
so yeah but you know my stomach is like
feeling very almost like tender right
now cuz that's a real that's a serious
question that's a really really hard
choice to make
my brother-in-law actually asked me
yesterday his girlfriend they actually
moved into our house so that they would
they live in San Diego they were in a
tiny tiny apartment they moved into our
house but his girlfriend's Canadian
and he said what should I do because if
she gets sick she has no insurance here
in America and we can't afford to deal
with any medical costs should she go
back to Canada and if she does she has
aged elderly parents who have both have
compromised pulmonary systems and so all
I could do is say okay here's the
information that I have here's the
choices that you've made in the past
you're gonna have to make the best
choice and then and try to feel good
about the your capacity and making good
choices that's kind of where we are
right now
[Music]
Gregg did you have a question
Gregg Walsh to piggyback on that Lou
yeah this was just in relation to
Ellie's question that I do have access
to a family farm way up in the boons of
Pennsylvania like it's completely off
grid well not completely but there's no
internet access no communication no cell
phone so is it do I think about it as
better to stay in the area where I can
have access to things like this or you
know goes someplace more to hunker down
well again I think I think questions
like this would probably best be feel
fielded in a collaborative collective
intelligence but I can guarantee you
that the specifics matter and I don't
have any good answers when I listen to
what you're saying I would actually feel
very I would feel very concerned
personally if I didn't have access to
communications
it's kind of a it's a long bet now you
know so as I think through it I'm like
okay well to what degree does it have
significance efficiency does it have
good water does it have good food like
is it really a hunkered down place
because in this case you'd be looking
down core down in a very big way second
part is what role do you have to play in
the larger conversation we may need you
and so while it may in fact in some
sense in principle even be in your best
interests to go off grid it may not be
in the best interests of the whole so
think in both directions and then if
there's a context of family young
children
vulnerable people there's a need a real
priority of getting in them into places
which are more livable in the context of
what looks like several months at least
of hunkering down I mean young fit
able-bodied males were just kind of in a
wartime footing if you have something to
give to the larger context it may be the
most the best choice to be thinking
about prioritizing that so it's you know
these are very complex nuanced questions
and that's my sense by the way my sense
may not necessarily be a good sense it's
just you know what I got
no Ryan I would like to read out your
question
yeah one of the things that I'm feeling
these days my situation is actually
pretty stable
we've got enough amenities around us
social distancing pretty easily but I'm
being filled with a sense of urgency and
almost a calling to actually participate
more and actually take advantage of this
leverage point in history I'm curious
what you're seeing from your perspective
for a person who is in a good position
what are some particularly high leverage
actions that you are seeing right now
that might be become important on the on
a larger scale well that's actually a
very long list so let me see if I can
find a way to create a
an impeccable answer
all right I'm gonna do is this at a high
level and then try to bring it down to a
more practical level for those of you
who contract at the high level it'll do
the maximally leveraged and if not we'll
bring it down into more practical levels
and where things land at a high level
the world right now is basically being
broke broken up into roughly four kinds
of people the first kind still the vast
majority are people who are not yet
secured
in many cases that securities at the
psychological level they have not yet
adjusted to the reality of where we are
in our moving into a place of
psychological cognitive sovereignty in
many cases its physical they are still
in places where there's a real question
whether or not it's a good place for
them to be so category 1 and category 1
the only thing is to get yourself into a
place of stability in some sense that's
simple and of course really very hard
then you've got people who have moved
across they figured out what the right
answer is and they're moving through
that process and then you've got people
in category two people in category two
are people who are now trying to asking
a question like what you're asking I am
now stable and I'm looking around trying
to understand how do I best be at
service in the context of the larger
whole in category two are people who are
positioned to operate in what I would
call tactical or engaged mode they're
there on the ground doing stuff you know
projects swarming all over the place
depending on your local capacities and
your relationships and your
relationships matter here people who you
know and trust like finding people you
know and trust and self-organizing with
them because leveraging collective
intelligence just has such a multiplier
effect and it's really easier to work
with people who you already know and
trust and find out what you as a group
can do than it is to try to jump into
something where you have to build
relation
you have very unique skills if you have
very unique skills than finding a place
where your very unique skills are
uniquely well serviced it's worth the
time and energy to build relation to
allottee but broadly speaking
self-organizing groups that youthful
good relationship with and saying okay
what can we do is a first is the best
answer because at the high level the
question is we the big challenge for us
right now is to avoid the us-versus-them
dynamic and continue to embody and grow
the we dynamic that's kind of a good
aesthetic rule of thumb
okay third category the third category
are people who are equipped to operate
at a level of strategic leverage
fortunately mo
to the people who are operated operate
into the third category don't have the
best interest of the whole at month so
these are collective intelligences often
organizations and political groups but
your favorite bad guy who have already
in some sense adjusted to the current
reality have seen that we're in a Kairos
event
and have a capacity to not be mired in
trying to fight fires but to sit back
and look at the environment and say okay
what are the moves that I can make they
have the most strategic leverage
I'll give you an example right now the
Treasury Department is endeavoring to
put together a program to inject
substantial amounts of cash to recommend
to individuals they talk about it like
$1,000 per person that won't be enough
but in any event bad idea and you can
imagine by the way that's an intense
thing like to take that idea and move it
from Andrew yang to gonna happen as
moving through a lot of
psychological inertia and so they're
they're very much focused almost all
focused tactically how do we make it
happen what's the plan that kind of
works but there's a handful of folks who
are well positioned to look at it
strategically meaning they're watching
the whole environment saying how do I
know do this system too
maksim take advantage of the fact this
is a huge program it's going to be
several trillion dollars of money are
going to be moved into the environment
now
if you happen to be in a place where you
can move strategically you can make that
shape move in a direction that benefits
the things you want to benefit that's
high leverage unfortunately again most
of the guys in category 4 are not
working in the best interest of the
whole and and so if you have that kind
of capacity forming collective
intelligences that have a gent have an
OODA loop that can operate strategically
and they can perceive sense make and
then choice they can actually in the
pace and complexity of the environment
who are operating in and have the best
interest the whole in mind do that don't
worry about things in category to
operate a category through and there are
examples of that I'll give you an
example right now we're trying to nudge
places like say Facebook to move into a
higher level of effective choice more
ethical approaches because if they can
begin to drop into more ethical
approaches the power of the platform is
quite hot and by the way I mean again
when I say category I don't necessarily
mean mal-intent
I just mean that they're egoic
structures are driving their choice
making so they cannot help but make
choices that are maximizing their rival
Mis game theoretic position because
that's the way they make sense of the
world then you have people in category 4
category 4 is the ability to have the
conversation we're having right now
actually perceive the Metta landscape
that includes all the previous
categories and to be able to contemplate
what might it look like in principle to
have a who dilute to have sovereignty to
have a sense making perception since
making choice making and actuation
capacity in that context how might we go
about constructing a collective
intelligence with enough strength with a
binding capacity with an ability to move
things through it
fast enough and rich enough to perceive
everything that's happening and to make
effective choices in that context and
then to percolate those effective
choices down into the actuation dynamics
of the real world so it's maximally
nudge the total system dynamics in an
upgrading for the whole if you
understood right what I said right there
welcome to category four
it's not a common place to be but it can
become very common if people are
listening in the right way let's say
yeah
the only language we have to describe it
is since I can transcend into a
spiritual dimension maximally using your
cognitive and embodied capacities to
communicate and perceive - it's the rule
Omega point
there are some that are proposing in
category five if there is such a thing
it's above my pay grade
okay I'm gonna read out Ashley's
question I'm an education high school
and college students what conversational
topics can I engage them with without
scaring them but planting seeds and
hopefully sculpting them into sovereign
Ally aware beings and/or emerging
leaders I believe it is my duty to start
conversations with my sphere I don't
know who you are but I love you that is
one of the most what do you recall it
ripe and ripen in this full aesthetic
sense I should say that as time moves
forward it begins to move into overripe
and then into rottenness meaning this is
something we're moving with smoothness
and elegance to take advantage of the
opportunity that's emerging in a timely
fashion to avoid it actually becoming
something that's a real problem is
callistos
and there are many many answers to that
question the pot was powerful answer is
to recognize that these kids are
superheroes waiting to happen
their native ambient capacity to flow
across the possibility space of the
environment to be living right now at
the physical level is orders of
magnitude greater than our own if we can
find a way to empower them to recognize
that they have within themselves most of
what is needed if they can learn how to
communicate with each other and connect
and connect with the people who want to
help them help themselves they will
become the most powerful force in the
world and I don't mean that in the least
bit
all right say this naively
some serious when he was 12 there
are 12 year olds right now who could do
some serious
there are definitely 17 year olds and 22
year olds who could do some serious
in many cases if we can help them that's
the best thing and of course to degree
to which they learn through doing by
embodied capacity to achieve self
liberation and self sovereignty oh my
god that's very powerful
so 2 degree to which you can actually
create in yourself the capacity to be a
conduit for wisdom and flow that into
them to help them unlock within
themselves the Andean capacity to step
into their own sovereignty and discover
the ways themselves that work to support
each other that is your highest that
would be the most valuable thing that
could be done and there are so many
they're all sitting at home playing
Minecraft if they are kind of in the
high school trim minecraft is exactly
one half a step away from doing real
stuff
if they're sitting at home watching
Netflix make them aware of how addiction
works and recognize that it very soon
that's going to be very bad for their
health
Thomas you had a few questions one
recently about the earthquake tap in
Utah
hey thanks yeah just wondering about
secondary effects and if if any other
natural disasters you know came onto the
scene earthquakes hurricanes you know
coming over to hurricane season at the
end of this summer you know how that
might affect the larger sphere the
political sphere the economic sphere and
and also just back home I mean stocking
up on resources not a bad thing but I'm
challenging to do person-to-person
contact in that scenario direct the
people who are hit most worst yeah
well first prey let's hope that has some
efficacy because we would be really nice
not to have any significant natural
disasters in the middle of this because
obviously were stretched to the limits
and as you say
and I still active sorry Thomas just
frozen's of me we're good okay
the normal way that we respond to most
natural disasters is uniquely inhibited
but the context that we find ourselves
in a whole bunch of people getting
together to start putting sand in
sandbags to prevent the levee from
breaking is going to be
hard that said some things are more cute
than other things if you're right now in
the context of being flooded you're
gonna have to rapidly figure out a way
to quarantine the people who actually
need to be protected and then put
able-bodied people on the frontlines to
actually deal with that problem then
figure out how to do with the rest later
sorry that's just reality let's take it
up one level and look at the meta
reality daniel trachtenberg brought this
to the collective intention people like
first responders I think think about
medical EMS and even like military as we
start moving closer and closer to having
the need to actually start using
National Guard to to maintain order and
quarantine they're not wearing hazmat
suits and what that means simultaneously
is that they're going to get infected
and act as vectors for for dissemination
and they're gonna get sick so we're just
kind of needing mindful of that at a
certain level it doesn't matter at a
certain level that's problematic and a
certain level creates another cascade
effect to deal with so yes spillover
effects both natural and non natural
they inject asymmetric
anteye modal chaos into the system
challenging to deal with what I mean by
that is an earthquake is a nature driven
anti modal it's a new front it's a new
kind of thing that we are currently
dealing with and it's chaotic mean that
it creates a whole new crisis for
Horizon and our ways of doing with
crisis horizons in general are stretched
to the limit and in ways that were not
even used to human driven would be of
some nice person decides to say do a
cyberattack on smart grids tomorrow
we're hyper vulnerable to all kinds of
mal-intent
there were hyperbole in all kinds of
natural disaster let's flip it around
we're not just helpless the fact with
the entire populace right now is moving
into a resilience mindset means that we
can actually handle more crisis what
would otherwise have been I remember
actually and I think this is actually
loss to the collective intelligence in
September 11th
in that crisis event not too long after
like six days after if I recall
correctly there's like a jumbo jet to
crashed in New York New Jersey kind of
on the East Coast
that we were all
supersaturated with events that were
going on that what I had would otherwise
have owned our salience landscaping when
almost unnoticed and I don't mean that
and that's how this that's negative in
some sense because maybe did need to go
unnoticed but also positive we were now
geared up and dealing with serious
firefighting adding another fire to the
equation is hard but it's also something
we may in fact be positioned to deal
with so let's think about it like our
job right now is to build the capacity
to respond to whatever made sure and
humanity throws at us and then let's
hope that it throws things that is that
are not too hard to deal with
thank you sorry let me just me hit that
really quick Sokka Thomas the point
message there is we just need to be able
to respond to reality when it shows up
so it's it's point by point if you got
an earthquake use the collective
intelligences that are developing to
figure out how to create a bespoke
solution to the situation that you find
yourself in that's kind of it yeah make
sense okay we've got about 10 more
minutes left and looks like the
collective intelligence is doing its
work in the chat so a visitorial
explosion antenna so I'll read a
question from our buddy Phil Chen how do
you see Sochi a social organizing
collective intelligence evolved after
coronavirus how do we use sustain this
energy after this and not go back to
normal
yeah and this is kind of one of those
the water comes the tide comes in the
tide comes out alluvial plain things
whereas it comes in lots and lots of
things can happen and then as it comes
out certain portions of what's developed
now will in fact wash out and then
challenge is going to be how do we
maximum move things up the hierarchical
complexity developmental landscape which
is to say there are in fact staged
developments there are things where once
you've actually learned it it's just now
part of reality it doesn't get unlearned
even when the pressure lowers
relationships that are built real
relationships that are built on in the
trenches don't go away
think about that metaphor of World War
two the people who went and fought in
World War two and built real
relationships when they came back to
peacetime they still had real
relationships and so when things were
tough he could get on the phone and call
your buddy in New York and say hey
remember me like yeah I remember you you
were next to me and then in the in the
foxhole I need some help and help
happens because you're operating from a
transcendent relationship that's one so
again if we can move the stack down into
building that kind of fabric that kind
of fabric doesn't go away second habits
like building better intuitions on how
to do this kind of thing right now
people are forced out of the inertia of
their time being spent doing other stuff
it's a found opportunity either we can't
do it because that environment isn't
exist anymore or the energy of the
moment is actually pushing us past
minimum thresholds of not being lazy and
actually learning new skills all right
well as fast as possible like take that
seriously learn new skills like really
learn how to build a capacity to your
capacities of discernment really learn
how to build more conceptual landscapes
and build the interior of your psyche of
escape so you're actually able to
perceive what's going on better physical
infrastructure there are tools being
built those tools more or less don't
necessarily need to go away if they're
really good tools they won't go away
it doesn't necessarily need mean by the
way that that's where all the attention
needs to go
those first two layers are more
important they're more fundamental the
more the way that self-organizing
collective intelligence actually
operates because a lot of physical
infrastructure is going to be thrown
together to meet the needs of the moment
as it should be so it's more like seeing
the topology that infrastructure seeing
what kinds of things work and then
saying okay how do we build on top of
that but on occasion some pieces might
actually just be permanent upgrades of
our collective capacity
okay so this one is from Adams as
interesting wide networks of artists
musicians creative practitioners
normally focused on long-term shifts in
thinking opening new spaces
best way for their faculty a for those
faculties to contribute in the current
context yeah so let's just kind of
hammer in that notion to transcend an
operator like I said at the beginning
this is a spiritual crisis and the
deepest best work is actually done at
the spiritual level if you can find a
way to actually synthesize collectively
if our collective soul can hear that
which is calling to change within us and
then you can communicate that so that
everyone is actually feeling that thing
resonating within themselves and get it
voice so they in themselves can actually
feel the light coming through themselves
and grow from their interior that is the
highest possibility for the whole that
is the job of the artists now
Nate you had a question or Jake I should
say Jake the book networked a collective
intelligence yeah thanks
so it seems like networked collective
intelligence as a mode of making sense
of things orient yourself because it was
so effective and kind of ahead of the
curve of the kind of centralized sense
making organs for this crisis has
demonstrated legitimacy to the broader
public
and so I suspect that more and more
people will be moving toward using that
as their their primary mode of
sense-making especially since they're
gonna be digital as well but but there
are obviously dynamics of social
contagion and and panic that the crowds
orient toward and I'm wondering what you
think the best way to mitigate that is
as a broader populace that isn't
necessarily sovereign Lewis sort that
motor sense making people learn most
through emulation and they must learn
best through emulation of other people
who they feel sense not feel well feel
are like them so the more diverse people
that we can bring into conversations
like this one that could be seen and
perceived by other people the better
that's the maximum bandwidth channel for
disseminating right action so for
example
fires and by the way I need to bring
this Bret's campfire because Brett's the
one who gave you this idea like this
show people what it means to be asking
the right kinds of questions and
thinking from a place of sovereignty and
compassion
what it looks like in
feels like it's the feeling factor that
matters most if they can feel it in
their body what it feels like to be able
to be truly sovereign in the context of
now and then can feel can start to make
choices to begin engaging like the first
step is watch one the second step is do
one
all right watch learn do and we can
iterate on that a widely distributed
network of people who are participating
in decentralized campfires that are
upgrading our collective capacity to
actually be conscious is very doable and
very powerful and it's very in some
sense very easy because everybody can do
it
from that comes the next set of stuff so
imagine in those campfires people began
inquiring into these kinds of questions
and learning how to ask the best
questions and learning how to respond to
them in the right way
okay so this is going to be the last
question sorry for those questions we
didn't get to and Joe I'm going to read
this on your behalf
what does prayer look like in a game be
world that's a good question
oddly enough I was actually just
wondering that myself like literally as
you were asking the questions that's a
good sign the conversation I've been
having with John around faith I think
points in more or less in the right
direction right it does not look like
magical thinking what's it look like
well it's just two hitting first person
this is it looks like for me
it begins with meditation
it's that bottom of the you think guys
for a movie with that metaphor so
slowing down knowing that the first
thing to do is actually to get out of
the ago at construct so slowing down
loosening relaxing settling getting to
the bottom of the you
you
then from the bottom of the you
listening to what is calling and it's
not a egoic construct projecting wants
into the world it's a self listening to
what the world is asking for
and then feelings allowing the feelings
to emerge the world communicates through
feelings and noticing what those
feelings are
and orienting more and more into a
directionality of I suppose we might
call them virtue calling in yourself
grace humility compassion hope and hope
again we can rescue these ideas but
again we can put them in the right and
the right footing I don't know if you've
watched that video if you haven't
watched that video we did a lot of good
stuff around these kinds of words
dispositional e orienting your higher
self into the right kinds of ways of
being to be able to most fully perceive
in the
without getting in the way
without having prejudgment and fear and
all those other kinds of things
bending what it is you're perceiving
that's actually what prayer looks like
doesn't that seem interesting it's a
very different kind of notion all right
you're not trying to send emails to God
that ain't it it's more like
learning how to become capable and
asking for the capacity to give your
highest in to what is needed in that
moment for the whole
it is the day mod so we have a session
coming up on let's see that I'm doing on
the 23rd at 7:00 p.m. Eastern Time
embodying the Stockdale paradox and
that's like a stoic term for holding the
tension between like that radical
uncertainty and seeing the grittiness of
reality at the same time having this
existential Hope at the same time so if
you're interested for that session you
can RSVP to it um so Jordan any closing
thoughts well yeah I don't think I even
want to go high level on this let me
stick with that one piece because I
think that there's a that learn like the
edge that question the practice of
actually getting into that place is a
hyper useful practice and it's very
scalable because a lot of people are
confused how do you become capable of
actually smoothly being in connection
with the shape of the reality that
you're in that's the thing
the fear is a signal don't avoid it
listen to it but don't let it make you
tight like that kind of stuff like those
kinds of practices and building those
practices we can actually just become
capable of following loosely well being
water in the context of what is
happening hmm okay so I'm gonna make an
announcement a moment but thank you
Jordan for being on this call today and
being such a mensch during this
meta-crisis guys say Jordan so for
everyone else tomorrow 11:00 a.m.
Eastern Time we have Massimo Pigliucci
discussing being a stoic during a
pandemic other upcoming events include
care mongering meditations existential
dance parties you can check this all out
on the stoah dot CA to RSVP to them
include it in the the chat in the moment
there we go you can sign up to the
mailing list there and I view the store
as a gift everyone to freely use if
you're inspired to provide a gift in
return you can go to the website and you
can see the gift economy
so thanks everyone for being on the call
today appreciate it bye guys thank you
[Music]