[Music]
let's move on to the next question
go ahead hi my name is Jenny I'm a
sophomore and this is for all three of
you can you say why America is the
greatest country in the world diversity
and opportunity Louis freedom and
freedom so let's keep it that way
[Applause]
well our Constitution is a masterpiece
James Madison was a genius the
Declaration of Independence is for me
the single greatest piece of American
writing you don't look satisfied one's a
set of laws and the others a declaration
of war I want a human moment from you
what about the people why is not the
greatest country in the world professor
that's my answer you're saying yes and
with a straight face you're gonna tell
students that America is so
star-spangled awesome that we're the
only ones in the world who have freedom
Canada has freedom Japan has freedom the
UK France Italy Germany Spain Australia
Belgium has freedom so 207 sovereign
states in the world like 180 of them
have freedom all right and got you a
sorority girl just in case you
accidentally wander into a voting booth
one day there's some things you should
know and one of them is there is
absolutely no evidence to support the
statement that were the greatest country
in the world were 7th and literacy 27th
and math 22nd in science 49th and life
expectancy 178th in infant mortality
third and median household income number
four in labor force and number four in
exports we lead the world in only three
categories number of incarcerated
citizens per capita number of adults who
believe angels are real and defense
spending where we spend more than the
next 26 countries combined 25 of whom
are allies no no this is the fault of a
20 year old college student but you
nonetheless are without a doubt a member
of the worst period generation period
ever periods when you ask what makes us
the greatest country in the world I
don't know
the fuck you're talking about Yosemite
sure used to be we stood up for what was
right we fought for moral reasons we
passed laws struck down laws for moral
reasons we waged wars on poverty not
poor people we sacrificed we cared about
our neighbors we put our money where our
mouths were and we never beat our chest
we built great big things made ungodly
technological advances explored the
universe cured diseases and we
cultivated the world's greatest artists
and the world's greatest economy we
reached for the stars acted like men we
aspired to intelligence we didn't
belittle it it didn't make us feel
inferior we didn't identify ourselves by
who we voted for in the last election
and we didn't scare so easy
[Music]
we were able to be all these things and
do all these things because we were
informed by great men men who were
revered for step in solving any problem
is recognizing there is one that was a
clip from the newsroom a show aired on
HBO a few years back welcome back to the
red pills sorry it's been such a long
time since the last one
sorry also that this is not about the
Jekyll Island meeting and financial
crashes which is what I said I was going
to do at the end of the last video I
have subsequently changed my mind I've
used that clip by way of introducing the
idea of this video which is looking at
the media the importance of the media
I mean if money and government controls
the doings of our lives then the media
and education which I'm going to get to
in a couple of videos time control the
thinking's of our lives you know what we
think what we feel what we our opinions
our imaginations and so on the
importance of journalism news media the
media in general I think think can be
overstated in fact I don't think I'll be
over aching if I said that America was
in many ways founded on the principle of
free journalism a chap by the name of
Thomas Paine who was one of the founding
fathers of America albeit one of the
lesser-known ones he wrote a pamphlet
called common sense in 1776 which was
widely circulated in fact I believe it
remains the most widely published most
the most printed document ever in
American history
anyway this document was widely
circulated read out in town halls and
pubs and stuff like that all over the
country and really fermented the
independence movement against Britain so
you know America was largely founded on
the idea that information is power and
information is freedom and that a free
press was a fundamental right and was
enshrined in the Constitution freedom of
the press is the only profession which
is which has its freedom enshrined in
the Constitution media was subsidized
irrespective of content in the early day
to the US because they recognize the
importance of a free and vigorous media
to a free and vigorous democracy and so
by subsidizing it irrespective of
content it means that a wide range of
voices and opinions are heard and aired
and circulated and discussed and a free
and unimpeded press challenges power and
it prevents corruption it prevents
cronyism in politics
it holds politicians accountable and it
scrutinizes their behavior even more
importantly than that the media is the
conversation that we have with each
other as a society it's the way that we
learn about the world and it's the way
that we learn about each other access to
information is thus essential I think
about it how do we know anything about
the world around us we gather
information about it using our senses is
that the actual world around us the
world that we see with our senses well
no of course it's not our I see only a
limited range of the frequencies of
light which are out there
Arya's here only a pretty narrow
frequency range of sound so our view of
the world is limited by the quality of
the data that we gather about it it is
also limited by the data that we pay
attention to it's estimated that some
90% of the data gathered by our senses
never actually makes it into conscious
awareness because it's discarded for
lack of relevance and anyway the point
is that the world outside of our
immediate sphere we rely on information
imparted to us by other people in the
form of new TV social media internet
books newspapers films etc etc and so a
range of perspectives is necessary for
example if you ask a police investigator
at the scene of a crime they ask a dozen
witnesses to describe what they've seen
they will get a dozen different witness
accounts it doesn't mean anyone's lying
or deceptive in any way it just means
different people see things differently
and so in order to construct any kind of
reliable view of the world you need a
variety of information and obviously
this being the matrix my contention is
that that does not happen so by deciding
what we are told and more importantly
what we are not
told by distorting and manipulating
information by narrowing ranges of
opinion and perspectives our thoughts
our opinions our imaginations even our
very worldview can be surprisingly
easily controlled and so a free open
unrestricted unconsolidated flow of
information is therefore essential for
the smooth functioning of the society
and so what I really want to look at is
two main things for the rest of this
video I want to look at how the media
industry has consolidated over the last
few decades and how the flow of
information has been concentrated into
ever fewer and fewer and fewer hands a
familiar story if you remember the story
if you remember what's happened to the
banking industry over the last few
decades in the second part of this in
another video which will come fairly
shortly I'm going to look at how
dissenting voices people who stubbornly
refused to be silent have been silenced
anyway
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
so like I said back in the day the media
in the US was subsidized and there were
thousands and thousands of radio
stations and newspapers each town had
its own radio station at least one its
own newspaper at least one bigger towns
had quite a few TV starts to change
everything because they realized that
they could start making money out of
advertising on a scale that they were
unable to on radio or on newspapers and
so the larger company started lobbying
Congress to allow consolidation and in
1934 the Communications Act was signed
and this gave away basically publicly
owned airways to a few large
corporations and this is the beginning
of the networks in the u.s. this was NBC
CBS and ABC becoming national networks
and this was simply given to him this
was publicly owned Airways publicly
owned transmitters etc which was just
given away to companies to now make
profits from their advertising revenues
yeah it's quite an extraordinary thing
just given away creating a privately
owned monopoly has a publicly owned
infrastructure but at least it was
regulated there were laws in place which
prevented anyone network opening too
much in terms of local radio stations
and TV stations and so on so that they
no one company could define the
discourse and similarly there were
barriers against any one company owning
the TV and the radio and the newspaper
in any one town not to mention all sorts
of other restrictions based on their
practices you know they couldn't
advertise much during children's
programming I had to get equal airtime
to political candidates from different
parties they when they leave their lives
they had to show themselves to be fit
proper responsible people to hold an
heir license so you know there were many
restrictions placed on their practices
this all starts to change under Ronald
Reagan I mean he believed in you know
get government out and big is better and
let the market rip and all this kind of
nonsense and so a lot of these
regulations started to be cut back
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
I've done it how many of you will
remember this but Ronald Reagan was
actually a spokesman for gee he did lots
of lots of advertising for them and his
campaign was financed by GE and other
large corporations to a very great
extent he allowed the merger of GE RCA
and NBC against a great deal of public
outcry at the time because it
consolidated a great deal of power to
disseminate information into small hands
also GE has its fingers in all sorts of
other pies and so there are now
conflicts of interest possible you know
programming may not be done because it
harms GE interests in some way it should
be noted as well that Reagan approved
the merger of GE with RCA and NBC
despite the fact that GE had less than
an exemplary record in its trading
history
[Music]
above all the relaxation of the
restrictions governing how many stations
one company could own meant that big
companies went around gobbling up
hundreds and hundreds of newspapers
radio stations TV stations in small
towns all over America and so the news
now becomes the smaller and smaller
piece of ever larger and larger
corporations and the news is no longer
done as a public service but is now a
profit center as a consequence there
have been huge job losses here's a
couple of interesting stats the
consequence of the media now being
primarily profit driven and all the
cutbacks to newsrooms and to the numbers
of journalists means that there are far
fewer to actually gather news and so
what most broadcasters now do is they
simply read out statements from the
press officers of politicians or the
public relations department of
corporations without scrutiny without
any kind of checking of well if you
filled up your gas tank lately then you
don't need us to tell you that gas
prices are back on the rise you don't
need us and tell you that gas prices are
back on the rise you don't need us to
tell you the gas prices are back on the
rise you don't need us to tell you that
gas prices are back on the rise and you
don't need us to tell you that gas
prices are back on the rise you don't
need us to tell you that gas prices are
back on the rise you don't need us to
tell you
you don't need us to tell you that gas
prices are back on the ride you don't
need us to tell you gas prices are back
on the rise so you don't need us to tell
you that gas prices are back on the rise
you don't need us to tell you that gas
prices are back on the rocks
you don't need us to tell you gas prices
are back on the ride but you don't need
us to tell you but thank God we walked
out on the live you don't need us to
tell you gas prices are on the rise
I know consumer news economic factors
may take some spring out of the Easter
Bunny step this year the economic
factors may take some spring out of the
Easter Bunny step this year economic
factors may take some spring out of the
Easter Bunny step this year economic
factors may take some may take some
spring out of the Easter Bunny stuff
this year economic factors may take some
spring out of the Easter Bunny stuff
this year economic factors may take some
spring out of the Easter Bunny stuff
this year
economic factors may take some spring
out of the Easter Bunny death this year
economic factors may take some spring
out of the Easter Bunny step this year
economic factors may take some spring
out of the Easter Bunny stuff this year
economic factors may take some spring
out of the Easter Bunny except this year
economic factors may take some spring
out of the Easter Bunny stuff this year
the economic factors may take some
spring out of the Easter Bunny step this
year economic factors may take some
spring out of the Easter Bunny that's
this year economics
take some spring out of the Easter
Bunny's step this year economic factors
may take some spring out of the Easter
Bunny step this year economic factors
may take some of the spring out of the
Easter Bunny step this year Easter Bunny
kudos to Conan O'Brien for once again
exposing the media repeaters look guys
obviously this is no coincidence
the question remains where are all these
new stations getting their scripts from
well there are affiliate news services
that supply packages and scripts to
hundreds of stations around the country
stations then have their anchors read
the Kansas story with the generic script
now you might look at this and say it's
just indicative of how lazy local news
can be but consider the implications of
this kind of reporting for one second
the bottom line is that people who watch
the news tend to trust this information
information that then influences their
perception and decisions
so for these anchors to ask no questions
do no fact-checking
and hold no different interpretation of
the news of delivering is not only
absurd it's downright dangerous that
last little bit there was a P Martin who
is a broadcaster of Isis she is on RT
you'll find her on YouTube as well I
have a massive crush on her ABI if you
ever happen to be watching leave a
comment love to get in touch with you I
agree with almost everything that she
ever says but on this particular
occasion one small thing I would take
issue with out I think laziness among
these people is the main issue as I'm
going to go into in the next video there
are people out there who have tried in
the face of this general tendency
towards dumbing everything down and
looking for the lowest common
denominator there have been people who
have tried to stand against but they
have been silenced they've been removed
from their jobs and there is always a
willing lackey willing to fill a suit
and sit in front of a camera and read
out a script so it's it's yeah it is
laziness but those who try not to be
lazy are soon removed so it's not
entirely the fault of the journalists
the consolidation pattern continued
under Clinton Clinton in 1996 under
Telecommunications Act
and this in turn led to a series of
mega-mergers
[Music]
[Music]
now we have a situation where some 90%
of the Western media is controlled by
six organizations all of our information
flow pretty much comes through six
organizations and those six
organizations are themselves all
interlinked with each other they've all
got mutual interests and so they tend to
club together and protect each other
[Music]
[Music]
just to be clear that top six is the top
six in terms of production of content
that people actually watch I mean
companies like Facebook and Google
obviously are way up there Google is
number one by a mile
but they don't make content the point is
TV internet radio movies newspapers
these things have enormous power to
shape political agendas public opinion
the national conversation imagination
reality itself in other words and as
consolidation has happened local
broadcasters have been brought up or
have simply died away and this is
concentrated power for the flow of
information into very very few hands and
in the immortal words of spider-man with
great power not spider-man actually his
uncle wasn't anyway with great power
comes great responsibility the original
charter of the BBC and similarly with
the network's in America was to educate
inform and to entertain and not to
titillate to indoctrinate and to market
journalism was protected under the
Constitution in order to give it the
freedom to seek out and expose corrupt
and criminal behavior on the part of
people who had the power to influence
the lives of others and not to hound
celebrities for nip-slip shots and hack
their phones for little personal details
about their lives the fact is that the
public knows more about sex scandals and
iPhones than it does about economics
than it does about politics science the
environment philosophy and this is quite
deliberate remember we are in the matrix
and the media provides an excellent
distraction from important discussions
important debates important issues the
whole media being in so few hands means
that they can control the zeitgeist
itself and they do so in order to make a
profit from us today amplify and
accentuate our baser natures while
simultaneously telling us what to think
and what to talk about by limiting and
framing the debate before it really gets
going a good example of this is the
aftermath of the financial crash in 2008
you remember a couple of years later
there were riots on the streets of
London
after those riots on 1,100 people went
to jail for loosing and for petty theft
but after the 2008 crash as of now not
one single person has even stood trial
for their culpability so you know by
sending 1,100 kids to jail for looting
we are sending a message as a society
that that kind of behavior is
unacceptable and I wouldn't disagree
with that however the question has to be
why is a similar message not being sent
by us as a society that ripping off the
country ripping off investors is not
acceptable either grenfell is another
good example
you know grandfa was oh it was oh it was
a horrible thing and for a couple of
weeks it was all over the news but the
broader issues of social inequality and
the lack of availability of decent
affordable social housing particularly
in London those issues have been swept
under the carpet again and until the
next fire happens which it undoubtedly
will at some point because the root
cause was never addressed and has not
gone away these are the discussions that
we should be heavy in our media and
we're not the only follow-up story I've
seen to Grenville was a report on the
BBC about how whether that story about
the baby being thrown out of a window
and caught by a passerby whether or not
that was true the guy couldn't find any
actual eyewitnesses you know this is
demeaning to the plight of the people
that have to live like this in our inner
cities but brexit immigrants Muslims
terrorists bullshit elections these are
in the news all the time Deal or No Deal
hard or soft brexit strong and stable
leadership or a coalition of chaos under
jeremy corbyn you know all of this
nonsense it's being treated as a terror
related incident you know this again and
again and again drummed into our heads
day in day out week in week out the
important discussions are ignored and
instead we're distracted with stories of
brexit Trump and terrorism diverting our
attention away from those who are
actually causing the ills in our society
bankers politicians lawyers
propagandists and shifting it instead
onto those who cannot defend themselves
and who have no voice immigrants poor
people and brown people and thus we
become more easily exploitable by the
corporations for whom the media truly
works I mean let's face it they have to
the corporations are paying all the
advertising revenue and the big
corporations own the media companies you
know they're relatively small piece of
Angie is an enormous company comcast is
a relatively small part of that even
though it's massive so to finish with
I'd like to go right back to the
beginning to the clip of the newsroom at
the start and three things I kind of
like to notice about it firstly the
assumption by pretty much everybody
there that the u.s. is indeed the
greatest country in the world and that
assumption is never questioned in their
media there and neither is the
assumption that it's okay for them to
use military force to protect their
interests out there in the world drone
strike soldiers etc etc they have a
question that that's okay secondly have
a look at the audience's reaction to a
guy that's actually speaking truth look
how shocked they are look how open
mouthed they are look how they get
cameras out to start filming it this is
how unused we have become to people just
talking plain and simple truth on the
airwaves and thirdly is the point that
he may have made about America was a
strong vibrant democracy because they
were well informed that they were well
informed by great men and that's kind of
where I'm going next time he was talking
about people like Walter Cronkite it
would our Morrow Diane Sawyer Roberta
Baskin Dan Rather Barbara Walters you
know these are these were household
names in America I've heard of most of
them and they were most them before my
time that's that's that's what big names
they are in the next video I'm going to
look at how some of these people and
others like them simply by trying to do
their jobs
ie challenging and questioning and
investigating the criminal and corrupt
behavior of the rich and powerful simply
by doing their jobs were marginalized
ridiculed lost their jobs and in one
case even killed themselves so I know
this has been a little bit
long one but nevertheless I'd like to
summarize gone through a lot here and I
think it bears summarizing first of all
media profoundly shaped the way that we
see the world in the way that we see
each other whether we interact with the
world it's now owned by a very few very
rich people and it's run for the profit
of their owners they have their own
agendas they do not serve us they serve
themselves and their own profit and
their own desire for profit they use
misinformation oversimplification and
omission in their reporting of what's
going on around us in order to create
fear suspicion and confusion among the
population they deliberately amplify the
worst aspects of our natures in order to
sell stuff to us and as I say he was
confused and fearful most importantly of
all they distract us from the important
discussions that we need to be having as
a society with adverts and celebrity
tittle-tattle and they help to refocus
the blame for the ills of society away
from the people who are actually
responsible and on to the people who had
nothing to do with it but can't defend
themselves and so that's it see you next
time another bit of George Carlin to
finish off with thanks for watching the
interesting thing about this country is
if they talk about how we have freedom
of choice you know we're free mature
yeah very limited it's an important
thing limited choice to political
parties essentially two big media
companies five six max yeah oil
companies down to three now I think
overall three or four banks the big
banks the big brokerage houses the big
accounting firms all the things that are
important reduced in choice newspapers
in the city how many used to be three
four now it's one or two the dome by the
same people and they also own a radio
station and a TV station but jelly beans
32 flavors yeah I speak all the things
that don't matter the unimportant things
a lot of choices you know when I say
your choice you know what your freedom
of choice is in America paper or plastic
yeah that's it man it comes down to
paper plastic a surcharge aisle or
window smoking or non-smoking coke or
pepsi these are you Joseph
everything else is kind of laid out for
you you get to do what they really want
they do what they want the ones well in
this country they do what they want
speaking of our choices being usurped or
taken away from us what do you make of
what and I'm fastly to ask you this
because all the things you've been
talking about for years mmm
are I mean we've come full circle on
this stuff that's why I was so fast they
didn't thank you for coming on the
program sure but here we are now you
know 30 years after you were talking
about it with this huge debate is huge
fight about whether or not our civil
liberties are being taken away what do
you thoughts on well I think if you
looked at the record of laws which have
been passed in the last 30 to 40 years
there's a thing called social history
social history is whipped up generally
by the media crime in Nyx's time crime
was the big social hysteria issue well
there's too much crime as we were the
coddling the courts are coddling the
criminals we have to tougher laws so a
lot of civil liberties went away in
terms of the rights of criminals and the
rights of the accused and and people
going on trial these these were limited
they were cut down these rights which
are guaranteed by the Constitution in
the Bill of Rights another social
hysteria drugs the drug thing happened
same thing
big big flow of drugs we're going to
fight the drugs we need newer tougher
laws we need draconian sentences we need
to be able to go into houses we need to
be able to do this we have reasonable
reasons you know all of these all of
these shortcuts have resulted in less
liberties because of social hysteria the
media whips up the frenzy people get all
excited the legislature passes it the
president's the executive signs it and
the judges then the judicial branch
okay's it sometime later when it gets to
them and and what has happened is you
have less freedoms less liberties less
civil liberties less rights and the
third socialist area is terrorism that
that was whipped up now there's it's a
little problem a little more cause there
you look at the 9/11 it's a very
dramatic event but that too has been
used with - with this Patriot Act to
reduce our liberties they say well
though if you have nothing to hide what
are you worried about you know that I
don't like
yeah yeah tell me about the people that
are you know just getting out of prison
because of the DNA forgetting had mind
it's just listen that this country is
owned by the ownership class they do
pretty much what they want I think it's
like a freak show here's what I do know
what I'd do to me if you're born in the
world yeah you get a ticket to the Freak
Show
think you take it to the Freak Show if
you're born in America you got a front
row seat so some people some people are
in the Freak Show yeah we got a freak
yeah then some people they want to fix
the freaks these are the ACLU lawyers
environmentalist fix the freaks we're
going to fix mommy ordinate turbo let's
do this and then there are folks who
just watch the freak show yeah as me and
some of us get to write about it or talk
about it right and I do that that's new
too yeah look at you I look how badly
you're doing I don't know I count myself
in yeah I say look how badly you folks
are doing how did you do this to
yourself
why did you let them do this
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]