[Music]
hey everybody on Twitter Jack Murphy
live.com Jack Murphy live all over the
Internet welcome back to the podcast
glad to have you
I'm here today with my very good friend
Goldman unleashed the coolest dude that
I know in all of New York City and I've
known Goldman quite some time and the
last couple of years we've had a lot of
a lot of opportunities to get to know
each other and I'd like to welcome you
to the show thanks for coming I
appreciate you being here I love it good
scene again brother good to see you
again yeah this is our first take no
doubt about it we haven't just spent the
last 15 minutes starting and stopping
and trying to figure out what we're
doing here just kidding but you know I'm
here I'm here in Brooklyn and tonight we
have something really fun happening
we've got a big meetup going on and I
think that the turnout is gonna be
really really great I've gotten a ton of
interest I know you've been promoting it
I've been promoting it and what's really
cool is like people people from all over
the place are just like dying to get out
and like commune with like-minded people
which is just really what this podcast
is all about and what I'm doing like
traveling the country and whatnot and
you know thanks for coming out here and
thanks for taking the time to speak with
me I really appreciate it yeah we're
gonna have a good time as always always
have we do always have a good time
speaking of a good time speaking of good
time
speaking of good times Goldman and I had
the opportunity to hang out for quite a
bit in Orlando recently at the 21
convention which is a group of guys
getting together to sort of speak on
issues related to sort of just been guy
like this being a guy in today's world
you know there's like a real dearth of
masculine role models out there these
days it's not like in the old days when
every movie and every book and
literature and music and art had a very
strong masculine figure in fact you know
I think we see across the board and in
pop art especially today like sort of
the diminished
of masculinity and whatnot and so this
this uh 21 convention put together by
Anthony Johnson it was really just a
tremendous time and and Goldman and I
had a chance to not only speak but just
hang out and hang out with all the guys
it was like how many how many people
were you think tethers close to 300 300
PL 300 people all coming together to
listen to guys speak on issues that
really ran the gamut from you know I
always lead with fashion when I was
talking about at Tanner Ghazi he's gonna
be on the show later because you know it
wasn't just about like how to have like
a successful relationship right this was
about like how to be a complete male in
the world today in arts fashion there
was relationships obviously there was
business stuff dating fitness you know
how examiner Cortes was there of course
and you know I wanted to talk about your
presentation there at the 21 convention
maybe you can give us a little tease and
we can sort of talk how we both sort of
come come to this issue and so Goldman
is a very accomplished author he is a
photographer he's been into the local
music scene and always been sort of on
the edge right always the underground
scene so why don't you just give us a
little background in like sort of how
you can try came to New York and by
living in Brooklyn and sort of what you
know just give us a little background
for us yeah I've always had been
involved in the arts like the art scenes
I moved to Brooklyn first of all this is
early 2000s I moved here for the art
scene especially for the music because
music in Brooklyn was very very exciting
this is like late 90s I was into punk
rock when I was young as a teenager
we'd come here I have my first fake ID
when I was 17 so he'd come here in the
90s and like listen of the punk scene
that cavenda evolved into the
independent artists okay they called
indie rock now but that's kind of it
wasn't like that it was independent rock
it was just new music that nobody had
ever heard before right and Brooklyn was
a place to be right and it was literally
it was such a good art scene and it was
edgy very edgy yeah I mean people were
here they're creating new things and
they're putting out new ideas and it was
new ways of living like here it was like
the new Bohemia here in Brooklyn like a
mm when I moved here and I loved it I
mean I was eating it up I was a big part
of the scene you know as I was writing I
was doing numb while I was in college I
worked at the radio station so I was
interviewing bands like bands that got
super famous and I was totally into it
because it was super exciting and it was
living on the edge right early 2000s it
was amazing right
if Brooklyn still feel the same way if
you I think Brooklyn peaked in 2007 2008
okay and then the money rolled in right
and soon as the money rolls in I mean
the artists have to move out of town and
the money rolls in because artists don't
make any money right well yeah it's kind
of true so yeah the money rolled in and
then Brooklyn became kind of this
template for the modern hip city you
know like Austin Portland's they kind of
modeled themselves up here what Brooklyn
was in the early 2000s and some people
living in Washington see Washington DC's
think that they're doing the same thing
so I mean it definitely I mean it's all
gone downhill like it's you're you don't
come here to be creative this is pretty
much a hive mind right I think SNL did a
pretty funny sketch recently about
Williamsburg Brooklyn know about they
live in a bubble they they absolutely
live in a bubble everybody's thinking
the same thing right and if you have new
ideas you're you're just outcast right
which is the exact opposite of what a
creative culture is supposed to be right
exactly right you're supposed to be able
to like foster and grow subversive ideas
yeah right things outside the norm like
when I first started coming into New
York myself I used to come back here in
the 90s and you know because I'm a
little bit older I'm a little bit more
on Goldman definitely look like oh I got
all this great people asked me if I died
my beard why would I only die pardon me
it's perfectly dyed though that's right
it's you know is naturally it's like
tutto it's like it's like Indian crazy
so I used to come up here in the 90s for
the dance scene right for the in techno
and house scene and I remember Brooklyn
was like yeah that was like a hot spot
to be there was like DJ Frankie bones I
remember and and Lenny Dee and Adam axe
and like this was this was where like
the future was happening yeah it was a
few difference a future of music future
of drugs
just creativity and it's really funny
actually as I was taking my kids to
school this morning before I took the
bus bus up here the song d-lite this one
by D like a Mon glue isn't groove is in
the heart you remember that song and I
was like oh my god kids I used to deejay
with those guys and the song was on the
oldies station dude they're like dad dad
no really I used to deejay with these
guys because they were from New York
Dean delight they're from New York and
they're from the club scene they're from
the clothing that like came out of New
York New York City which was in like the
limelight and this place later sound
factory and his other play it's called
the tunnel and man it was just exciting
people travel from all over the country
all over the world really yeah to not
only come and just check it out but come
and perform and so like New York has
always been sort of on the cutting edge
I mean hip-hop like you know New York
was a place to be Brooklyn was a place
to be but now you know we were just
standing out in front of this hotel and
we were just looking across the street
and boy what were they building over
there more convoy exactly so tell us
that tell us a little bit about the
scene that you got into and how you like
evolved into becoming this sort of
independent artist that remark is right
like right now you know maybe some of my
listeners don't know this but I mean you
are a full-time professional writer
artist photographer you talk talk to us
a little bit how you sort of made that
transition from coming you know coming
here to the city wide-eyed as a kid with
a fake ID back when a fake ID actually
work yeah I didn't need like the
Department of Homeland Security with the
hologram you know back back when they
just wanted you to come in and party
like how did you make that evolution
them well it was I've always been an
independent thinker so that's why what
drew me here in the first place so I
mean the music scene was great I mean it
was it was awesome then I saw New York
change and then about I always had that
independent mind like searching for
truths or searching for new ideas and
then I just I found I saw New York
evolving into this hive mind and I want
to keep myself away from it so then you
know if you're a if you're a curious
person you're going to keep doing
research and keeping your independent
mind independent and so that's when you
shout online and we found you know this
hole when woman was out that was around
2009 okay when I started I had always
hated the internet before that to be
honest I would never if you if you told
me when a when I'd first moved here I
would be like making my living online I
would I hated Facebook I hated MySpace
stayed away from it I was just like
always on the ground and this is like
way before Twitter became popular yeah
this is a way before that so yeah when I
found this these guys online who came
together and they're sharing their new
ideas they're sharing their experiences
and they're speaking the truth with no
filter that's the kind of art that I
appreciate mostly DIY stuff that's why I
was into the punk scene but these guys
who are out there writing now like me
and you it is a total DIY spirit and
your we're putting these ideas these
truths that we find no matter the the
pushback we get from the public because
we're getting pushback right plenty like
yeah oh yeah even if you've seen the
public pushback on us but you haven't
seen like that's the tip of the iceberg
of what's going on like have I've been
banned from certain social circles here
right I've lost jobs right you want to
talk about that a little bit not really
not really no but I have I have lost a
day job because a very good one too yeah
because of my ideas and the stuff that
I'm saying I mean yeah writing about sex
is always gonna get in trouble right and
that's kind of what I started off doing
right but I mean I've had the same
experience too yeah I mean I started
writing off about sex and relationships
I also wrote about feminism I wrote
about all kinds of political issues and
then one day people found out about all
that notwithstanding the whole they
called me a nazi which isn't
true but once once that happen and the
dam broke and then everybody started
digging into what I was writing you know
of course these are for at the time
audiences that were very small right so
you're like you're like your platform
power didn't come with the same
responsibilities as it does today right
like today with like tens of thousands
of people and they hundreds of thousands
of readers you've had like a millions of
visitors to your blog oh yeah yeah yeah
so like you understand now that you're
sort of like platform responsibility is
a little bit different yes right but
you're back then and you know for me at
least I'm writing thinking you know like
500 people are gonna read this
that's exactly yeah whenever anybody's
beginning especially if you're online
you're writing you don't realize what
the futures gonna hold so I need to get
you just hold nothing back right it's
like talking to somebody in private or
in the locker room because you have your
little small audience and you just say
whatever the you want right it's
such a great point too because you know
I always pride in myself and still do on
writing and expressing myself in a very
sort of raw and authentic way like I've
shared I've shared my failures more than
I've shared any victories that I write
and I've expressed sort of the my down
times more than I've ever like bragged
about my up times and I'm I've really
Whitman shared a lot of things that like
I might even be embarrassed to even tell
you if we're just like sitting there
face-to-face but I put it out there on
the internet right yeah didn't know that
like a few years like that like
thousands and thousands and thousands
thousands people including like my
employers and including future employers
and including you know all of my friends
and family and associates and everyone I
know is gonna have it and the mass media
oh yeah that's it like when you're if
you're a writer if you're like if you
need that feel I need to express
yourself especially when you're first
starting out you want to write about the
darkest most interesting things possible
right and that's usually you know the
dark side of human nature right the
that you've gone through right sex I
mean sex drives us all right so for a
writer sex is really really interesting
right and this is not like a new
phenomenon not like like writers and
artists like like going on about sex and
relationships and like oh you have your
inner demons and such yep even like my
the most famous American writers like
the literature in the 20th century like
most a lot of those guys got started in
smut really yeah like Kurt Vonnegut
Hemingway Fitzgerald they had all
written smut articles no you could look
this up it's it's totally true because
it is fascinating right and like like
you said they didn't have the
responsibility of the big platform right
so they just felt free to write about it
right because they could actually tap
into those emotions and write about in a
real way right with no ego right which
is difficult right it's very difficult
to write without an ego right it really
is and like how you you know I love
everybody and I'm still trying to do the
best I can but I'll be completely honest
like
when I know like my mom's on my mailing
list right mine too I just realized that
the other day I looked at she opened it
up the my last email and I looked
clicked on it and like MailChimp's
giving her a five-star rating really it
means that she reads those every single
every single email I probably like
forwards them around and so like I'll be
honest like you know there's a part of
me that like still not still but there's
a part of me that now sort of
acknowledges like oh there's a lot
of people reading a lot of people
listening like can I still have the
balls to write as if nobody is listening
mm-hmm and to hear that you know you
know Hemingway and Vonnegut obviously
these are like some of the most
influential male writers yeah for sure
the 20th century and people that I look
up to you look up to and to know that
they got their start thinking about this
I mean it makes perfect sense right like
what what is the one thing that we all
have in common is a sexual sex drive of
course yeah right and so our experience
in like managing our own sex drive what
it's like interacting with other people
on their sex drive the wins the losses
the shame the fear mm-hmm it's something
that everybody can really relate to but
answer me this why is it that today like
if you write about sex somehow it's like
insufficiently appropriate to be of
stature write it like it's like somehow
unprofessional yeah it's it's it's very
strange especially if you're talking
about real sexual strategies I believe
it on mass media like all the popular
movies like the popular comedies are
about like guys who like you know
they're having trouble getting laid and
like that's the funny bit you know it's
this guy who's a loser has no idea what
to do themselves and like that's what's
permeated our our mass culture so when
somebody talks about being a man and
finding strategies because that's what
smart guys do you find a strategy any
problem you have in your life and I
think sex should be the number one thing
for a young man to get out of the way
right so you're not just obsessed with
it I was right thank you sorry yeah in
my mid-20s I remember it was very
difficult for me to like meet new people
and you know get laid so finding that
strategy like it took a lot of work to
go to effort
found it and then it I just I mean then
I became creative and involved with it
right but that's not the norm now people
just expect you to sit back and just you
know you just don't don't talk about it
yeah just just deal with that
well I guess it's taboo for a reason
right yeah so it's it's crazy people
this culture really wants men to just
sit back and be passive and not take
life by the balls well and I think that
that's one of the reasons why guys like
you and me and a lot of the fellows that
we ran into at the 21 convention get so
much pushback is because we don't accept
that premise yeah we don't accept this
premise of like guys you just have to
figure it out and you can't sink it
through and you can't have a plan yeah
you can't have a plan for your
masculinity you can't have a plan for
your sex life you can't have a plan for
what kind of relationships you want I
think that there's some element that
like people just want you to kind of
like and already know yeah right it's
just such a crock of oh yeah that's
such a crock of because because
there's no there's no male role models
right it's it's very sad
we're in a sad state that's why the 21
convention was so cool to see like these
guys who came together to be role models
and we're mingling with the audience who
like look up to us and like it was very
inspiring that whole thing was very very
inspiring it really was it was really
inspiring for me it was inspiring for
you was inspiring for everybody all the
attendees and all the speakers mm-hmm
you know we we would hang out with
everybody and then afterwards like
lately late night like all the speakers
would get together and we would hang out
and like and and just sort of marvel at
what was what what's happening and I
think I think part of it I think we all
sort of had a kind of a small epiphany
where we realized that a sort of having
a plan for your life isn't wrong mm-hmm
having a plan to attack all the various
elements in your life isn't wrong and
that there's like a million billion guys
out there yes I like dying for this
thing yes there there are guys out there
like who want to embrace their
masculinity and it's been suppressed I
mean I was one of those guys where it
was absolutely suppressed then once it
awakened I was just a new person a much
better person
much more spiritually fulfilled like as
I just felt whole right actualized
actualized and this is what a lot of
these guys are looking for and they're
not finding it in pop culture
not one bit no there's not one bit I
mean you can you can look back and I'm
excited I'm gonna have this guy art
Teavana on and he's a writer for a
Playboy and for vice and LA Weekly and
he's like obsessed with the Americana
mmm and so we're gonna talk about like
you know his memory and history and he's
actually a recent immigrant too in the
80s so like he's got a very interesting
take on on Americana and like masculine
role models and that's definitely
something that's really really really
missing today you know what was the most
popular television show for like last 10
years I think that that one nerd show
what was oh he had the Big Bang Theory
Big Bang Theory which is if you ever see
clips of it it's just horrible
it's or but the whole thing is like
everything is terrible you think it's a
caricature but it's like it's not oh
that yeah that made me sick yeah cuz cuz
I was reading about it like oh this is
the most popular TV show and I see I
started to see the clips yeah these guys
are just the biggest wimps you could
ever imagine and everybody's laughing at
them oh that's funny who might hook up
with a girl like with a big long shot in
the dark he's like that's not how you're
supposed to be no you're supposed to be
aggressive and solve your problems as a
man these guys are just laying down and
just you know putting themselves under
the bus right and and there's all those
movies as a Judd Apatow oh you know
worse yeah he makes a ton of movies but
there's like none of the guys in those
movies or anybody that you want to be
right it's like Seth Rogen right
it was super popular and just the worst
the worst these are not these are not
people that you want to be and even if
they're living their private lives
differently which they may be okay but
they're presenting to the world in their
art is a diminished male figure right
somebody that's that's incapable
unwilling and ignorant of like the way
to go out and get and get what they want
you know if you if you just think back
to the pop culture icons of days gone by
guys like Clint Eastwood come to me come
to mine John Wayne comes to mind I mean
even the Fonz right Yeah right and
the Fonz comes to mind and even
even mr. cleaver right on Leave It to
Beaver
I mean that knew what he
was doing yeah he's making decisions he
made decisions and ran he ran his
household and he was a good father and
his wife was in love with him and his
kids were good kids and he was an
upstanding guy in the in the community
he probably wasn't going around talking
about the sex of his happen but you know
what to say at the same time he like he
was definitely a leader and you know
we're just not we're just not seeing
that which sort of really brings me to
like the conversation that I really want
to have with you which is you are living
the life of a creative of a masculine
creative right you're out there you're
writing your you're lecturing you're
talking you're giving workshops right
you're travelling around the country
talking to guys helping them learn the
craft of photography right so why don't
you just give give my guys and everybody
who's listening sort of like a just a
quick overview of what your what your
creative portfolio is because you're
like a really crazy dynamic guy and it's
like this is an exciting thing for me to
talk about yeah I mean the two biggest
things are one the writing like very
proud of my writing my blog in my books
and then number two's photography
photography is very interesting for me
I've embraced it in the past especially
the past like two years I first used it
just as a means to pick up girls no
really I wrote a book about it
that's the controversial camera game
book what's up what's the name of the
book an introduction a camera game how
to seduce women through photography
beautiful oh yeah it hits all the
triggers Oh everything yes yeah yeah it
puts you in charge turns you into a
creative guy puts you behind the camera
puts a girl in front of the camera yeah
hey you ever met a girl that doesn't
like to pose on camera they love it and
the prettier they are the more they love
it right so it's fantastic yeah you know
and I guess especially in today's age
like with the the explosion and
popularity of Instagram and like how
were even if it's hard to believe that
even like from 10 years ago we're even
more image driven more visually driven
than we were before you know that kind
of dynamic I could see it could be very
successful we'll get back to that so
keep keep talking about your books all
right yeah so that's a main thing I'm a
writer second thing the photography
which comes in I'm taking that very
seriously and then I just like like as
an artist your role is to
people appreciate life more that's like
my number one you know definition of an
artist it's somebody who makes people
appreciate life more and this is what
I'm getting the most out of like
traveling around I've been doing a lot
of photography workshops this year I
traveled up down the East Coast about
five times photography workshops in each
city I mean I do coaching in New York
photography workshops in New York but
like seeing someone evolve and become
just a little bit better from what I'm
telling them I mean that's to me that's
like the meaning of life right so you're
a teacher - yeah yeah teacher as well
yeah you're passionate about that right
oh I I want to give people my knowledge
I've been working on this for decades
and decades I've learned a lot about
this world
I put tons and tons of effort and the
means of sharing it well let's let's
just talk a little bit about your
efforts exploring the world because you
know one of the things one of the one of
the things about Hemingway for example
that was so cool was like he would go
and do all the stuff whether it's
obviously you know the war part what's
it necessarily you know something that
he was super excited about but he lived
life mm-hm and then translated it into
his art and what is the what is the
phrase the saying it's like if you don't
have anything good to write about like
go out and do something cool I mean I'm
paraphrasing it's something like it's
something like that right right if you
don't have something interesting to say
that's because you you boring
yeah right so you got to get out there
and do so just tell us a little bit
about yeah because this is one of the
things that I love about you the most
you know every time you know I see you
like every few months or so it feels
like lately but how I'm always like what
you put up to it you're like oh well and
then the story goes on for three hours
so why don't you just give a little
taste a little taste like you know talk
about the road trip maybe a little bit
talk about your last experience in the
in the desert talk about your ayahuasca
experiences like this is this is how you
how you become a really express yourself
creatively yeah I I can't help myself I
have to go out there I want to see
everything first of all that's like I
want to see the way this world works and
to me I love nature I love immersing
myself in nature like right after the 21
convention I flew right to Tucson
Arizona did a little road trip around
the desert there I'm it's
crazy people in this little place called
Bisbee Arizona it's like right near the
Mexico border southeast Arizona I spent
I spent it wasn't Christmas what was
that holiday
it wasn't Thanksgiving Halloween it was
Halloween oh yes I mean they were all
dressed up they thought I was dressed up
they just kept calling me Indiana Jones
like yeah whatever right if you have if
you haven't seen Goldman before he has a
signature hat that he wears and I and I
have I have walked down the street with
him and heard about a hundred times
hey at least five times a night right if
I go out yeah I get Indiana Jones all
the time so yeah and I lived a life
right
I think and I'm always exciting myself
in dangerous situations I like pushing
my boundaries and like as a man that's
pretty important you got to see what you
can handle
so yeah I've have you ever been let down
let down ya know finding it trying to
find your boundaries
if you ever like bumped up against one
have you I've always drowned a couple
times that sucked
I don't like drowning right it's not a
good did you did you regret it later
hell no no hell I know how that's me way
yes I know how it feels to skirt the
edge of death right and that just like
it creates his little fire inside and
you can't help but share these
experiences because you've been through
him you put yourself through the fire
and you got to let people know what's
out there and like I realized I have a
skill of this and I just became
manifested about five years ago when I
really started writing I was like oh
people actually want to hear about this
this is great guys are writing in to me
like thank you so much you inspired me
to go out and just like leave the house
that's amazing and you know I feel so
much better and that's that's what I'm
doing and that's right and you know it's
a it's a it's an unfortunate statement
to make but it's a true one in that in
today's culture you know people are I
mean it the studies are clear like kids
are dating less they're less
they're drinking less which I mean some
of these are good but the point is is
that they're they're not interacting
with the universe right they're
interacting with their phones I call
them the zombie boxes now so like when
the kid on the kids on the phone oh my
enough zombie boxing and it's a good one
and then when I'm on my phone kids who
like daddy
I'll be boxing again but then I go but
then I go but it's work guys yeah it's
yes it is true though the our whole
culture like wants us to be you know
safe satiated not our phones I mean it's
driven by money because if we're on our
phones we're all gonna be buying stupid
 right I mean nobody's making money
if you're out in the wilderness by
yourself exploring right so it's not
promoted right so I want to be the one
promoting this stuff like live this have
little adventures you don't have to be
crazy like me and you know go off to
Mexico and them in the mountains and you
know eat some peyote like I'll do that
I'll let you know how it is that's good
yeah but if that inspires you to just
get up and go see some nature or just
like get outside and just what do you
think your own thoughts take a picture
of a bird yes right or just be with
yourself with your own thoughts free
thinking independent with no other
influences that's what I want people to
do like have their own free thinking
thoughts without you know corporations
telling you what to do anybody else
mainstream media telling what to do
because we need this we need people with
their own voices their own opinions
adding to the realm of human knowledge
alright and you can only do that by
yourself without anybody else so I think
I just hit my main goal in life Thanks
that's amazing thanks for letting me
spit that out you know I know you've
been thinking about this quite a bit and
like you know that that's sort of when
you when you sort of male development
human development for anybody you know
obviously there's a hierarchy of needs
you meet those needs sex is on a
hierarchy it's low low in the hierarchy
but like it's one thing that people will
aren't getting yeah right I mean
obviously with the advent of the the in
cells and and the declining marriage
market and like this this current crop
of people are having less sex of anybody
ever before and once you start
fulfilling those of those needs you get
to the top right you get to the app
which is self-actualization and then
once you get there then and and I'm
having am I having the same sensation
which is you know I've made it through
each one of these these steps right and
I've secured my health my
well my sex life my family my community
and now I'm now on to the point now
where like I've become the person that I
set out to be mm-hmm and now and now
there's only one thing left to do after
that which is just spread the spread the
word yes and inspire others to go out
like we want to make the next generation
because we've done it the next
generation has to come up with their own
ideas so if we can inspire them to do
that the prop but we have to just
inspire them into the process yeah and
that yeah this is the hero's journey
right and we're the helpers on the
hero's journey right every every man who
is has something to contribute to the
world has to go through the hero's
journey and find out their values and
what they actually thinking their own
personal vision so I mean the next every
generation is gonna be different and I
think we're evolving so fast like with
this information age like the
generational gap like between me I'm
technically a millennial but like with
the real Millennials we don't think the
same because I didn't grow up with the
Internet I do way you rub me as a gen
Xer yeah yeah yeah technically I'm a
millennial is born in that generation
but I we think so different and yeah the
generation gaps are becoming wider so we
just have to you know inspire the next
one you know that's a that's a really
profound thought actually when when mass
media doesn't give people role models to
follow so self actualize when when the
main character in every piece of art is
someone who's clearly not self
actualized and even if their character
arc is one of growth it's still never
one like two self-actualization it's not
it's not one towards you know becoming
the idealized man of their dreams and
then being able to go ahead and share
that with other people yeah and so we're
finding and look you know Jordan
Peterson is tapping into this test
market right now he's literally out
there traveling the world filling up
halls with thousands of people of what
people are referring to as the Lost Boys
generation right and I just saw a study
that said like you know more more
millennial mill and are living at home
with their parents and
had a job and haven't even looked for
work in the last year people aren't
having sex they're not getting out of
their house they're not becoming they're
not just even they're not being
self actualized they're just not even
becoming adults right and so when you
have this dearth of role models in our
creative milieu as it were god I can't
believe I just use that word and like a
casual conversation when we have this
dearth of creative role models out there
then people's levels of aspiration are
set even too low mmm you know they just
oh maybe I can be like that nerd on the
nerd show and get the girl for a little
bit but didn't that guy become like the
man that he always dreamed of you know
and so I think what we're starting to
see in the 21 convention again was
really a transformative experience for
me because you know we're writing and
we're tweeting and we're we're blogging
and writing books and and whatever and
you know until you're in a
convention room with hundreds of people
that are just craving this type of male
leadership you know you don't really
understand what's really what's really
missing out there and we're seeing now
the rise of people like yourself I like
to throw myself in there too of examples
of how to live a life that's that where
you're not being taught it anywhere else
and you know in in terms of like
creating great literature or great art
you know how can you write a book or
produce a film that doesn't talk about
being self actualized it doesn't talk
about like going on the complete the
complete arc because that art won't
stand the test of time mm-hmm right so I
I don't want to like to tower horns too
too much here but I feel like we've been
born out of a necessity right a gap and
are you still seeing that get like is
that gap like being hammered home to you
all the time
is it widening is it narrowing are you
are you meeting more
less people along the way they're having
this this urge to be led or to not let
let's say inspired yeah I've seen it so
I I'm seeing it on the Internet
like I said in real life like it's
pretty much a bubble like I live in New
York City it's very much a bubble here
people are thinking the same but on the
internet I see like what our movements
growing like this little it's the rise
of you know as we call personal brands
but it's just our personalities that
were put out there we don't think like
the mainstream we put the work in we've
done that and people are drawn to
authenticity because the mainstream is I
mean Hollywood sucks TV sucks everyone's
thinking the same thing so they're
craving this and so we're filling out a
little we're filling that fulfilling
that role and it's on the internet like
what can I say you're not gonna find it
anywhere else where else could you go
like I'm not a guy with connections in
the media but yet I've got you know all
these followers and people are hungry
for it so we just keep we keep putting
it out there right and I mean let's not
understate Goldman's influence right I
mean he's had literally millions of
visitors to his to his website he sold
thousands and thousands and thousands
and thousands of thousands of copies of
his book he's traveled to countless
cities across the gallery he's had
workshops and coaching and one-on-one
mentoring with just a whole array of
different people and you know the you
know I don't want to talk about in terms
of a market because you know we're not
trying to just talk about in dollars and
cents but let's just talk about in terms
of just like supply and demand right
like there's such a dumb man yes these
guys are hungry
yeah and you saw and everybody's eyes at
the 21 convention they're hungry they
want to get on this path of
self-actualization right they're looking
to us for it and people are just
starving for it and it's amazing it's
amazing to witness because this what
we're doing now like the 21 convention
that these self-improvement guys it's so
underground right it's a subculture
that we're we're a big part of and these
where these subcultures are this is
where the real energy is because we've
got the truth on our side right right if
you we we criticize feminism ooh
it's not like it's such an easy target
right now they're so dumb but it is very
easy but if you do
any kind of criticism any kind of
mainstream media is just gonna jump on
you and try and cut your head off right
and so we're doing it our balls are out
there our faces are out there yeah
and we're putting ourselves out there
with like with no we're telling the
truth right and when you see that and
you're like finally it's such a breath
of fresh air like oh it's such a breath
of fresh air finally see this and then
you can just become you know you could
become more of yourself because you
realize the truth it's amazing one thing
that I have been pushing all along the
way here is like community I mean like
we're communal animals we evolved to be
parts of tribes and small groups every
single human being unless you're like
way out on the spectrum so we're just
talking about like regular people every
single human being has an urge to
socialize to be in a place with people
that accept them and share their ideas
and you guys you know as in the sapiens
book we talks about you know organizing
around an imaginary structure or an
imaginary set of principles and it's not
to say that they're not real it just
means it's like it's not tangible you
can't reach out and like touch
masculinity right it's like it's
something that's either it's in your
mind or it's something that you express
through your actions and we all have
this urge to organize around a common
imaginary order a set of values as it
were and a set of common experiences and
what I've found in the last like five
years and talking to people especially
in the last few years is that everybody
is you know I say everybody you know
people on our and our sort of sphere are
just dying for community they're dying
to like be table just rub like tonight
like tonight we're gonna have a meet-up
in New York then all we've done is just
like send out a few tweets and whatnot
and my IDM inbox is blowing up with
people that are trying to get that I'm
sure after we get done recording this
cuz we're heading right over there after
this there's gonna be a bunch of
requests and you know it's not political
we're not gonna have a lecture we're not
going to talk about anything all we're
gonna do is just like stand in
the same place have beers and just like
talk to each other like normal human
beings and I think that that's one thing
that
I'm really interested in and I know you
are too it's like just getting out there
and like socializing like building
building a community and watching
watching you operate here in Brooklyn
you know you're so far outside of the
norm in Brooklyn like you are you're the
you're the real Brooklyn right yeah I
was what it was and like when it was
when it was great
when in like it was great in the late
90s early 2000s right it was
free-thinking center of the world
right before Lena Dunham came along
before girls came along before identity
politics came along right where
everything got ruined right and that's
really fascinating to me that the
subcultures have been subsumed by the
pop culture right like like feminism and
identity politics or like mainstream
ideas oh yeah but yet they reach down
into smother and suffocate the
subcultures like I was asking this
question the other day I was like where
the is the subversive rock and roll
right no that makes me cry yeah I know
it makes you cry and even it is hip hop
even subversive anymore I mean the pop
stuff no no Drake is a it's it's
hysterical any a little tangent here you
know some of my favorite favorite hip
hop artists to names come to mind to
leave quality and Kendrick Lamar both of
them have just ruined it for me
ruined it yeah God they can rhyme like
two of the best rhymers ever in the
history of hip-hop and the beats and I
got a love it Blackstar love it
early Kendrick love it but damn man I
follow them on Twitter and then
I get a glimpse inside their brain now
and I'm like man I don't want anything
today yeah there's their pandering to
the audience I don't know if their pant
they're just so they've got so many fans
and just their mainstream now right and
that's what happens when you come
mainstream you just become suck they're
not down that river right so that's a
that's amazing that you know I've always
I've always been counterculture just
like you you know in the 90s man we were
like fighting against the man really
like taking ecstasy and dancing dirty
warehouses to like we thought we were
fighting against the establishment you
know and we and we were and I'll be
honest like my
experiences with ecstasy or MDMA really
opened my mind yeah it really it really
changed my life and total sidenote I'm
like I'm really thrilled to hear that
MDMA is gonna be up soon hopefully
approved for therapeutic uses because
it's it's really phenomenal and like
opening your mind to things and we
thought we were fighting against the
machine and and then Rage Against the
Machine god I love that and then you
hear that I can't remember the guys
exact Taylor okay and he is the machine
yes
Rage Against the Machine is the machine
there is no counterculture now except
for except for except for I mean I'm
sure there's others I'm not trying to
say that we're the only subculture in
America that's preposterous but like our
subculture tied together with
masculinity tied together with sort of
anti identity politics tied together you
know we would not even be in political
here but obviously you know neither one
of us we're gonna vote for Jeb Bush or
for Hillary Clinton you know and
obviously I'm pretty well on the record
as going Democrat to the plural don't
forget to check out my book it's on
Amazon Democrat to deplorable and so you
know we've always been counterculture
and now today just like by even I'm in
my 40s you're not quite there yet
but we're a counterculture now yeah
where we try we are trying to become the
optimal versions of ourselves we're
trying to be independent thinkers away
from the social media generation who all
thinks the same that are afraid of
getting you know banished from their
little their little cult of social media
we're out there like okay you can think
for yourself you can embrace your
masculinity this is and doing that makes
you a complete person as a man
especially when you embrace being a
complete person without it no I mean if
you need to think for yourself and
that's what we're really really pushing
is thinking for yourself and I think
that's why it's such that's why it's an
important counterculture because once
you do that you're like I said
actualized and it is god it's such a I
want to use the word empowering this is
real empowerment absolutely this is
empowering how sad of a statement is it
to say that in order that people that
pursue independent thinking men that
pursue a masculine idea
our counterculture like it's a real
testament to the hive mind etch called
it it's a testament to the the permeate
of the permeation hashas onward every
podcast I do this I like try to throw
out a word you know word or or word that
I've only read that I've never said and
I'm like I'm talk--i gah
but you know that this this idea this
collective idea you know the don't rock
the boat idea and like we're all
thinking the same thing idea that that
is really like what happened to them
like when it's somebody like held up a
flag like an American flag to you would
you ever like throw adjectives up
against it like everyone thinks the same
like we're like not masculine you know
no it's the opposite of what we found a
ssin was right independence right that
is the American ideal is real
independence right and that's what we're
bringing back right now it's a way of
thinking now we don't have to go you
know explore new frontiers but we need
frontiers of the mind especially where
we're headed in the future
we need new ways of thinking literally
well what's dangerous about about not
being an independent thinker in the age
of social media and and this this era in
which basically like what Twitter is is
like is like connecting all of our inner
monologues to each other in many ways
right and and and creating that Borg
mine and that collective mind where it's
really easy to you know I can understand
like it's really easy to fall in line
and to just think what everyone else is
thinking cuz that's safe right yeah but
in doing that we're not going to have
evolution of thought we're not going to
have new ideas we're not gonna spark
entrepreneurship we're not gonna spark
new creativity we're not gonna have new
art like how we haven't even really
started talking about art in general yet
but you know we're like a bulwark
against this total commodification of
human thinking yeah I saw it happened
especially with my generation because
Facebook came of age when I was in when
I was in college and then so that whole
generation of mine was sucked into
Facebook it was literally everybody I
knew from colleges on Facebook and so
they were all thinking that and they all
all have their they got their little
lives and their little jobs and their
little families but it's like if you
break away from that Facebook mold
you're just your life is done get fired
from your job lose all your friends and
family I saw that happen to my
generation hopefully in the future is
gonna change a little bit because that's
where pushing back against that's where
we are right now right and you know to
anyone that's followed my story for just
a little bit you know that I've already
suffered all those experiences I've been
I've been fired I've been docks I've had
the cops into my house over at wheat the
cops came to my house Goldman came to my
house the police 11 o'clock at night on
us gone like a work night everybody in
my all my kids were all asleep they come
banging on the door ba-ba-ba-ba-bom and
I and it's not it's not patrolmen it's
like detectives in like the black parkas
with like the silver chain and the
badges hanging around and with the you
can tell they're wearing bulletproof
vests and everything and in one hand a
guy has a blown-up picture of my
driver's license and I'm like showing
Goldman what they're doing like holding
it up to my face and in the other hand
they have a tweet a Jack Murphy live
tweet Malone up to eight and a half by
eleven and I'm like I'm like what what
the fuck's going on guys like I'm not
opening the door or anything because you
know I've learned like don't open the
door my sister was a cop she's like
don't open the door then invite them in
cuz they don't have to come in like okay
so I just like talk to him through the
door like what is this about and they
 hold up the tweet to the door
the nigga the tweets dude we're here
about the tweets this is some 1984 yeah
real crazy right right and you know
the tweet I said I was like something
something something you don't think I
would go without burning this whole
thing to the ground okay now that's like
singing the blues man that's like
cooking Jimi Hendrix great it's like I'm
a burn this to the ground
you know that's not I'm actually coming
to this destination to light it on fire
and kill people now man's figure
speech so even for just a figure speech
for an idiom for a metaphor cops
banging on my door in the middle of
night with guns armed men dissent to my
house and you know the the problem
that is we see all across the country
cops showing up the situations that
aren't hostile her aren't violent and
not like all cops are terrible people
but like bad happens when like
conflict is is fomented and then have
guns like that should happen so like you
know that's where we that's where we are
in this this sort of culture war that
we're in and you know guys like you
Goldman are just a inspiration
to me and to so many other people
because you have you've met you've
mastered the art of like living online
that's one thing and you've become a
professional full-time creative you're a
successful author you're a fantastic
photographer and man you should really
check out his website what's the website
again Goldman unleashed Goldman unleash
calm he's got tremendous you know photos
up there his Twitter feed is filled with
amazing pictures of birds in the park
and beautiful women and crazy in
the desert women in nature my two
favorite subjects I mean women in nature
I love that feminine energy
I mean it's everybody's favorite yeah
those beautiful things here for us and
you know it's not you weren't the first
to discover that of course no I mean I
say that jokingly but the point is is
that like people went men men and women
like Georgia O'Keeffe I mean that's a
real stick right sexy women in nature
yeah it's like women in nature like you
know this is this is who we are this is
where we come from and so you know you
you are an inspiration to guys like me
and to a lot of other people you're
fulfilling your art you're you're living
life to create something beautiful with
which then to to fuel your creative
energies
you've become a self actualized
individual you have no shame in your
game what's what's what's that for
and then and then on top of it you're
taking this message out and and sharing
it and teaching and and and really
helping other people learn and grow and
man that's that's cool
that's cool man thanks for saying that
it's pretty cool yeah I live to express
myself yeah like I have to especially
now where I mean I
for years and years and years trying to
figure out what was going on both inside
myself personally you know and figure
out how the world works right and so now
that that's come together I have this
insatiable need to just share it with
others and if people are getting
benefits from that fantastic and they
they are so I feel like I'm gonna in a
good place right now I mean more power
to you dude and like mad props and like
I said you're an inspiration to me and
to many other people and you know it's
it's an it's a very fascinating
intersection to use that word
intersectional it's a very
intersectional looking it's a
fascinating cross-section of culture
technology business art masculinity
self-expression self-actualization
teaching leadership nature women I mean
 dude it's cool
thanks man yeah and to everybody out
there I think you should really aim to
make your life your own personal art
project like I love being single and
independent and that's what I write
about that's who I am but even if you're
like a family man God make that the best
family possible right make your life an
absolute masterpiece of art and that's
what I want everybody to do again it
requires thinking for yourself it
requires bringing in quality information
into your mind and rejecting the

churning your meter up to a
thousand percent this is like one of my
grandfather's sayings oh yeah so yeah
and just making your life a masterpiece
this is what I I really hope for
everybody
beautiful make your life a masterpiece
by Goldman unleash and I think that
that's a that's a great place to wrap up
here man
thank you so much for your time today
and thank you for sort of laying that
all out for everybody you know guys and
ladies where again can they find you
what's the best place to find Ron
Goldman unleash calm at Twitter at
Goldman unleash and on Instagram at
Goldman unleashed just Google only just
you just use that horrible hateful
technology to find me please and so you
know we should wrap up now we are going
to head down to well the the place where
we're meeting people
yes yes we are in Williamsburg Brooklyn
so she can't we can't share exactly
where we're going you know for safety
reasons because there's just crazy
people everywhere but we're on our way
we're gonna go meet up with like 20 30
40 people we're gonna we're gonna have a
 great time and thank you
everybody for tuning in right today is
the 27th of November so I'm in I'm in
Brooklyn getting on a plane tomorrow I'm
flying out to Seattle to Washington
State and then renting a car and I'm
going to Olympia Washington I'm gonna
speak at Evergreen State College home of
the infamous date without white people
brouhaha last year where Brett Weinstein
refused to stay home from work on the
basis of him being white and you know
cause basically like riots and crazy
scene over there and a whole huge
revolution that's going on and I'm going
to speak in a class a fascinating class
hopefully I'll get the professor on the
podcast to a class about bridging
political divides and you know I'm going
into the Viper spit man like I'm
bringing the message and I'm going out
there I'm building bridges and I'm out
there just hitting the road we're gonna
have another meet up out there in
Seattle - man we can we can raise an
army we're not normative bad people army
of good people everywhere we go across
the country there's people dying for
this kind of stuff there's people dying
for this kind of community there's
people just reaching out all the time
online and just thank everybody for
tuning into this podcast
don't forget follow me on Twitter at
Jack Murphy live go to my website Jack
Murphy live.com and sign up for the
email list because one day I'm gonna get
booted off a Twitter just like all the
other radical voices out there sign up
for the mailing list by the book
Democratic to deplorable you can find
that on Amazon just do whatever you can
to support the cause and I will hear I
will be here again soon on the podcast
and talk to you guys soon thanks again
Goldman Thank You brothers some rock
stars yeah always a pleasure always
the pleasure all right man talk to you
soon peace
[Music]
you