are you shocked at the amount of people
that live in Western societies here in
Norway especially when we were in Sweden
a couple days ago but all the countries
that we've been in that live in free
societies yet are completely afraid to
say what they think is it absolutely
shocking to you I think the most I think
what I've been most shocked about in all
of that is what's happened in the UK
with the police starting to prosecute
people for crimes of offensiveness
that's just and I think that's probably
partly because I'm and I mean I see that
as broadly reflective of something
that's happening in the West in general
but it's particularly shocking and
appalling to me as a Western Canadian no
because obviously COUNTA that was part
of the British Empire and when I grew up
like there was a pretty tight affinity
still in Western Canada with the British
Empire I mean our maps were the Dominion
of Canada it was still pink you know it
was still part of the British Empire
we sang god save the queen constantly at
public gatherings that's gone by the
wayside and so and you know I've always
regarded British common law and the
British parliamentary tradition as well
one of it perhaps the highest
achievement of Western civilization I
mean you could argue about that but it's
it's in the top ten let's say and then
to see the Brits who also have this
phenomenal sense of humor this ability
to say anything no matter how outrageous
about anyone and to include themselves
in the joke right which is such an
elegant way of expressing comedic
freedom to see them going down this road
it's just it just it's it's it's what is
it exactly
well it's deeply saddening that's for
sure and and what's horrifying and it's
not the exactly the right word I don't
know what the word for it is there's
certainly sorrow that's associated with
a disbelief it's also that at at
watching that happen and what I still
think is like the central
core of the idea of individual
sovereignty and freedom as expressed
across the Western world and so and then
there's similar manifestations of that
everywhere else but the police for
prosecuting people for you know asking
people to turn in their neighbors if
they say something offensive and that's
happening in in the UK
yeah litter what we saw that that you
know somebody sent me posters pictures
of posters in the in the Scottish subway
in the in the Metro in the tube you know
saying inviting people to inform on
their neighbors for being offensive it's
like what what the hell what so I knew
this was coming because because I knew
we brought our first hate speech laws in
in Canada back in the 1980s we were
after this character named Ernst z√ºndel
who is a particularly despicable piece
of work hard hat wearing right-wing
anti-semite Holocaust denier you know he
had it all that guy and you know it was
his shenanigans careless malevolent
shenanigans that enticed Canadians into
producing hate speech legislation I
thought no that's that's not good it's
not good you're making a big mistake
we're gonna pay for this it's gonna
unfold over a long time who defines hate
the crucial issue it's not like it's a
scientific category to judgment and the
answer is those whom you least want to
have the power to define it because
they're the ones that will take that
power to themselves and if you think
that isn't gonna affect what you get to
say well you've got another thing coming
so I think it's I think it's we're gonna
pay for it and hopefully hopefully will
wake up and push back before we have to
pay too high a price we're gonna pay for
it so yeah and we're gonna deserve to
pay for it too
he's talking to you what you know last
night last night I was on this British
show called question time which is very
famous British show and there was a
woman parliamentarian there from Ireland
who it was pretty bright I liked
listening to her but the the host asked
me about this character named count dank
EULA I don't know if you know about him
his girlfriend he's a comedian well he
thinks he's a comedian and well but you
know there are lots of comedians who
think they're comedians that aren't
funny and and I'm not saying he's not
funny cuz other people think that he's a
comedian too but he presents himself as
a comedian count Dane Killa I mean
that's actually a joke that name and his
girlfriend had a pug and I liked count
dank ulam because he hated that pug and
I'm not very fond of pugs I think
they're hideous little creatures and and
and and you know I don't really hate
them if a pug comes along and I'll pet
it and everything but it's just sort of
like the the this little rat like dog
with these bugs but you know if you hit
a pug on the back of the head the eyes
will pop out and so because they've been
so genetically mishandled and so I don't
know man it's just you do realize we're
putting this on YouTube and you're just
something you're unleashing a whole
world the hate from the bug people I
know but whatever whatever so you can
have your pug and you can love my dad
had this dog that was so damn hideous
and useless that it was just a miracle
and he loved it to death and so and you
know that's fine that's fine but and
there's kind of an ironic attitude in in
the dismissal of pugs and dank EULA
didn't like his girlfriend's pug and so
he thought he played a mean trick and or
a mean / funny trick and teach it to do
a Heil Hitler salute which I actually
thought was quite funny it's like I
don't look I don't see that as
glorifying Hitler it's a pug for God's
sake
it wasn't that it wasn't uh what do you
call those Doberman you know it was a
pug that's like teaching a rat to do a
Heil Hitler
salute I love that this has come down to
the breed of dog with you well these
things matter in terms of their of the
way they're represented you know and
then you know he taught it to it's so
horrible he and I'm gonna be so killed
for this he taught it to do its little
salute when he said gasps the Jews which
is not funny
you know except it's horribly funny you
know that's the thing well look and so
yeah you laugh that's right because
you're all horrible and you know and you
know perfectly well that it's horribly
funny
and you know we need we need to be able
to be horribly funny because life is
horrible and we and we need to be able
to find we need to be able to allow
people the freedom to find the ability
to transcend that horror with comedy and
a mark of a free society is that clunk
comedians can be just exactly what the
arse which they're people who push the
edge of what's acceptable if you're a
brilliant comedian you get right to the
edge right you dance there and the
audience is thinking Oh Sarah Silverman
is a good example of that you know cuz
you can just see her she's got all
politically correct recently but when
she was in her heyday you could just see
Sarah she's so smart you'd see her
sitting there and she'd think of
something just spectacularly evil and
horrible and she think oh and then she
say it you know and everyone would just
crack up because like the darkest part
of their soul had once thought something
like that and she dared to utter it and
and by uttering it she also
simultaneously transcended it you know
and that's the beauty of comedy and and
and well so anyways they they went after
Dane Killa and nailed him legally and I
thought that's and that's in Great
Britain as well and last night so they
brought this up one on question time and
you know the the Irish woman said she
went off on a talk about how terrible
crystal nacht was and what an awful
thing
ash wits and and Holocaust was it's like
well it's you're not that morally
virtuous to notice that you know you
know what I mean it's like and it didn't
have anything to do with the topic at
hand it's like yeah you wouldn't say
that you noticed that unless you were
implying that were people there are
people around you including this count
dank EULA who didn't notice that okay it
had nothing to do with whether he should
have been prosecuted for his stupid joke
and they even say well you could say it
was a stupid joke which it certainly was
you could say that it was a hateful joke
which I don't agree with by the way but
you could say that and I think you could
you can make a credible case for that
but then to say that because
you think that the Holocaust was bad he
should be criminally prosecuted it's
like no sorry man you've crossed the
line and there's no excuse for it
and so that's part of what's worrisome
about the state of discourse in in the
free West that same thing
comedians won't go to university
campuses it's the same thing you don't
get to be funny so if you can't be funny
then you're not free you know
the gesture in the Kings courts the only
person who gets to tell the truth and if
the King is such a tyrant that he kills
this gesture then you know that the evil
king is in charge and so when we can't
tolerate our comedians it's like well
there you go they're the Canaries in the
coal mine as far as I'm concerned
you know I thought I promised my wife
that I wouldn't hit any Hornets with any
hornet's nest with sticks for like a day
and now I just hit a big hornet's nest
with a stick so sorry Tammy she's here
somewhere
give it up for Jordan's wife by the way
she's been on this entire Torah