just feel so frustrated cuz just
watching Russell Brand's interview
another guy that I just watched that I'm
living in of about climate change and
they're like a green with everything
they're saying but also so frustrated
cuz I have a solution to this
whole climate change and any poverty and
everything but the system is not
designed to get an idea into the world
especially when it's an idea that breaks
the system like especially when it's an
idea that's like not-for-profit and
therefore there's no money to advertise
with there will be but like it's
starting here and I can see the whole
path so frustrating okay look at his 12
million followers I'm like a bomb lately
and he's amazing I love him
anyone on jealousy I'm like yeah and the
beauty of like I old Russell Brand which
isn't even regular typical Hugh Mann who
had you know addiction problems and
womanizing problems and if he wasn't
that I don't think he'd have the
platform he has and have the 12 million
followers to be the new one that has
this like beautiful spirit and is
interviewing all these changes and going
on the edge and like loved it but also
12 million followers I'm like give me
 10,000 and I'm like just think
it's like fighting to get 50 and blue
Tube video has like seven followers and
it's not for me to go like I just need
people so that I can help save the world
and then the coaching thing that I'm
part of and they're like two hundred
people know what a thousands thousands
they don't need to believe in me but
they need to be thousands of people and
want to create a better solution
bypassing the government bypassing the
corporation's and creating our own
entity it's gonna be the world we want
to create in the corporate format and
invitation like I I know I can't do it
in a bite-sized amount I can do it I can
lan√∫s giving it an elevator pitch for it
just doesn't work like we're gonna solve
technology with technology but we're
gonna do it together and I get it like I
don't have my videos aren't edited I
don't know how to explain it beautifully
and I can fully see why that's exactly
why I'm the person who came up with this
but explaining that to the world what
they want is a hero
it's like when I say I have a way to
save the world like oh this is the hero
and they come on they're like oh you're
not a hero because one you don't look
like one we don't normally look like and
two I'm not saying like I have this
lotion here it is ready to buy it I'm
saying I have an idea that's a solution
that we all need to create together I
don't want ownership of it I want to
have one out of 7.5 billion of it like I
want to be able to access what we're
gonna create I want to live in a planet
that makes sense I wanted like
offer the hope I see in the future to
everybody else like we can create a sane
world where the 1% and the corrupt greed
that is destroying our planet can't
destroy our planet because if we are
actually connected if we can collaborate
on a massive scale if when somebody has
an idea it's easy to put it out there if
it's a good idea because we can look at
it and be like oh yeah that's like we
can do it and I have the actual solution
to climate change like what we need is
solutions and no matter where they come
from we need them to be able to get in
the world that's a piece of technology
we can create that I know what that
looks like we have we need to be able to
access information about climate change
and about the whole ecosystems I agree
it's not just about climate change it's
about all of it all the chemicals go
into the atmosphere all of our
biodiversity well it will have access to
science so that everyone has access to
and anyone almost anyone can understand
if you want to open it there's a way to
learn it for your learning style we need
and then there's like one place for
information that we can all just point
back to like we kind of do with
Wikipedia where it's like look like this
is
to debate like yes there's those four
things that like maybe sick climate
change isn't going to destroy it isn't
caused by humans there's these thousands
that do and we can look at the actual
numbers instead of like the media just
having talking points all that all
the noise all the distraction we can
create something together that stops all
of them it's not an overnight thing it
is a progressive thing like we can't
create all of the upsell at once that's
why there's a way to get there there's
that's why we're do it starting with one
and we're just gonna fund it together
and we're going to decide together on
what that project is and then we're
gonna create it and then we're gonna go
on to the next one and the next one and
when we have like four under our belt
the world is going to shift hugely and
that's in like two years like if we give
people the access to information on
their politics the products they buy and
on science they can fully see what's
going on there is no spin that the
governments can do and yeah even if only
10,000 people are using it that would
already shift it because it's like one
place to look back to way I'm going to
say is I have the solution I
just need people