[Music]
Suzanne meditations on Leonard Cohen
number eight Leonard Cohen Suzanne may
be one of the most beautiful songs of
the modern era it is a pure prayer to
embodiment to love to fullness it's one
of those songs that has everything
inside of it the whole history of the
world that is if you know how to listen
to it read its symbols enter its
melodies as Lina Cohen has said such
songs as Suzanne are not constructed
they are not made
they are surrendered in two there is no
instruction manual on how to write a
song like that it is like a religious
text revealed to the author from
somewhere beyond Suzanne is a
masterpiece found among the garbage and
the flowers which means among the sacred
and the profane the beautiful and the
ugly all contrary things if we prefer
the beautiful to the ugly the spiritual
to the worldly we cannot cross over to
the world
Suzanne reveals Suzanne takes you to the
land beyond preference where the river
flows without interruption to its source
the song unfolds like a river like a
caress that Suzanne holds the mirror she
shows you where to look means you cannot
find that bridge on your own what do you
see in her mirror a primeval land Hitler
toe unimaginative Ann invites you to a
brightly colored pagan world of earthly
things she feeds you teen oranges that
come all away from China the gifts of
love come as a surprise from very far
away they are not ordinary you know she
is half crazy but that's why you want to
be there Suzanne's craziness smashes
your mechanical logic brings you into
the realm of sense and soul her logic is
abrupt and contradictory you cannot
possess or describe her with your mind
Susanne's craziness is the divine
craziness that lacks any kind of
ordinary linear frame she has a logic of
her own but we must look deeper into her
mirror to see it it is the logic the
muse Suzanne comes when you're exhausted
when you have burned the bridges cried
all your tears let go of the iron grip
she doesn't tell us what the truth is
she allows you to see it does when you
think you have no love to give her she
puts you on her wavelength
don't ask her how or why you cannot
capture this revolution of the heart in
concept or language she lets the river
answer you have always been her lover
she reminds you wordlessly you forgot to
listen to her deep melody but she was
always there just below the surface of
your conscious mind you want to travel
with her you want to travel blind your
blindness is the paradox of vision your
objective world will be shattered before
you can touch her perfect body with your
mind Suzanne is the divine woman and God
cannot create anything without her
and Jesus the lonely Jew sinks like a
stone before her he was brought down to
earth first made human and mortal then
drowned in her wordless wisdom like a
stone he falls down into the depths
where sailors are drowning it's not
Jesus but Suzanne who brings the man
from his lonely wooden tower from his
games of power and acquisition from the
spiritual arrogance here the material
and the spiritual are not divided they
are enjoined in a vision as heaven and
earth as man and woman
sharing that supernatural unity only
drowning men can see Jesus but Suzanne
is holding the mirror for everyone to
see
just ask the children or leaning out for
love they will lean that way forever the
children are not from this earth but
from the beyond they don't follow our
laws of space and time
they are the potential of all things and
you will be a sailor until you find them
in love mind and body and their eternal
struggle and fall down into union the
eternal children are calling to have a
body to come down to this impossible
earth where we are all traveling blind
but willingly she the lover has invited
us here to recapture the flame the
garbage and the flowers meditations on
Leonard Cohen number nine in a time of
casualness consumerism and faux
spontaneity Leonard Cohen is intentional
and formal where all the borders of
language and culture are broken Cohen is
a tight rhymer
he works language down to the bone he
leaves you with the skeleton keys
there's hardly a throwaway line in any
of his songs and yet he sings them with
such soulful ease that is because he
will not give up a song until it has a
body and the soul the soul demands
perfection in mind body and heart
traditionally the three seats of the
soul some artists are full of heart but
lack intellectual rigor some are hyper
intellectual but lack heart many stars
are lost in the sexual grind but have
little access to higher realms of
feeling and intellect most of us are
fragmented and bloom in some areas while
languishing in others but Cohen I would
argue is a complete artist as he covers
all the major locusts of the souls
deeper concerns of course he is a master
wordsmith and an underrated novelist but
there are more accomplished poets out
there he has a broken voice and is not a
bad guitarist actually but Cohen's chord
progressions are standard and
conservative even if he writes beautiful
simple melodies although he has worked
with great musicians and producers he
didn't push the envelope musically like
for instance a prodigy like Frank Zappa
still Cohen was an accomplished
minimalist and successfully worked with
the limited resources he had he put the
right ingredients into the soup without
trying to reinvent Soup essentially his
stark but warm poetry triumphs over the
music the words are all important that
the music is often unremarkable doesn't
matter much
it is a backdrop for the story in fact
one could say that he spoke more than he
sang his songs Cohen gives us the word
in capital letters the logos we live in
an age of verbal casualness where we are
constantly assaulted by fragments of
verbal noise but the Cohen universe is a
sanctuary where each word is embodied
and articulated instead of abandoned or
excessive sonic stimulation he gives us
moments where our own souls can
recuperate and be enriched in Cohen we
enter a temple of attention and
mindfulness this is altogether precious
poetry is made to give us back our souls
to be titillated or entertained as a
secondary concern and in our age of
categories we tend to divide the two to
divert ourselves with entertainment and
then at other times to look at more
serious works actually Cohen both heals
and entertains which is a surprisingly
rare combination these days again Cohen
manages to bridge the higher in the
lower worlds the garbage and the flowers
so to speak formalism doesn't make Cohen
stiff at all the quality of containment
and disappearance the suit the mask or
the Zen uniform these are not self
negating but self liberating robes they
make the singer subordinate to his song
just as the monk is subordinate to his
prayer and Cohen knew the more limited
the choices the more delineated the
playing field the more humor the more
death and intelligence emerge
that concentrated space again it can't
be stressed enough how much spiritual
discipline and hygiene play a part in
Cohen's work without his studies of zen
and vita jewish mysticism he would have
been crushed in the Maz of 60s hedonism
like so many of his contemporaries it is
not an easy task to write what he called
the crisis of a song and he often
bemoaned that it was a slow and arduous
process but there was no going around
the discipline of the craft and in this
Cohen is contrary to our era and like
the Giants of the past Bird on a Wire
meditations on Leonard Cohen number 10
often the figures that encapsulate their
era contrasts with it the most
strikingly Leonard Cohen is jokingly
called his work inappropriate for this
reason while the rock stars in the 1960s
were involved in splashy psychedelic
experimentation Cohen was a
perfectionist and studied traditions
while pop music was all about
experiencing the now Cohen was prophetic
and wrote about the future not that
Cohen didn't participate in the favorite
games of his time or remain aloof in the
movie bird on the wire we see him
playing his role as cultural hero
ironically dropping acid groping the
groupies riding around Europe and
limousines and smoking cigars but in the
midst of all that joyous abandon he
seems like the saddest man in the world
commander Cohen seemed to know that he
was captain of a ship of fools and that
the ship was going down how did Cohen
clash with his generation he was slow
impatient in the midst of hyper real
speed and consumerism he articulated
each word without haste he didn't preach
he spoke the way a poet does compressing
words into their potent essence of
meaning in fact you could say his
singing style was to speak rather than
to say
- let the lyric appear rather than force
it into being Cohen was meditative
instead of impulsive melodic instead of
avant-garde he lacks the aggression and
speed of his contemporaries and his
early music Cohen sounds beyond his
years his is not the soundtrack of
youthful vitality but the spirit of
healing that arises from exhaustion some
aren't able to attune to this lovers
weariness or weariness with samsara
as the Buddha scholar one has to have
seen through the favorite games of the
world somewhat to relate to Cohen's work
people who are excessively idealistic
are those who have never suffered from
heartbreak will feel offended by the
philosophical pessimism of Cohen's work
he doesn't give us hope or answers but
rather a deeper question which is where
a deeper hope paradoxically Springs from
after reading Beautiful Losers recently
I was struck by how painful that book
feels he has said it was a book written
in blood that the record of a crisis
when imagines Cohen on the Greek island
of Hydra with his wife in the pinnacle
of success in worldly glory youth and in
love and yet somehow ferociously sad
broken lost the book is along
cacophonous prayer full of obscenity and
beauty both a prayer that doesn't raise
up his generation but records its
collapse in that state of desperate
creation which brought him
hospitalization eventually in such a
state there could be nothing left but to
ask for mercy from the higher powers and
muses to make a total confession Cohen
songs are prayers
more so than his contemporaries perhaps
Nina Simone was similar in that regard
but she never managed to surmount her
depression she did however manage to do
an extraordinary cover of the song
Susanne instantly of course Cohen
couldn't be a more radically different
kind of talent than Simone but the
sadness felt in the music is the same
Cohen survived this Avalanche perhaps
because of his
tough Jewishness and sense of humor born
and those sub-zero cold joyful Montreal
winters what is the antidote for chronic
sadness devotion may be the only way
devotion is the great theme in Cohen
devotion to teachers to lovers to his
audience and that may have been what
saved him
his devotion to his audience is
supremely touching in those early years
it pained him almost physically to give
them a false note in the film Bird on a
Wire Cohen is volatile and vulnerable
hardly able to get on the stage at the
end of the film you see him in Jerusalem
weeping while having a vision of his
ex-wife Mary and I'm quoting him here
Cohen so I go out on stage with the band
and I start singing so long Marianne and
I see Marianne standing straight in
front of me I started crying I turned
around and the band was crying too and
it turned into something in retrospect
quite comic the entire audience turned
into one Jew and this Jew is saying what
else can you show me kid I've seen a lot
of things and this don't move the dial
and this was the entire skeptical side
of our tradition not just writ large but
manifested as an actual gigantic being
judging me hardly seems to begin to
describe the operation it was a sense of
invalidation and irrelevance that I felt
with authentic because those feelings
have always circulated around my psyche
where do you get to stand up and speak
for what and for whom how deep is your
experience how significant is anything
you have to say I think it really
invited me to deepen my practice digging
deeper whatever it was
take it more seriously Joan of Arc
meditations on Leonard Cohen number 11
Leonard Cohen songs express a radical
kind of spirituality and eroticism but
you cannot say that he is new-age
although he is venerated in spiritual
circles as the poetic sensitive man his
songs are also fiery and subversive
sacrifice
is a major theme in Cohen's work and
sacrifice is never separate from erotic
love ecstatic vision and the lovers
consummation are earned through trial by
fire
it's interesting how Cohen's sings of
strong women as very few men do most
love songs are about the desirable woman
the sexual woman the motherly woman or
the femme fatale but fewer above the
saintly aesthetic heroine of a woman we
can see the Cohens relationships with
women and sex is never one-dimensional
and is always creative and even
subversive in the song Joan of Arc the
cold and lonesome heroine is tired of
the war and wants a domestic rather than
a spiritual life it turns out however
that marriage is the fire and she cannot
escape her fate this reminds me of the
Last Temptation of Christ or Christ
descends from the cross to lead an
ordinary life only to wake up again on
the cross
domestic love itself is the sacrifice
here and nobody escapes a fate so cruel
and bright and deep inside his fiery
heart he took the dust of Joan of Arc
and high above the wedding guests he
hung the ashes of her wedding dress
perhaps the ashes are symbolic of the
song and the wedding guests are the
audience the beloved bride has been
burned up but remains in a song the
concert is a place to mourn and
celebrate the sting of lost love remains
but there is a ceremony of transcendence
before the divine audience there is the
bitter taste of ashes but the hope for
renewal and fire make your body cold I'm
going to give you mine to hold and
saying that she climbed to the side to
be is one to be his only bride the
lovers died to each other becoming one
in spiritual marriage not for this world
the fire will not burn without the wood
the man cannot create his works or sing
a song without the generative force of
women if he has fire she must be wood he
sings the male principle here is fire
spirit or semen which burns up the
female principle or wood which could
symbolize biological generation
or birth but the song also contains a
kind of reversal of gender roles Joan of
Arc is the fiery revolutionary and Cohen
is a compassionate receiver she goes
inside him it is as though man has to
become woman such as in traditional
ceremonies like the Mexican Day of the
Dead where a man through imagination or
cross-dressing imaginatively unites with
a woman as a consequence he gets
symbolically pregnant and in Cohen's
case the song child is born this
sacrifice so cruel and bright is both a
blissful wedding feast and a funeral a
birth and a death the coming together of
man and woman in a terrible love cry
that repairs the broken polarities of
the world individual identities are
sacrificed in the bonfire of existence
I saw her wince I saw her cry I saw the
glory in her eye he sings is she being
burnt at the stake or is she having an
orgasm burnt up in the Holy pit of
carnal love she embodies the whole
material maternal world in a giant orgy
astok blaze we are the fire as well as
the wood the anima and the animus in
young in terms and the fire of holy
spirit that burns within us Joan of Arc
reminds us of the original androgynous
being male and female principals are
unified in a ceremony of love and
annihilation the boundary the border the
distance is sacrificed and yet and yet
we can't help thinking what if it had
been different like a beast with his
horn meditations on Leonard Cohen number
12
recently I received a Kurt remark from a
Western Buddhist accusing me of putting
Leonard Cohen on a pedestal on the
contrary I wanted to say to him I love
Cohen precisely because of his
humaneness his warmth his legendary good
humor this man went on to lecture me in
a vicious condescending manner in which
his person seemed quite present saying
that all concepts of self and good and
bad or an illusion when people have
nothing but spiritual terminology and
criticism to give they can't hear the
birds sing you talk over your head
they are dogmatic I wonder if this
religious Buddhist had ever written a
love letter or it ever had any human
passion a love letter is betrayal a
fondness for another human being it
permits flights of lyricism as a way to
express the inexpressible the love
letter also characterizes the essence of
Leonard Cohen songs how much more alive
is a poetic response to the world than a
dogmatic one Leonard Cohen's romanticism
was chivalric rather than adolescent
intelligent rather than sentimental even
as he wrote about romantic love he did
so almost religiously in one sense he is
deeply religious committed to his Jewish
heritage in another his iconoclastic
heretical even hedonistic these two
poles are tension between desire and
higher transcendence are recorded with
accuracy and beauty in his songs this is
the battle we all fight to which Cohen
gave form there's a war between the
people who say there was a war and the
people who say there isn't by submitting
himself to both sides of life mystical
terms to the left hand and the right
hand paths he emerged as a whole artist
a whole artist is neither appended nor a
spiritualist neither worldly nor
otherworldly he or she is the real deal
Cohen is singularly affectionate in his
relationship to teachers and spiritual
friends which is regarded as more
important than religious dogma his old
japanese zen master mattered to him more
than the buddhists
and for instance distance himself from
mainstream Judaism at the same time
insisting on being Jewish traditionalist
which might seem contradictory until one
realizes that the inner and the outer
paths are often at odds Cohen was
devoted not to the legalistic aspect of
tradition but to spiritual Judaism and
Zen which has everything to do with
friendship and love because of Cohen's
humaneness and humility his ability to
kneel grotesque and bare as a song
avalanche has it his full confession of
ego that beast with the horn The
Hunchback he was saved saved from what
for one thing he was saved from becoming
a fossilized folk star from the 60s and
granted a full lifetime of inspiration
and a happy death at least it seemed so
from what has been written Cohen
transcended the self-loathing and shame
of the narcissistic artist perhaps by
meeting that monster in himself some of
his lyrics on the subject are truly
harrowing the cripple that you starve
and feed is neither closed nor cold he
does not ask for your company not at the
center the center of the world he
struggled also with the false master or
tyrant especially within himself he
fought that beast with his horn with
tooth and nail and he paid for his gifts
in blood why do I praise Cohen so highly
because I believe he was the kind of
artist who managed to walk on both sides
of the world the inner of the outer of
the light the dark the spiritual the
carnal and survive and this is
exceedingly rare calling at times were
the robes of Old Religion but not
without humor or even embarrassment but
truly what is more iconoclastic today
than duty chivalry friendship in this
Dark Age of self obsession there is a
law meditations on Leonard Cohen number
thirteen and this is a quote from
Leonard Cohen book of Logging's always
after I tell him what I intend to do
next
Irving Layton solemnly inquires Leonard
are you sure you're doing the wrong
thing
the value of a good song or poem can't
be measured in the economies of the
world it may be as useless as a forest
to a highway and the collective culture
makes highways not forests what could be
more wrong than a Leonard Cohen song
than today's smog doing the wrong thing
in the positive sense means breaking up
the structures of an ossified world
culture the wrong thing the wrong word
the inappropriate gesture is actually
poetry which is by its nature subversive
we should make sure to do the wrong
thing as Leonard Cohen did in a world
that becomes more and more like a
lunatic asylum every day in other words
we should try to be less civilized that
doesn't mean to be vulgar or exhibit
lewd behavior although that might be
called for at times an orgy might have
been radical in the 1960s but lewdness
today is the ultimate conformity better
wear a fedora hat and play classical
guitar when everyone is playing noisy
music and wearing spandex butter shave
your head and go and live in a bear room
in a monastery then marry the trophy
wife do anything but the right thing
Irving Layton was Leonard Cohen's mentor
Layton was constantly trying to upset
the stuffy moralistic world of the
1950's and his comments are more true
than ever today we live in an
increasingly Puritan world that despises
eccentricity even while it pretends to
celebrate it real eccentricity is not
blind impulsive and savage behavior it
is instead the courage to draw lines in
the sand to be gentle and quiet at times
to make origami swans instead of shit on
a canvas even if it seems to be a
culture of pleasure we actually have a
general culture of rudeness and
interruption and people don't feel
enough natural pleasure because they are
over stimulated in
isolated have hyperactive shallow brains
the rude machine turns up perfectly
fashionable ciphers who think they are
individuals because they wear designer
t-shirts and play spiritual parlor games
Leonard Cohen's music proposes that we
bring back the laws of hospitality how
about being self effacing and modest let
us be quiet and deep instead of flashy
and extroverted what about bringing back
some good old Victorian manners that
would really screw up the machine would
it not what about real discipline real
skill and allocution real gentleness let
us be gentlemen and ladies let us bring
back demarcations let us not be casual
but intentional unfashionable in every
way that might be the best way to screw
up the system and the powers that be in
this day and age to become an actual
dignified human being this is what
Leonard did and what makes him Boober
cool even to the punk rock world his
coolness is not without fire not without
raw power it is containment that makes
him cool why should we do the wrong
thing the inappropriate thing because
that upsets the laws of collective
coercion the braying of sheep there are
other kinds of laws deeper laws divine
laws the laws of remorse as you put it
in a song that remorse that shame on our
own vulgarity before others it's not
uptight Puritanism there's actually
being gracious it is humor Cohen made
music that was hospitable he invited
everybody in he sense his actual love
for Humanity in those songs he respected
his audience he adored his audience what
faults he made in his performance he put
on himself
he did not declare with the beautiful
arrogance of a Bob Dylan you don't owe
me anything he did not turn his back on
the crowd he practiced and displayed
gratitude for his fans of course there
was something great in the sort of
fuck-you of the punk-rock attitude of a
ham bowl or a Bob Dylan but this belongs
to adolescence and Cohen was an adult an
adult is a rare bird in the world of
popular culture something that
practically doesn't exist anymore I'm
your man
meditations on Leonard Cohen number 14
as I have mentioned while writing this I
immersed myself in the teachings of
Leonard Cohen's final teacher Rabbi
Yaakov lay a cooing and his fiery
podcast on the Zohar and the Gnostic
Gospels although I have only a
superficial understanding of those
traditions I'll try to explain certain
revelations of rabbi's teachings that
might give us a better understanding
about Jewish and Catholic also mysticism
weaved their way into Cohen's work some
of the Zohar also known as the oral
torah a foundational text of Jewish
Kabbalah some of its views on sex and
God which are Cohen's principal themes
are quite surprising for instance it
says somewhere in the Zohar that if
women are not present God is also not
present in fact the Holy Spirit in
Jewish mysticism
according to Jakob is decidedly feminine
and he refers to the Holy Spirit as she
Yaakov explains that the actual
messianic mission is meant for us not to
save ourselves but to heal God through
reuniting the feminine and the masculine
spheres going even further than this is
the idea that God needs us to repair him
and this means that God is actually
schizoid in other words totally divided
unpredictable cruel broken this idea is
not hard to understand if we consider
that God created our broken mad
it's not so hard to believe that the
creator went nuts when he created man
and woman and the snake in the Garden of
Eden our job according to the rabbi is
to heal God that means God is suffering
and the task of the mystic is to unite
the two polarities of man and woman but
not for the sake of men and women but
for the sake of God so we actually have
to repair a schizophrenic God through
equalizing the male and the female
principles obviously this is a radical
view not the nominal view which says
that God is all-powerful and omnipotent
etc and of course this kind of view is
heresy to nominal religion and it's also
radically different than any kind of
new-age self-help philosophy we're not
helping ourselves here
we're helping God what could be more
dangerous than that and the dangerous
game that we play is actually love and
that is how we heal the angry Old
Testament tyrant through love of the
Holy Spirit which is love of woman a
central danger for the night or
Troubadour is to lose himself in a
woman's fear as I said it's a dangerous
game
he cannot be aloof or ravisher or he
will lose everything he must regard her
in prayer with his love and his passion
by seeing the woman in her fullness she
becomes enlivened and so does God we
should worship women then not by putting
her up on a pedestal but for more
sublime spiritual reasons because she is
a Holy Spirit Cohen seems to have
intuitively known this which is why he
never wrote a banal love song he admired
women and appreciated their company as
friends and lovers his view of them is
not chauvinistic but worshipful in the
larger sense
you're not only sang about their beauty
he sang with him he struggled with them
he loved them in their complexity the
female voice is exalted for con she's
everywhere and everything the crack in
everything is the place where we enter
the world through this which is
symbolized by the female sex the light
gets in through penetration the woman is
animated by that thrust of light and the
man has made whole
through devotion a man cannot be real
until he has cracked open by a woman the
woman cannot be fulfilled until she
returns to her Lord the broken voice
then is the real and naked voice not the
studied or mastered one which reunites
men and women man and woman when man
stands before the woman with his broken
hallelujah he is paradoxically made
whole in this confession real chivalrous
manhood here is not about being in
control but about being tender if you
want to love her I'll do anything you
ask me if you want another kind of love
I wear a mask for you I'm your man
who could deny that these are the words
that a woman wants to hear even if they
sound a bit old-fashioned I'm your man
not because I could be domesticated
but because I'm right here in the beauty
and the horror I'm your man because we
are equal and benighted
before what is most divine I put on a
mask for you consciously I see into the
core of you the beauty and the ugliness
your makeup and your real face Here I am
I'm your man ready to do what is
necessary in so long Mary Ann Cohen
sings you held onto me like a crucifix
as we went kneeling through the night
here sexes embodied prayer sacred
worship sacrifice the hallelujah is not
so holy that you cannot taste it it
exists right here in our broken bodies
Cullen through his unique alchemy brings
the sublime down into the earthly the
divine into love and sex
who else did that who else wrote so
deeply about man and woman in modern
song the ancient poets and mystics did
and so did Leonard Cohen