[Music]
hi so as it says on the title page this
is not episode 3 this is an addendum so
episode 2 a couple of things firstly my
apologies for the technical issues on
these videos I'm aware that the volume
and the lighting and so on is a little
bit variable I'm working on it I hope I
will get better with practice
secondly and this is the main part of
this I wanted to talk a little bit more
about Adam Smith I refer to him very
briefly in passing but actually is an
incredibly important figure his main
work is book called The Wealth of
Nations and this is the seminal work on
which all of modern economic theory is
based and I thought it would be
interesting to a take a very brief look
at his thinking in his ideas but more
importantly because this is the matrix
remember to look at how some of his
actually very sensible very reasonable
ideas have been perverted and so been
subverted in our modern economy Adam
Smith was born in 1723 and his main work
The Wealth of Nations was written in set
will published in 1776 it took them
about 10 years to write it in that he
starts off by saying that people act out
of a combination of benevolence and
self-interest but the self-interest is
the reliable gauge and that therefore
that is what should be used as the
fabric by wish to construct society and
so yeah his thinking basically goes on
after the people act primarily out of
self-interest and people require goods
and services that others provide
especially now as because people have
become more specializing and production
lines and
and targeted laborer meant that you know
the need for each person to be
self-sufficient is no longer there
people produce one thing and they use
that one thing to exchange for all the
other things that they need and that
life requires the assistance and
cooperation of whether it was the phrase
use the cooperation assistance of great
multitude and that they cannot be
provided and they cannot be sorry they
cannot be depended upon to provide their
assistance they lose their services
purely out of benevolent motives and so
we therefore exchange with each other in
the spirit of mutual self-interest
[Music]
Smith believed that in a society of
people completely free to do what they
want and each acting out of their own
enlightened self-interest that a
perfectly egalitarian society is created
by Hickey Gallatin he doesn't mean that
everyone is exactly the same or has
exactly the same video that everyone is
participating under the same conditions
you know what I mean you have an
absolutely level playing field so yeah
his vision depended on conditions of
absolute liberty so minimal of
interference no interference from the
state that the state's role would be
simply that of providing large
infrastructure adjusted the criminal
justice system and perhaps the national
defense but beyond that the government
had had very little role to play and as
such taxes would also be minimized
[Music]
and he believed that the laws of supply
and demand if left entirely to
themselves would create a dynamic and
stable and free and fair market place
[Music]
but even Smith recognized that there
were problems with this firstly the idea
of wages for labor as far as he was
concerned the true wealth of any nation
originates with its labor it takes
labour to dig gold out of the ground you
know that the gold reserves of a nation
should no longer be used as a measure of
its wealth but its ability to produce
things with its labor should be the
measurement of its wealth and so the
whole concept of wages for labour he did
not approve of because labor creates
wealth but wages give you no stake in
the wealth that you are creating and
wages as a transitory thing
[Music]
he also believed that the production
line was just getting going when Smith
was around and he also believed that
although the production line massively
increased efficiency and productivity
but that it also destroyed human beings
you know doing dull repetitive work year
in year out destroy human beings and
that it should therefore be limited and
automated as soon as was practicable
[Music]
he also recognized the fact that
domestic labor done primarily by women
was not factored in you know that it was
not given any monetary value and that it
made a huge contribution to the huge to
the smooth functioning of society and he
recognized that as a shortcoming in his
work he also acknowledged that this
would not on its own solve problems of
inequality and poverty and he recognized
that it would put there was also a
significant danger of an a completely
unrestricted free market leading to
unacceptably high concentrations of
wealth in the hands of a very few
individuals
[Music]
Smith was fundamentally a good guy he
believed in empowering the workers and
not letting the Masters you know the
owners run rampant over their workforce
[Music]
he believed in benevolent acts in order
to alleviate poverty he sympathize
deeply with the plight of of the
impoverished and above all he recognized
the huge wealth concentrated in the
hands of a few people later unfettered
power and you know based on the old
axiom the power corrupts and absolute
power corrupts absolutely
[Music]
so many ways Adam Smith was actually
quite socialist in his views he
advocated a redistribution of wealth in
society that should never become too
concentrated in too few hands and that
Labour should be valued and that workers
should be treated fairly and compensated
generously and he believed that the
burden of running the mechanics of
society ie taxation the burden of that
should fall primarily on the rich above
all he was a libertarian and a
humanitarian and I think this sometimes
get lost gets lost in his in the
derivation of his work into modern
economics you know above all he believed
that the market needed to be tempered
with human compassion and benevolent
intent and that one should never seek to
get one over on the other that exchanges
should be of mutual benefit I believe
that he would be horrified if he could
see what we have constructed what we've
created in his name in the modern
economy
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
justification justification so when
Ellen Smith talks about enlightened
self-interest he meant exactly that not
naked self-interest but self-interest
which included an understanding of the
fact that unless others around you were
also prospering that you had no chance
of prospering somehow rather that idea
of enlightened self-interest has become
twisted and corrupted into the idea of a
dog-eat-dog survival of the fittest you
know succeed or die
and that the poor are poor because they
are lazy stupid and worthless and it's a
good example of how a great man with
good ideas who had only the best
interests of his fellow man at heart how
those ideas become co-opted and
perverted to serve the needs of ruthless
and greedy people is not unlike
Nietzsche's ideas being co-opted and
twisted to serve the needs of the Third
Reich and you know if that sounds like
I'm dropping the Hitler bomb that I'm
being overly inflammatory and you know
using highly emotive things as
comparisons well I do this in
in full knowledge of what I'm doing
because the structural violence
committed by our system of money and by
our system of power energy of politics
and globalization far exceeds anything
was ever done by Hitler Stalin Pol Pot
combined
and it surely cannot be denied that
wealth is far too concentrated in the
hands of too few people as I showed you
in the last video some 80 percent of the
people on this planet are currently
impoverished in some way or another so
even if you reject the whole thing that
you know about the origins of money
coming from
you know armies and controlling
populations even if you reject my whole
premise on that and even if you believe
that money has a useful purposes so I
would contend that that useful purpose
has run its course that money now holds
us back that it is way too concentrated
in way few hands and we need to
re-evaluate the way that we think about
money the fact is we're facing new
conditions now conditions that we've
never seen before you know with our
technological ability and our knowledge
we have the capability now to create
abundance for everybody instead of which
we're creating profits for the very few
in there and this quest for profit is
blocking us because abundance is the
enemy of profit scarcity makes things
more valuable makes them more desirable
and therefore more valuable for example
diamonds when they find a very high
number of diamonds in any particular
here there they hold some of them back
in order to keep them off the market so
that it maintains the high prices of the
diamond so you know the concept of
abundance is entirely antithetical to a
profit debt interest based monetary
system and in the next video I'm going
to go into the particulars of one on it
is monetary system and how and show at
the next level how it how it blocks asks
from progressing as a society but the
point is that given we are facing new
conditions in the light of new
conditions we should be seeking new
systems of organization if our current
ones no longer service and I think it's
pretty clear that our current model
of Finance does not serve us not as a
people this idea of needing to exchange
one thing for another in order to get
what you want if there is an abundance
of everything for everyone that need to
exchange things is room you know it is
no longer valid so what we need to do is
allow technology automation the ability
to communicate so easily and so readily
with each other now we need to that let
that come to the fore I came across the
idea of the technological singularity
recently on a guy called XAR beers
channel well worth a watch is funny he's
talking about this the singularity worm
the singularity he defines as being the
point at which technology is developing
so rapidly it isn't possible to see even
a few years down the road where it's
going to take us and whether we're
reaching that point now you know where
we can do almost anything we have the
capability to do almost anything I mean
in terms of solving the problems of
survival and living on this planet if we
were to unleash technology take away the
restraints that are currently placed on
it they need to make profit from it they
need to shield it from others so that
they can't profit from it you know Toto
take all of that away and just unleash
it I really believe I know there are
many out there that don't agree this I
really believe that what we currently
think of as human nature the need to
trade with each other in order to
acquire things and seeking you know
ideally mutual self-interest but if
necessary profiting from and exploiting
other people in order to get what we
want I really think it's time we start
to think of those as archaic outdated
irrelevant unhelpful attitudes and start
to embrace the idea of there being
plenty for everyone we can do it I was
having a conversation with somebody the
other day and they were saying what we
need to do is want five billion people
planet I think that's an incredibly
cynical viewing do we really come to
hate our fellow human being so much that
we're happy to see two-thirds
three-quarters of the wiped out just so
they're the rest of us can have an
easier life somebody else said to me
where's the money going to come from to
provide this abundance for everybody
well again it's a simple read channeling
of resources as I said in the last video
we don't need the money
we need the manpower the skills the
knowledge the resources we need a
different way of channeling those things
but even if we stick with the current
idea of money that we have all we need
to do is divert the manpower the
resources the research that goes into
developing weapons of mass destruction
developed you know buying Trident buying
hs2 bailing out bankers fighting wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan you only know that
it was estimated that if the money spent
the may and resources wasted in the
second world war could have fared
clothed and housed all of the poor of
the world three times over so it's a
simple question of redistribution of
resources where do our priorities lie as
a society but it's clear from the fact
that there is so much poverty and war
and so on that our priorities as a
society lie in profit and there is
nothing so profitable and scarcity
there's nothing so profitable as war and
these things are perpetuated as a direct
consequence of the monetary system that
ensure scarcity in the money supply
itself and which enslaves both
individuals excuse me both individuals
and governments in unpayable debt and
going next video it's a huge topic and
it's going to take me a while to put the
video together I'm also away for a
couple of weeks in Spain so it could be
as long as three or four weeks before
the next video goes out please be
patient with me I will do it i'm not
being slack in the meantime thanks very
much for watching keep passing it on and
yeah that's it
[Music]