yeah it shouldn't be that way because
the people at the bush they're living
that they've got the privilege they're
living well they don't have all the
stresses and pressures that you have as
the white guy with all the privileges of
living in a nice house good educational
rest of it who knows if that's the right
way to live it might be the other way
biz for so long it was that way what I'm
interested in is recognizing this deeper
layer that it's the capacity to overcome
obstacles that is the capacity to be
sovereign yourself right it's what you
said before thing is I've always to call
you a black Basten it's gonna it's gonna
bounce off you nice clap on that one all
right
Yara yes I'm so happy to be sitting down
with you I feel very blessed that I get
to have an hour conversation with you
thank you for doing this that's good
it's to get it out there for people to
listen to and hopefully get something
from it but yeah I'm a part of this
right yeah beautiful well let's see I
suppose the best way to begin
conversations like this is to touch on
to explore who you are there's just such
a broad thing there but you're someone I
think that can dip into that complex
space of who you are and pull something
out so Yara who are you well my name's
ER mwyn yeah yeah I'm a judge a wrong
man
my great-great-grandfather John Charles
in the early 1900s
I found out is from that area but I grew
up thinking that I was from your jaw
drop around Shep and an achiever in that
area but yeah I found out more for
elders that were actually from the
Jurong Bacchus Marsh area through there
a few years ago I was up there doing a
film called The Man from Snowy River and
not knowing that's where I was from at
that time I knew I felt connected to
that land and as time went on after that
film I was talking to some elders and
stuff like that and this particular lady
said to me you're actually your
great-grandfather's from this area John
Charles and he was a man that was a
warrior
and he was he spoke his mind and and I
sometimes think why am I the way I am
but how I I'm not I don't like people
that are racists or people that are
bullies mmm
and he was that type of guy as well I
look the jeans from him mm-hmm
wherever I am today I think from our
ancestors and all of us have got our own
ancestors from the past
I think they fly through to us in some
stages in our life and the flow that I
got from that name is a strong flow
right yeah there's something about a
connection to your body and something
about a connection to your lineage of
what you've been your ancestors
something about that waking up
experience into who you are that has
some character some characterization of
beginnings of spiritual experience but I
know a little bit about your past and
your life began let's say without an
easy connection to your ancestry and
your home yeah can you sue a little bit
about your childhood and well I was with
my father from the age of seven
my mother and father broke up and I was
with my dad and from that stage were in
Ballarat there and we hitched like
straight up to Adelaide and my first
first week with my father was living in
parks and stuff like that was my
father's an alcoholic and would have to
sleep in these parks and sleep in empty
houses and you know learnt very young
about survival because we didn't have
money so I had to be creative to get out
there and make the money so I could eat
right and because I didn't want to go
hungry right so you know we'd be up in
Adelaide and whitmore square and we're
back to Melbourne back to the champion
hotel all the pubs and stuff like that
and what's all the men in that pub at
that time you know they'll be playing
pool and the jukebox been going on over
there and you see a fight happening over
there and over there is this little kid
watching all this stuff so no more role
models so as I'm growing I'm thinking I
want to be
like that mm-hmm you know from that
stage when I'm about 16 17 18 after
traveling the country with my father
learning a lot of stuff about being a
street man and if having some loyalty
and wisdom from that age 16 I went I'll
end up back in Shepparton where those
kids haven't even left that area that
country town so then I can tell some big
stories and I found the interest when I
was telling my stories that those guys
and girls were listening to what I was
talking about yeah from the experience
that I've had
mm-hmm and then I said you know I
started to create things and remember
watching this video called the Warriors
and I remember getting on my my mates
into my sister's flat up there in
Shepparton and not take 10 at a time up
there and watch this video was a game
called the Warriors and so I want to
create this gang you know I was about
same sort of things but what I was
probably thinking about when all those
men were in the pub drinking and stuff
so because I did say would it be just
like them but I took it to that level a
bit further again my starting this game
and we got a little bit of trouble up
there and then you know it was starting
problems with the police and I'll be
pulling me up telling me what I did over
the weekend there was I started to drink
at that time as well when I was 18 19
right and at that stage you had a wife
with with one child and then 20 21 had
another one and by the time I was 21 I
had to leave Shepherd or the narcs to
leave there it was might as as wise for
me to leave and I left with my wife and
two children then at that stage and by
then my mates at that time was starting
off to jail or starting in a pent region
in all these jails and stuff right
anyway I sort of missed that besides a
bit more clearly than staying in the one
environment because my journey was
always moving around right so I knew was
it was a problem she having to come to
Melbourne blaming all of them but I
realized it was me I had to look at
myself right
and then I had to get to start thinking
about why I'm I get myself in all this
all these problems and I realise what
was the alcohol right it's doing that
right yeah so I just how much were you
drinking I'd drink I was a binge drink
every two or three weeks on a weekend
right but it wasn't met him at how much
you drank it what it what the effects
would have done to you
right it was costing me more than what
the bottle is worth you know I'd have a
drink on a Friday night right
I meet together work on a Monday and I
got two children and a wife and I'd
start on a Friday hearing Marvin I'll
end up in Adelaide no wake up the Amanda
I think oh geez what am I doing here me
to be gonna work today and then I'll be
back to Melbourne no trying to come back
and do the right thing again and then
the crying and kicking again after two
or three weeks don't do it again
and I decide you want to do this anymore
just keep doing it mm-hmm and there was
one time on the 5th of August 1993
I was at this church on the corner of
Holland Victoria Street and there was a
guy there by the name of Jackie Chris
was a great guy I'd go there on a Sunday
to this meeting and listen what about
talking about drugs and alcohol and I
was identifying with him but I didn't
want to stop right and I didn't want to
stop I couldn't stop with my wife or my
kids or to get to keep my job I had to
come to the point on the 5th of August
1993 on my knees praying to something
higher than myself
mm-hmm and it's not a religious thing I
was a spiritual experience where I was
brought to my knees and I got back up
off my knees at that that night when I
walked back into a meeting my brother
was in there he looked at me as you okay
I see now I'm falling he goes I said why
I wasn't mad at you guys you just look
different so from that point until now
I've never picked up a drink so it's
over 25 years Wow so something happened
Wow I'm glad that happened
yeah so from that point to where I'm
today because I'm not in the cloud and
the fog of alcohol or drugs yeah I see
things very clearly right and always
connect with the right people because
whatever got that take took that alcohol
away from you that day
guides me in the right direction right
even to what I'm doing right now yeah
speaking you know hopefully that someone
could hear something what I'm talking
about now yeah can identify what I'm
talking about yeah where it could help
them miss that great guy helped me and
he said to me now you need to help
others right and that's how you you had
to give it a way to keep it right it's
not about you anymore
yeah this alcoholics and drug addicts
but where
pretty full of our ego self-pity
resentment you know and we need to start
thinking about others and the damage
that we've done to other people and if
you're doing the next right thing well
then you have a better life so it was a
connection to something greater than
yourself yes
that was the experience that was the
experience and you I mean it sounds you
know I've had some experiences myself
that you could associate with a mystical
spiritual type experience and I've
spoken to lots of people who have and
I've read a lots of things and one of
the core characteristics of that
experience does seem to be the
dissolution the lessening of the
boundaries of who you take yourself to
be in the ego voice and to recognizing
somehow how much more connected how
connected we really are how we're
embedded in relationships with other
people how we're embedded in a
relationship with the land well in
various different processes that all
harmonize together in the processes in
our body all right we've got millions
billions of bacteria in our body that
don't even share our DNA where this
organism of constant flux in process and
where we begin and where the world
starts in some level doesn't make so
much sense because we are connected but
but to experience it is a very can be a
very strange thing for people who who
like what are you talking about you know
I'm here and I'm me and that's that can
you speak at all about what that
experience was like to you and you were
down on your knees what was it what was
it like it was a moment of peace that
I've never experienced before
mmm quite this there was between me and
my maker at that particular time right
there's no man woman on this planet
could have taken that away from me right
from that moment it didn't happen on the
4th or the 6th of all this that happened
on the 5th right when the time was ready
I was ready right you know and they say
when the students really the teacher
will appear yeah the teacher was
definitely there and
Jackie Chris mmm who'd give me the who
give me the sea to start growing
something within myself and I felt that
the shame and remorse and the guilt of
doing the same things and giving the
same results all the time when I was
drinking I took a sick and tired of
being sick and tired I thought this is
it and no it was just that that matter
just went I just went down bang or am
ever crying all the stuff coming out of
me mm-hmm and I remember getting up and
I felt very very peaceful so I was at
peace then I believe with with with
Mother Earth right you know I'm on this
earth to try and do the next right thing
by the land right by the people that I'm
meeting right and my family you know all
that sort of stuff at all it all sort of
comes together at that particular time
mm-hmm
and then happen when I was 28 mm-hmm and
they say you're a man when you're 21 I
think from what I've heard of a lot of
people have a lot of changes when
they're in about 28 that that particular
number mm-hmm and it definitely happened
for me I was ready at that time yeah
I've heard a lot of people talk about
that a lot of whether it's rock stars or
film stars or famous people around 2728
there's a spike in overdoses or suicides
there's something about the transition
to adulthood
I mean there's something about the
transition to adulthood and maturity
that is there's something about that I
feel well there's a little emptiness and
they're in our current culture it's not
like there aren't plenty of mature
people and it's not like you can't find
a teacher mm-hmm but there does seem to
be a bit of a of some disconnection
right we and and so much of social life
is fueled by alcohol and short-term
pleasures you know the instant
gratification is Right instant
gratification so one thing I'm really
interested in is how to come together
with people to pay attention to who you
are and pay attention to others in a way
that can afford this growth yes well
they let me it comes back to the slowing
down and smelling the roses
you know other people into meditation
and all that stuff right now I think
we're on a journey now of people coming
together realizing that you know the
materialistic stuff is not a it's not
all you know and the fakeness of the way
we we're putting our lives through to
suit other people we're worried about
what you're thinking about me mm-hm I
don't worry about that anymore
I don't I don't worry about what I'm too
little worried about what what not
worried about what you're thinking about
me is what I'm thinking about you mm-hmm
that's what I need to think about
mm-hmm and that means don't think of bad
on anybody which when you point the
finger there's three pointing back at
you and this one of the creator and the
creator was the one that took that
craving away from me so I'm not going to
judge you or them because you know
you're not the same as what I am I'm not
God and ego stands for edging God out
you know I'm not God you know I couldn't
get myself right until I
I was doing my journey and my free will
right up until 28 yeah and then after 28
the will was was was handed over to
something else sometimes I take it back
on mm-hmm and what do I do
it makes me feel uncomfortable hmm and I
don't I never got sober to be
uncomfortable
oh that's over to be free and all free
I've had so many opportunities even hmm
what my thing is today are gonna watch
what I wish for I never wish bad on
anybody and if I'm having bad moments in
the day that create I'll always put
something in my path straight away it
could be a little kid in a wheelchair it
could be somebody on the street that's
not doing well and anymore and I'm
thinking about I'm gonna pay my rent or
pay for my electricity or my phone bill
or whatever it is a nice canoe that will
be putting my path and like I sorry for
thinking about myself again you know
yeah it's it's remarkable those moments
of gratitude that you can find something
I experienced a lot at the moment is I'm
trying to look after myself better than
I've done before so I'm going on runs
and what-have-you and I'd like to go
places and dance
there's something about movement and
flowing
that helps this kind of meditation
contemplation processing feel it's like
a release from certain parts of yourself
but at the same time a connection to
parts of yourself and and and something
that I cannot take for granted is that I
have the body to be able to do that and
it's and it's it's nothing unique I'm
just it's just a human listening and
moving to music I like going beautiful
places and looking at lots of people and
looking at the buildings and looking at
the sky and having gratitude for that
and it's it's it's so it's so basic I
like and and and when you're in that
space the patterns that you can be with
their fundamental patterns right if it's
if it's meaningful to me it's because
there's something in my body there's
something in my heritage there's
something in how I can make sense of the
world that is shared I believe it comes
from a shared basis that we can all
possess and look and I don't know I
don't know what that is I don't know
what creativity is well it is because
for in this country the traditional
people of this land they've been like 80
thousand years or more and they've been
doing this for that long they do dance
when they do ceremonies
mm-hmm means business when women's
business they do their thing about
initiations about when they're gonna go
out hunting they they show respect to
the animal they're gonna go on hunt now
there's all those sort of things that
we've been done for thousands of years
and today it's it's different because
we're in nightclubs doing that you know
right and then we but we but then we we
want to make it even more by some of us
taking drugs right an alcohol right
that's been introduced into the cultures
and stuff like that yes it definitely
wasn't in this culture hmm I didn't see
a personal men walking around with a
with a with a bong in their mouth or a
syringe or a beat or a bottle in there
now though respectful loyal respectful
to their family it was gatherers and
hunters that have to go out there and
hunt and bring back the food for the
family
we've lost all of that stuff yet and we
could say now I but that was that was a
long time ago but I think that's really
what the man would love to do
is that to be a real man and let's look
after your family and the woman's got
her thing where she does her thing as
well where she looks after the family
without our women we're nothing right
we've got to respect our women yeah
and if we lose that in our in our
culture as a whole well then you know
we'll be in the fog where we're just
going for a life with no respect I think
it's by having respect for the women
well I know it's the respect for women
that you will have a better life no
waste this my mother you know all that
sort of stuff yeah beautiful mmm
my just wait so this game is by to move
off of anymore there's been a incredible
history throughout the world of altered
states of consciousness being associated
with initiation rituals and maturing 'no
speak whether through fasting whether
through dance of chanting you know i'm
not i'm very ignorant of aboriginal
culture really but i know there's a term
walkabout boom right i mean i'd be
interested in for you to explain to me
what walkabout is but i assume that in
that experience there is a sort of a
change a radical change in consciousness
that's associated with development and
growth is that right this country
aboriginal people belong to the land we
don't own it we belong to it and when
you belong to something you want to look
after it so that i think the term
walkabout would be a thing where people
traditional people would have just kept
moving and kept moving and looking after
land on the journey right and while
they're doing that they were doing the
hunting and they would have been doing
ceremonies at certain rocks and water
holes to keep it blessed for the next
generations to come through to use that
food and that water and the air that
we're breathing and the different trees
and all sorts of stuff that's out there
on this planet that belongs to all of us
nobody owns this planet no religion owns
it
no culture owns it no government owns it
we all belong to it and when we all have
that last breath we're all going back to
it so you're not that powerful right
we're all just another grain of sand on
the beach right yeah right well that's
right we are part of things but there's
something remarkable about human beings
in that we can reflect and we can
realize that all we are a part of
something and then the question becomes
well what are you going to do about that
who are you going to be a steward are
you going to try and develop and protect
and nourish what you're a part of yep
are you going to fall into a trap of
trying to exploit a follower and and
listening to other people that are
telling you what what you should do what
you shouldn't do well particularly if
they don't have very good advice but
this is the thing we have to learn from
our elders don't we yeah we do and that
comes with respect right and if we lose
that respect for our elders that people
have walked the walk before us right yes
they can talk the talk we say walked it
yeah and you'll come now if your idea is
this fair enough to have your ideas but
just remember that these people have had
the journey before you already right you
know you can listen to what they've got
listen to the message not the messenger
right you might like the person that's
telling you the message so then you'll
block that off don't block an office it
could be something that conversation
that they're having with you there could
be a good thing for you somewhere down
the line something about the ability to
listen is crucial listen without it's
like when someone's telling you a piece
of wisdom it's hard to really get that
in the moment sometimes you only get a
little bit of it here it might make you
feel a bit uncertain or a bit unsure
there's something about being able to
hold a space with that unknown who
that's crucial somehow but anyway
there's something I there's something I
want to ask you about and that's I'm
fairly sure that well as you've
mentioned just before growing up being
not as connected as perhaps you well
perhaps I think wouldn't be beneficial
to be
before this moment when you were 28 did
you have much relationship with art or
Aboriginal culture and how did you how
did you connect with it again that's one
of the things that is so remarkable to
me about your story because I look
around here and I see beautiful artwork
I've heard you played the didgeridoo you
make didgeridoos I've heard you play it
was one of the most remarkable things
I've ever heard
very very psychedelic yeah right and how
and and you know you didn't learn that
as a kid did you yeah you just thought
you woke to it somehow how does that
even happen
it's it was always in me but I had to
open it for that to happen and like I
said on that day it was open that day I
was open to a lot of different things
mr. piece before that day from the day I
was born from the first breath until
that particular day I was in I was in a
cloud I know it now because I've been
out of it for over 25 years
mm-hm and I go back to that time and
before then from when I was born I was
with my mother and father you know they
fed me then they went on a journey with
the both of em up until I was seven and
then I worked my dad on his journey and
then I went on my own journey with my
wife and two children and and through
that time from about 16 that I was
drinking through all of that so I was
living in a cloud I think a lot of us
are we're just living in a cloud right
you know and we need to start slowing it
down and thinking about where you want
to go and stop having to listen
everybody stop being dictated to by
everybody all the time I really don't
like to be dictated to hmm especially
from another grain of sand on the beach
the beach - you were haha you know a tan
experience today I was walking a line to
get into a life to talk to some people
on the counter and I didn't see the guy
over there skinny something out of his
bag and he just like tapped me in the
show like that and I looked at my said
you're right man he gets on in the line
I go yeah okay just say you're in the
line and I'll just let you go through
and it's all falling like don't touch me
and don't talk to me the way you
disposed to me yeah and he goes I keep
your shirt on and I said Mack you're not
that special I told him directly
straight up
what I mean about not being told what to
do or be pressured by other people you
know when you're just another grain of
sand on the beach even the Queen wipes
our ass yeah her corgis and and all the
royalty around them they're all we're
all the summer we bleed red
we've got fingernails with eyelashes
nose and mouth lips tongue all the
organs in us kidneys heart and all the
rest of it we're all on that spiritual
connect connection to something yeah
something's out there in the Milky Way
our belief like in the Stars and all
that sort of stuff so I have moments of
being really happy or or not being sure
where I'm going and at night time I
could look up into the sky and I could
see a half moon the quarter moon or the
full moon and I believe that's the annoy
to some sort of creator you know and
then during the day got the Sun mm-hmm
you know mm-hmm and sometimes during the
day it could be clarity or it could be
raining but on top of the cloud on the
right it's always blue up there and the
sun's always up there mm-hmm so I
believe they're the eyes of the Creator
for me the moon and the Sun are they
crucial parts of your work do you feel
connected yeah that kind of thing when
you are painting yeah yeah yeah I like
to play the didgeridoo yeah before I
start my work it's not work before I do
my art yeah and then I start to paint
and I'll let it flow like I do when I
play in that didjeridoo and then I play
it then some people connect to it and
then that's a good piece I'm giving it
away that way yeah well when I'm
painting I'm giving away so obvious when
someone connects to it that painting was
meant to be for that person yeah you
know like I said the person that comes
in on the day to buy it or whatever
they're doing connected to it yeah and
they're gonna buy it that moment on that
day somebody else could have come in the
day before and they weren't sure on it
and they'll come back the next day but
it's gone the person on that they bought
it at that particular day right but it's
about timing yeah me I mean what brought
us here together we were at the same
event yeah and you donated a painting to
this event yeah I put my business card
in a hat yeah
got pulled out the next moment I'm
standing with this amazing painting I've
never owned a piece of art before I go
into aboriginal galleries all the time
and it's I'm I'm so grateful yeah and
now we're here doing this yeah and yeah
look it's your your a sisters were
aboriginals as well right everybody
that's here all aboriginals right right
right from this planet right unless
you're from another planet oh then
you're different so we're all the same
yeah where to stop this Sikh and black
white religion money no money and you
know people aren't doing well in Africa
and places like that
it's disgusting how we're allowing
people over there to go hungry you know
and I think one day in the future when
something goes when things get a bit
messy here on the planet where it gets a
bit shaken up a little bit and and
there's a big famine the people that
haven't already eaten and their body's
already immune into it mm-hmm the people
that I've got that on tap all this food
that they're wasting everything they're
the ones they're gonna suffer they're
gonna feel the pain of what other people
are going through right now which it
shouldn't be happening right it's just
no need for it right there's just
there's just greed and power well
there's so much we're dependent on
living in the West we might have our
career where our job and we do this one
tiny thing and we have to rely on all
these other processes to get the food to
us the internet works the power works
and it's basically just magic yes right
I exchanged some tokens and I get all
this food if that breaks down I think a
lot of people we'd all be in a lot of
trouble
yeah and that's something I think
everyone would desperately like to avoid
right that's right but to do that it's
going to come though it's going to come
we can't continue to be like this and
let the other people out there on the
outside of the city they were all gone
to lights and trans and all the rest of
it around us and you know all this stuff
is happening Internet the whole thing
and there's people at in the bush that
that some days are managing that well
but you know what they're probably
better off than us mm-hmm you know I've
been in the outback I've seen my oldest
out there the way
the way they live out there and then
most educated people I've ever met in my
life you know you can listen to
intelligent people speaking to us around
that we're hearing through the city but
you put those same people at the bushes
here to see us Martha then then it
doesn't work as well for them mm-hmm is
this the Western Way and this works for
us at the moment but to be able to get
an experience to stuff out in the bush
like looking at the stars and rocks and
everything that was there in different
ceremonies and storytelling right around
campfires right you know the creek
crackling of the fire going up like that
yeah and just sitting there listening in
silence and then when the fire guys hit
was pitch black you know we can hear
then there's kangaroos jumping around
thump thump or birds making noises and
stuff like that
you watch how eerie that feels yeah
because we're that's that's the sound of
our mother earth mm-hmm yeah and we're
not used to hearing that you're too busy
on the phones and and the TVs and all
the stuff is going on around us we're in
this strange place where if you want to
try and connect with people or to bring
people together you still have to have a
presence online yes it's this thing
where they really know exactly what
we're doing now but but look but this is
for me doing this is to for people to
watch it to remind them you don't have
to continue to do this all the time yeah
have time out yeah go to the to them to
the to the beach then they listen to the
water or go into the country long in the
Murray River they say they listen to the
cockys and all the rest of the stuff
that's going on mm-hmm
you know and the birds and the animals
and slowly in and just let feed your
soul the still of your ego yeah yes well
that's right I mean I think you
mentioned before we all have we all have
organs we are all aboriginals of this
planet and some important sense we are
all connected yeah one way I like to
think about this idea is that well we're
all finite well here for a short period
of delay we all participate in something
larger right all our best laid plans
one day yet they sink back yeah
somewhere unknown right and we can
suffer and we can love these these
existential conditions that we're all a
part of yeah we all make meaning we're
all involved in stories we all see
connection yeah we all need to be
involved I think in some collaborative
mutual growth transformation it's it's
there's a there's a feeling associated
with that when you're when you're
connecting with someone yeah and what
comes up for me when you talk about
being around a campfire and it's it's
exactly that yeah conversations around a
campfire yeah music in the background
attempting to understand listen to who
you are as you connect with the world I
don't know what's possible if that takes
place more I want to see people that are
in positions of fame in this country and
around the world enter into these kind
of interactions with each other yeah and
I know this happens to some degree but I
don't know what's possible if you create
a situation that sometimes people are
scared people are scared of that
darkness when the fire goes out yes we
need people that that can be sovereign
right and strong enough when that
darkness goes out to still connect to
themselves still connect to the people
around it around them yeah well that's
why I can't be sunny all the time a copy
raining all the time it changes all the
time it's all about accepting things you
cannot change courage to change the
things you can then you have the wisdom
to know the difference but people live
in fear and fear stands for face
everything can recover a lot of people
say your breathing and run the
other way it's not a runners you know
stop pushing through the fears and I've
done that a lot through my whole life
actually get off on it mmm actually get
off on fear because I know I'm gonna
grow mmm you know it's just easier now
don't do that oh no I can't do that then
you said this will happen unless gonna
happen yeah you know I don't need to
think about that stuff yes what's gonna
happen what happen I learned that when
my mother was driving from Shepherd and
back to Melbourne she was driving a car
there was a truck coming opposite way a
spear will come off the truck she
swerved to miss it hit a tree and killed
her straight up yeah and she was just
thinking about come back to Melbourne
yeah but that happens like that you know
things happen to people like that all
the time
yeah so well we're in the 24 hours that
were in and they said earlier and we're
here for a short term yeah I remember
when I was seven I fill up my life's
been a lot of chapters 7 16 28 and where
I am right now yeah
so it's coming to that 54 now jeez what
happen when I was 23 and 27 and all the
rest of it and a lot of those people
that I knew back then some of them
aren't here right yes they continue to
keep drinking they're in institutions
jails or they're dead right if you
continue to drink alcoholic alcoholic
Lee yeah boy
you can come to a point in your life
where I was and something was I've
handed handed that that will over to
something else and it was taken another
journey and I don't regret any of it I
don't regret the times where I was
drinking either but you have to know the
the good and the bad right yeah don't
know what it feels like right if they
feel sad and happy right you can't be
just happy all the time right you know
it'd be boring so it's best like the you
and the yang you know I think the yin
and yang is such a fundamental is so
deep I mean that this is kind of like
that's that right yeah you you you walk
out you just stretch out into the world
into the unknown you just come back it's
it's it's in and out always and that's
just basic basics of transformation it's
like animals when they'd fly the birds
the mother lets them go out they just
fly a little bit they come back right in
their fly then they just keep flying
right then they'd go on their journey
right yeah you know it wines and fish
and all sorts of stuff when they
spermine they're going up they know
where they're going and whales and stuff
here they go all around the world in
certain particular times yeah now that
they're in the flow yeah means ahead of
the flow we need to get back on the flow
right yeah right into the flow coming
into flow yes
coming into flow and you know we see a
mindfulness revolution and meditation
revolution people I look
to access this yoga is big it's just
yeah I think we're looking for at some
level I believe that unity mm-hmm yeah
we're looking for unity but there's
there's a difficult thing about unity
because in some important sense it can
never be totally attained because it's
so it's almost like a dance right the
dance is playing out a hole over time
but at any one moment you've lost the
dance you can't just chop it up it's in
the whole thing it's the whole song
right it's the full process of the art
it's the making of it and so one of the
I think this is another core existential
thing and I think a lot of difficulty
and suffering comes from this but I
think deep down because we are searching
for this unity I think sometimes people
get a glimpse and they think of what
they want to be and then they think how
could I ever attain that right there
they're wanting something final and
perfect but but final perfection is not
something that's attainable for us we're
in this constant relationship of making
and becoming right so so the constant
need to transform the fear that the
night will come that the darkness will
come that is the case
oh yeah right but we can come into
relationship with each other and that we
can help each other through and bit by
bit I do believe we can make a better
world but it's it's never going to be a
final utopia there'll always be problems
it'll always be things to solve mister
aliens will reigns will there you go
will always continue to keep going off
paths you stay a guy wants to them to be
the man and they're the big people and
right now the Chiefs and all the rest of
it right but the true Warriors are the
people that lead their people in a
better way
right share and care and with loyalty
and honor and all that stuff yes if a
lot of us can start to learn to live
that way a little bit more yes I think
it'll be a better world
look I agree with you and when I think
of that whole endeavor I just it's very
easy to get overwhelmed right so all I
can really do is attempt to show up show
up to conversations with people being
honest about the things I can ask
questions try to try to answer them also
try to explore try to engage people in
exploration and look I see I see that I
feel that energy in you I I it's
stunning to look around I mean I'm going
to look at the painting that you that
you made it feels like you made it for
me yeah alright it seems like you made
it for me it's mine
yeah and I'm going to look at it for the
rest of my life yeah right and and your
children's children look at it as well
may yes yeah he's gonna sell my dad got
that what was a raffle or something was
it yeah it was like a I don't know it
was like a little you can't plane
something so some people think that can
plan their lives and their golds and all
the rest of it and it never turns out
that way and 95% of the stuff that
you're thinking about is never gonna
happen either right but a lot of people
think into the future that causes
anxiety some people think about things
in the past and it causes depression
they're not even the present right now
you're thinking about their and their
they've got one over there and one over
there you get across I know so what
about trying to slow it down think about
where you are right now and just you
know you enjoy the weather the warm that
the wind is blowing on your face right
you know
right and just think about that that's
right everything you have some of them
gonna happen right I I hear you but the
thing is I know and as as you've said
before there's this there is still this
vision of unity there's this vision of
harmony and connection and love and that
is an important attitude to take towards
the future and so what I want to ask you
is I want to ask you about your vision
for Australia because the dynamic were a
part of the cultural dynamic and the
historical dynamic there's a lot of pain
a lot of distrust and in some cases a
major breakdown in communication even
amongst people who have the very best
intentions or what is sometimes called
reconciliation or this kind of thing
there's a lot of pain I feel a lot of
pain and unease in the whole notion of
reconciliation and I wonder
for my part I mean what I want to see is
a world where no matter your skin color
and all these surface level things can
come together as human beings and relate
to each other at this deeper level and
this level of a deeper set of
existential conditions we all love we
all lose right we all have a story we
are trying to become something we're all
trying to grow and transcend ourselves
and look after ourselves and each other
and we all are constantly in this
dynamic of needing to update the ego and
have this relationship between ego and a
deeper self develop right and we all can
hate each other at times and hate
ourselves at times and we can lose
connection but then we can find it again
and that stuff like what it is to come
into what it is to love right what it is
for a human being to love that's so much
more fundamental than any identity group
of skin color of what you look like
well it's all programmed into us from
day one from the first breath that we
have when we come out of our mothers
we're there with the mother and the
father and when we're growing with that
mother and father that they were at that
same stage in their lifes before and
they went through something for their
mothers and fathers so it's all been
handed down all these different
personalities and it keeps coming
through to that to that to you and me
and then it's up to ourselves to try and
tap a tap out of what we've been taught
by our parents and through the schools
I've never been to school in my life and
people educated people tell me now that
they they want to go they want to learn
they want to undersell --vs what they've
been taught you know with programs
straight away from kindergarten to
primary school to high school to
universities it's a big ego thing with
money and stuff to control people and
that and then I said in like like robots
going to work in and out their
briefcases and their suits and all that
stuff in : strippers on down there and
I've been do a lot of exhibitions in
different fires and stuff I've said
these people walking in and out of these
buildings they're program but they're
still in kindergarten I'm still going to
school didn't lunch time finish time and
then you know home time and then at the
end of that there for weeks holidays and
the Gulf - holidays get in the bush and
go camping and stuff and they love that
part right they come back into the into
the walls of the cities and all the rest
of it yeah then they love to go back
into the bush and all sort of stuff and
then you got the black fellas in the
bush they're always living out there
they'll even well you know they're
you know and they don't know what's so
important about the way we're living
right now it would be a perfect water we
just sort of come together a bit more
equal and start focusing on being equal
with each other
yeah and that's that comes back to a
fear yeah yeah just try and keep working
on your fear when you're looking at
other people yeah and start judging them
yeah start thinking why you're doing
that right this is something with your
mum and dad said to you earlier when
your baby's grown through pain teenagers
and all the rest of it or what you're
watching through media and all that sort
of stuff as well it's all you know it's
not it's not really substance for me to
to think that that's the way I want to
live yeah I love all sorts of people
right they love Christians a lot Muslims
or love Asians I love gay people I love
sick children I love all people and I
say that in my prayers every night
before I go to sleep right please
creator help the world heal you so I've
had a great day today and I hope the
world handles right this for a wife to
be like that don't judge anybody but I'm
not God I'm not giving you the breath to
breathe right and you're not giving it
to me right so you just the same as me
right I'm not better than you you're not
better than me right I might be able to
paint something and you might be able to
be good on the computer or something but
it doesn't make you better than me and I
know that a hundred percent yeah yeah no
when I get spoken to like I said earlier
when someone touching the child in that
like don't tempt me and you just look at
me for whatever reason that you think
you could do that to me you know I just
or authority telling you what to do and
where you can do this where you can't do
that you've got cameras set up all over
the world this of this terrorism and all
that sort of sort of stuff I think
that's terror in herself by just putting
these cameras up all over the joint
isn't watching everything
yeah their phones all been you know test
and listened to and we know now that the
three of us are in my gallery right now
right doing this sort of stuff right you
know and you've got people travel around
the world doing whatever they're doing
[Music]
yeah so it's the people that are
controlling all of that I think they're
all the ones that are full of a guy
mm-hmm and they just want to keep
everything in control for the way it
suits them but it doesn't mean has to
suit everybody well when you're going to
school you might be an artist or ax or a
very good with technology or whatever
mm-hmm doesn't mean you all have to be
good at art all that we've got a
technology when you go into school I
mean these kids are getting taught all
this stuff they might like to learn
about maths or or stuff like that yeah
doors they've got a really good school
and you know they don't maybe don't want
to turn out that way you know piece of
pressure on people and then when they're
16 18 20 25 to 28 that's why they're
drinkin and druggin there's a lot of
suicides happening and all that sort of
stuff this is too much pressure people
on them right you know who they're not
beasts their parents want them to be
scientists and doctors and lawyers and
whatever when that might suit that child
that keep might be a might be free to be
able to be an artist so I just want to
take your shoes off and fill mother
earth between these toes yeah something
simple
yes tell her we're in the Louis Vuitton
shoes and and all the rest of it they
might want to do that stuff yeah it's
been fear from the parents putting in
fruit of the children then the kids
learn then and they do it again as well
yeah you know I don't know about all the
stuff I've said a lot of stuff I'm just
talking about freely unfeeling no no I
know I'm with you I mean well I what I
get from you is a desire to see a world
in which people can become who they are
yeah it's the simplest thing in the
world yeah
but then things get so complicated they
do between we make it complicated just
simple keep it simple you know in my
journey as a young man I was 25 26 I was
working at the border works this guy
started telling a story in front of
everybody at that place you know well
this guy's a big Bally's red faces
you know like rednecks right and this
guy was telling a story in front of all
these guys I've only been there one week
and he said you get his start telling
asteroid or Danny pointed at me goes all
your people or your brothers lived in my
mate place and the burn hole in the
middle of the floor and they must live
there in the outback and there's about
50 guys in a couple of like laughing and
stuff like that and I felt so
ameliorated because he said that about
my people but I don't know who he's
talking about I don't know who they were
because I original there were my people
here so I I was 25 I think and a really
good fighter
could erect him didn't do any of that
stuff let it go and because of what he
said that really inspired me to go to
prove him wrong to think well I'm gonna
work really hard and done all that stuff
then I you know I bought myself a brand
new mercedes-benz 15 years later I'm at
stoplights of huddle Street and Victoria
Street in the same area where I got
sober this was years later after I got
sober and I put up in this brand new car
convertible and a garbage truck pulls up
beside me and I looked up and was him on
the back of the garbage truck 15 years
later after him telling me that and I
just drove off and I said thanks Bubba
Farrar expiring me to do that but I
don't have to do that Neil I thought I
had to do that to prove him wrong I have
the big flash car and all the rest of it
right so the message is whatever people
are saying to you on your journey don't
have to take it on and put pressure on
yourself to do things to make that
person happy because probably that
person is not happy that's why he's
putting this on you so just let him
go
how important is it how important is
that when people are talking to you and
and they're touching nerves in your
system that makes you think that they've
got power over you right a lot of people
say well he made me dot she'd made me do
that because he said that because he's
in that now we've got the power to do
anything you call me a black pastor
right now and I'm not gonna give you the
power to do that to mean right
but back then I didn't know any better
I'd want to punch in the facing and then
all me trouble and everybody I says yeah
see that black fully punched the white
man and right and all that sort of stuff
you know it's it's all crap no
absolutely look and this is it's a
challenging thing so look yeah I'm a
white guy hmm I'm straight
yeah I've got an English accent yeah yes
I sound like an imperialist making a
good guy and that's why I feel the
energy that way yeah so it doesn't
matter what you are
my father was white but he was my dad
all right Aboriginal but I was he son
yeah other people around us look at this
white man being up this Aboriginal son
yeah in the seventh late seventies he
tried around Australia yeah that would
have been thinking all sorts of stuff
yeah
at that time I didn't think I didn't
even know what that what they'll think
I'll even care without thinking hmm
he's only 4% of stuff or things that
were thinking though weren't even
thinking it anyway but that builds up
all the pressure made that I want to go
and take drugs and drink and all that
right yeah no I'm totally with you and
and the thing about it is that there is
this narrative there is this there is a
very large narrative in current culture
that looks to understand the world
through this lens of oppressor and
oppressed so me as a white straight guy
hmm sounds like I do with the privilege
associated with that yeah that means
that in some sense no matter what I do I
am always in this dynamic of being
privileged and actually actively
oppressing rather through unconsciously
or what have you but the problem is is
that few if that's your worldview that
is the essence it's the essence of of
racism for me to think that I like
myself you know I don't think that about
myself but it's night yeah it shouldn't
be that way because the people at the
bush they're living that they got the
privilege they're living well mm-hmm
they don't have all the stresses and
pressures that you have as the white guy
with all the privileges of living in a
nice house a good educational arrest
over who knows if that's the right way
to live it might be the other way biz
for so long it was that way right but
people have to think that they're going
to be educated and all this other stuff
what is education I know people in the
streets they've got nothing and and
they'll give
their last dollar well you can have
millions of dollars look at that person
with with $2 and you know you won't give
him anything but you've got millions but
you won't about someone taking it from
you
they've got all those pressures and
stresses so that's not really a
privilege mm-hmm I don't think it is
look it's definitely the case that many
people are they have challenges that
other people don't face mmm right and
but this what I'm interested in is it's
not it's not denying that there are
these different systemic obstacles some
people have to overcome and not others
this is this is the case in in many ways
although I do think that there is a lot
of a lot of beauty and goodness in the
Australian culture well I do believe
this very strongly and I believe the
majority of people the vast majority of
people have love in their hearts of all
human beings no matter their skin colour
but that there is a conversation to be
had about various obstacles that are in
the path of some people and not others
I'm not denying that well but what I'm
what I'm interested in is recognizing
this deeper layer that it's the capacity
to overcome obstacles there's the
capacity to be sovereign yourself right
it's what you said before it's I've
always to call you a black boss and it's
gonna it's gonna bounce off you it means
because you're giving me that power
right it does if you know your value do
you know your worth yeah it's not mine
to take from you right and so it's it's
for people to understand and feel that
they have Worth they have value they are
sovereign and that that's a right of
everyone right to be sovereign of their
own self and then what we also want to
do is to recognize the ways we are
connected yes to recognize that we have
sovereignty as individuals that we can
develop that capacity to take agency in
our own lives but then also to recognize
that as we do that we are also embedded
with many other people with the world
with the earth we are connected so we
are agents and we can take agency and
move our lives and grow right yes there
are about less there are conditions we
have to work
and some people face obstacles other
people don't and when there is in when
there is inequality that prevents people
in important ways from the basic
conditions of being able to take that
agency that we need to look at that and
come together to try and help each other
out here but we want to have this
individual sovereignty and then we want
to recognize a collective responsibility
and I think that has to be we have to
develop somehow this way of coming into
communion with each other to connect to
who we are and then actually look and
feel what the world can be right that
has a place for everyone and I like this
the biggest task in the world I don't
know how to do it I do believe it starts
with individual conversation does and
you know how to do that is I think
mother mother nature mother earth the
planet that we're on will make that
decision
mmm yes at the moment we're not doing
that right with what all the mining and
all the rest of stuff is going on so you
know what you know we are all connected
whether we like it or not it's one we're
on the planet of mother earth and two
we're all breathing mm-hmm if I stop
breathing I'm done if you stop breathing
you're done
it's your breathing here like I am so we
really are connected mm-hmm unless
you're breathing through your ears or
free your ass right it's one of my many
talents yeah yeah some people might but
I don't think they are I think we all
seem to be breathing for our noses and
for our mouths mm-hmm we're breathing
something and that is the creator we're
breathing the creator mm-hmm and the
Creator brought us together now to talk
today for somebody to listen to what
we're talking about is these people that
are listening to us they're breathing as
well and they stopped read and then
they're finished it's done but then they
go into another level
yeah into the bread into the level of
meditation what we're sort of grasped me
we love it now yeah
there will be another time when we all
go to a really deep meditation and then
we will all find ourselves then but at
the moment I feel that we're a little
bit lost yeah and we need to start
focusing on we really are together
because we're breathing
it's that simple right we're breathing
oh can I tell you what when you play
that didgeridoo and everyone here is it
yeah there's something we all
participate in this all I'm gonna get it
now and I'm gonna play it right now all
right
the didgeridoo do it we'll finish it
with the ditch okay oh they haven't
grabbed it okay no no no it's all good
we'll leave it going so this is the
breath that I was talking about mm-hmm
all right this is the breath so I'm
gonna put it up here so you can see it
so we're breathing in and we're
breathing out
[Music]
[Music]
and that is the sound of this land
wherever you go in the world and you
hear this plane it'll always bring you
back to this land and zeno by the ants
was grown by the tree we blow through
our mouth in prayer nose and our our
mouth it's all about breathing and
relaxing and it's about life just
without the breath we're nothing so
people that are watching this will all
seem to breathe the same way so just
start thinking about how different are
we
is we're not and in this country it's
not black and white anymore this is a
multicultural country the world has all
come together so stop thinking that
we're different and that's it that's it
there you go brother thank you