howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
rut show.com that's Jim ruts show com
today's guest is Jessica transit MIT
associate professor in the Institute for
data systems and society hi Jim it's
great to be here hey it's great to have
you here this should be very very
interesting
jessica is a PhD in material science
from the University of Oxford as a
Rhodes Scholar she was a fellow of
Columbia University's legendary Earth
Institute and she is external faculty at
the Santa Fe Institute we're doing
something a little different here on the
Jim Rutte show with this episode in the
next couple episodes this is the first
of a three episode arc this month
focusing on climate change we can talk
mostly about climate related things but
in addition to her work on climate
issues Jessica also does great work on
the nature and history of innovation we
posted a link to that work on the
episode page at Jim rutt show dot-com if
you're interested in those topics I
recommend you check it out now to
technology and the fight against climate
change let's start with some basics what
is er oai or energy return on energy
invested and why is it so important well
so the EROI or the energy return on
investment is just a simple measure of
the energy you get back from building
some energy conversion technology so
building any technology requires
especially Hardware requires some amount
of energy for production and
manufacturing and then you get a certain
amount of energy back when you're you
not technology and the ratio of those
two is the energy return on investment
okay and why is that so important well
it's important I would say especially
today when we're using fossil fuels
primarily to manufacture many of the low
carbon energy technologies that people
may have heard of like solar energy and
energy panels and wind turbines so we
use typically fossil fuels to
manufacture those but then when they're
put into operation they generate a
certain amount of electricity and we'd
like to make sure that that amount of
electricity is more than the energy put
in and the more the better right yeah
the more the better but I will say that
of course if we get to a regime where
we're using renewable energy to
manufacture these technologies then we
won't be quite as concerned about the
energy return on investment because
you're putting basically clean energy
into manufacturing the hardware and then
there you're using it to produce clean
electricity in the case of solar and
wind energy so that's something that's
important to keep in mind but certainly
in this transition period you want to
make sure that the solar panels and you
know wind turbines you're building that
you're gonna get more clean energy out
than the fossil fuel energy you put in
okay very good it's a foundation which
we'll talk about in somewhat more detail
later okay second foundational idea
which will reference several times in
the discussion coming is what is a
learning curve and could you give us an
example from something outside of the
energy field yeah sure so the learning
curve was first observed in airplane
manufacturing where it was seen that the
labor hours or the labor productivity
increased with the number of units
produced and so this was named the
learning curve it was later applied to
many different technologies outside of
airplanes and the basic idea in terms of
the mathematics of the learning
is that if you're following the typical
learning curve for each 1% increase in
cumulative production you get a fixed
percentage improvement in performance
and so that could be improvement in cost
intensity of the technology or it could
be improvement in some other measure of
performance but these are simple curves
and it's a simple model but it's quite
useful for comparing the rate of
improvement across different
technologies and we see that solar cells
for example in solar panels have
followed a learning curve wind turbines
have as well and many technologies
within energy systems and outside of
energy systems have followed these
learning curves one of the interesting
aspects of this is to try to understand
where this kind of behavior comes from
so there have been you know many
interesting questions and we're starting
to get answers to them on why we see
these kinds of trends and technologies
and also getting some insights on why
some technologies improve faster than
others which obviously is really
important for making good investments in
climate saving technology because we
really want to invest in those
technologies that are going to improve
quickly that are going to reach cost
competitiveness that will you know their
performance will increase and and so
that they'll be widely you know
affordable and can be adopted around the
world yeah very good
now one well-known statement of a
learning curve is Moore's Law right
that's stated in terms of time and then
there's also forget the name of the guy
there somebody else is law where the
that's where it stayed in terms of units
can you talk a little bit about that and
the difference between the two yeah so
so there's something called rights
rights curve or rights law and Moore's
curve or Moore's law Moore's law which
many people may be familiar with is an
exponential trend so we see
exponentially improving performance with
time in the case of solar panels we see
that the drop in cost was about 10% per
year over the last 40 years and overall
we've seen a nine
9% roughly a 99 percent decline in costs
over the last 40 years
so that's Moore's law and then if we
look at Wright's curve our rates law
this is the functional form that
describes what I was mentioning for the
learning curve so this is a power law
relationship where we're looking at
improvement along and metrics such as
cost with increasing effort and that's
usually measured as a cumulative
production so in that case what we see
is that with each 1% increase in
cumulative production you see a fixed
percent decline in costs that if a
technology follows that kind of behavior
then it's following what we would expect
from Bright's law now the interesting
thing is that when we look at solar
panels which I mentioned before they
actually follow both Moore's Law and
rights law you know so on the face of it
Moore's law implies something pretty
different from rights law if we want to
use this to inform our decisions because
of course with Moore's law you're
looking at the improvement as a function
of time so is there any way in which you
can speed things up if you know we say
that cost intensity or cost of you know
to make it concrete a solar panel is
falling with time if you just look at
that on the face of it it looks like
there's nothing we can do to speed it up
on the other hand rights law tells us
something very different and that is
that if we produce more things will
improve more quickly so which one of
these is correct well as I mentioned a
minute ago we see that both holds for
the case of solar panels and for a
number of different technologies why is
that
well when we dug into this what we found
was that there was another type of
behavior another trend that we had to
pay attention to and that was the trend
describing how cumulative production of
solar panels is increasing with time and
we see that that production has grown
roughly exponentially over the last 40
years so that means that we take those
two observations we see that costs are
coming down exponentially with time
following Moore's law and we see that
production is growing exponentially with
time if we take those two things
together and we plot cost intensity
against cumulative production we would
in fact expect to get rights curve out
or rights law out so that's the reason
why both describe the behavior and solar
panels and in fact when we look across
many different technologies technologies
that start out with rapidly growing
production tend to continue to grow
rapidly and technologies that start out
with more slowly growing production tend
to continue to grow more slowly now
that's not to say that we can't speed
things up and based on a lot of the
research that I've done over the years
my expectation and we see this in a
couple of cases where we you know where
we see that technologies their
production has grown at different rates
over different periods of time then we
see a departure from Moore's law and we
see some of these technologies following
still following rights law so I guess
the bottom line is that we can use
Moore's law to describe many
technologies and if we just kind of
leave things alone then technologies
will tend to grow exponentially with
time but there are certain kinds of
government policy interventions that can
speed things up and then you can you
know depart from this time-based trend
and you can actually make improvements
faster and that's really again really
important for climate policy because
it's important to make investments to
drive innovation and technologies that
can help us solve the climate problem
we're going to talk about those policy
settings a little bit later but good
setting of the groundwork now from your
work and also other work I've looked at
it seems like implicitly most people who
have looked seriously at the technology
curves and how to really do this are
assuming that something close to an all
electrical society is where we're headed
do you see that as feasible
I would say yes we can get close to that
there are still some energy services
we're using electricity is difficult so
we see that in you know steel
manufacturing or cement production some
of these energy services and industrial
applications may require other kinds of
fuels or we may use electricity to split
water for example or create other kinds
of fuels that can be used in some of
these applications but yeah on the whole
we are seeing this happening already so
you do see more energy services becoming
electrified more heating is being
produced using electricity and you know
this is important and the reason is that
we do have ways we have pretty good ways
now to produce electricity using
low-carbon technologies you know to
basically move away from using fossil
fuels for electricity production so if
we can use that electricity not only for
you know lighting and all of the
applications that we've traditionally
used electricity for but also for
transportation and also for heating and
for industrial processes the more we can
do that the better but I do think that
we shouldn't assume that we can get a
hundred percent of the way there with
electrification so one really important
research area is to think about how we
can combine electrification using more
electricity with low-carbon sources with
the production of new kinds of fuels
that can serve some of those heavy
energy those high temperature
applications or for example what's
called long distance long-haul
transportation that just means you're
going you know a vehicle is covering a
large distance and may be carrying a
large mass then we may need to turn to
other sorts of options other than using
the electricity directly but yeah
certainly electrification is a
important step toward addressing the
climate problem okay I think we're gonna
focus mostly on electricity though I
would also point out that fairly
recently there was a lot of interest in
biofuels and also one of my favorites
fact I actually did some experimental
manufacture of thermosolar where you can
heat your house and hot water directly
with thermal energy at high much higher
levels of efficiency than you get out of
PV yeah and I hope people don't forget
those as well but let's mostly focus on
electricity because if we're gonna truly
reform our whole society that's probably
going to be the main road so one more
fundamental before we start getting into
some of the details if you could talk to
our audience a bit about the difference
in the electricity range between base
load and intermittent sources and maybe
even the concept of dispatch ability
yeah sure so if we look at the ways in
which different power plants are
operating today to meet our demand for
electricity so our demand for
electricity and for example the
Northeast where I am right now you see
that some of these plants are operating
all of the time and those are our base
load plants some of them are operating
you know good fraction of the time maybe
50 percent of the time and others are
operating only for you know 10 percent
of the time or much less and those would
be peaker plants so we have the base
load plants we have the intermediate
plants and we have the peaker plants and
so the basic point is that many of these
power plants are turning on and off
that's because our demand peaks at
different times of the day so it rises
and falls depending on human activities
we have the diurnal cycle you know most
people wake up in the morning and they
may go to work they may pursue other
activities that consume energy and then
at some point they're sleeping so our
energy consumption tends to go down
although there are some processes of
course that run through the night but
anyway we have this fluctuating demand
for electricity and these power plants
turning on and off so in a sense many
power plants are
intermittent and how they're operated
but when we bring in what's called
variable renewable energy which is solar
and wind energy there there is a
difference there's kind of a qualitative
difference between those plants and some
of the fossil fuel-fired plants that we
rely on today as well as nuclear which
is that we are not in control of when
the sun shining and the winds blowing so
they turn on and off but not in a way
that's under our control however there
are different approaches to dealing with
that so I'll highlight three main
approaches one is to use this variable
renewable energy solar and wind energy
with energy storage devices like
batteries to store the energy when we
have too much of it and then use it
later
another approach to dealing with this
variability is to draw your resources
from a large geographical area that
tends to smooth out at least some of
these fluctuations and then a third
approach is to use what's called
demand-side management or create a
flexible demand where you're matching
the demand to the supply so you can
imagine that there are many appliances
and industrial processes that where
there's some flexibility you don't have
to run them at exactly you know the
point in time at which you turn on the
dishwasher for example so if you need
the clean dishes maybe the next morning
there is some flexibility there and and
the dishwasher could turn on when
there's an excess of electricity of
course if it's overnight that wouldn't
help for solar and wind but that's just
an example we can have you know heating
and cooling that can go up and down by a
few degrees that's imperceptible to
people people can't perceive those
differences but it could save large
amounts of energy so that would be an
example of demand-side management yes so
those are called excellent big picture
ideas and it's you know I did a bit of a
dive into mass electrical storage which
is a topic we're going to go into next
and my first takeaway is kind of the AHA
was this why is electricity different
than any other product and that is if
you ignore storage
it has a useful life of one microsecond
missus only right so that the supply and
demand has to be intricately balanced
and a surprising amount of electricity
is actually discharged into the ground
like more or less like a local lightning
bolt when you know but frankly most all
the time the balance isn't perfect but
the the dance of the grid is to keep it
as close as possible and so when one's
thinking about electricity it's really
different that almost anything else we
deal with conceptually in the economy
and that it has this you know one
microsecond useful life which is you
know a good jump until one of my
favorite topics when I spent six months
working on back in 2004 which is mass
storage of electricity and I know you've
written on this and you know why it's
important particularly when it's coupled
to these variable sources because you
talk a little bit about that and how it
fundamentally if you have enough of it
changes the whole nature of what
variable production could mean yeah sure
so I mean just to start out I guess one
way we can think about this if every
time we build a solar power plant or a
wind power plant we have some means of
storing that energy so we convert it to
electricity and then we store it in some
form and then we use it later as
electricity if we can do that then you
know these plants can be turned on and
off at will so that's really the idea
behind energy storage for that
application for the power sector and
there are a number of different ways in
which you can store energy and I
sometimes say that the technologies that
we have available for storing energy are
as diverse or even more so than the
technologies that we have available for
converting energy you know to produce
electricity for example because you can
imagine that you can store energy in all
sorts of different forms and you know so
we can use Pumped hydro storage we could
use compressed air energy storage we can
use various what are called
electrochemical devices so those are the
batteries that we're familiar with like
lithium-ion batteries and other kinds of
batteries and so there are many
different ways in which we can store
energy and I would say that we're just
starting to really
explore what's called stationary energy
storage technologies in a serious way
and you might ask okay so why are why
have we not explored these previously
well there hasn't really been a market
for it because fossil fuels are pretty
cheap and they're pretty easy at a store
and so there hasn't been a real
incentive to develop alternatives now we
have of course developed batteries for
mobile applications so those are
batteries that could be used you know in
our computers or our cell phones but
once we start looking at these power
plants we need to be able to store it
many more kilowatt hours we need a much
larger energy capacity to be able to
shift things around in time and you know
so that's that's something that there
hasn't been as much of a demand for but
now as the use of solar and wind energy
is growing and as concerns about climate
change are growing there's a real need
for this and so I expect that we'll see
a lot of developments in this area of
course the outcome of those is still
uncertain but it's an area that has a
lot of potential I'd say you know I
looked into it back in 2004 the
technology I focused on was vanadium
redox flow batteries these big sulfuric
acid filled tanks with vanadium in at
met cetera and that point in time it
looked like it cost about $200 a
kilowatt hour for mass storage you know
eight hour deep storage 20 hour deep
storage you know really deep storage and
my analysis said that was not nearly
good enough even for a very specialized
case I was looking at for as a possible
business venture and I actually
consulted it was one of the best electro
chemical engineers in the world who
unfortunately has since passed away and
he said young man he was like 91 quite
that old he was old young man you're
used to the technology world where
things double every two or three years
in electrochemistry it doubles them out
every 20 years if we're lucky and
interestingly he was damn close to right
you know honest $200 for Kurla watt hour
to her you know around $100 per kilowatt
hour six
years later I think you actually wrote
in a paper that you did recently that
something around $20 per kilowatt hours
what we need to really be able to make
intermittent sources competitive with
baseload sources that is that the right
range yeah so that was one target but
actually there's another way to solve
the intermittency problem which I which
I can talk about as well but yeah what
we did was to look at combining solar
and wind and using solar and wind to
reliably meet energy demand over a
period of twenty years so we wanted to
meet demand every hour over a period of
twenty years and so we want and then we
asked how much storage would be needed
for that and we developed an
optimization model so that we're using
only as much storage as we need and then
we asked at what cost would these plants
the solar and wind plants that are
optimally combined with each other with
this optimally sized energy storage at
what point does that technology become
competitive with other sources of
electricity and so the rough target that
we arrived at was twenty dollars per
kilowatt hour energy capacity cost so
for your listeners just a quick note
this is not to be confused with the cost
of electricity this is instead the cost
of building the capacity to store energy
so this is the upfront costs what you
would put into building your storage
facility as compared to the electricity
costs which is per unit electricity
produced so anyway but that estimate
that we arrived at was twenty dollars
per kilowatt hour but this was to meet
demand a hundred percent of the time if
instead we relaxed that requirement and
we say that we're going to use something
else for just five percent of the time
then what we see is that the target
rises to one hundred and fifty dollars
per kilowatt hour yeah we're there well
yes and no I mean so those numbers that
we see publish for
Kamiya and batteries are not taking into
account we think the full cost of
installing a stationary energy storage
facility but you're right were close to
there but then that that scenario is not
also not that necessarily that easy to
implement because we have to then find
the other thing that we can use for five
to ten percent of the time and so that I
think is a really important research
area it's one that we're looking at and
essentially I see us as you know we we
can we should certainly continue to try
to drive down the cost of energy storage
but we should be looking for these other
solutions and it could be producing low
carbon fuels with the excess solar and
wind energy that you have because we see
that when we optimize the whole system
you're creating a lot of excess to learn
wind energy so you could create other
revenue with that there are ways to and
this is something I'm working on
developing technology for a different
kind of demand side management that
could help to serve that five to ten
percent of additional demand so it's
it's a scenario that I call the energy
storage plus scenario so it's it's the
hardware for energy storage but it's
also using software and developing
approaches and algorithms as well as
maybe producing some low carbon fuels
that can fill in that additional five to
ten percent of energy demand and so the
reason why you see that big jump from
$20 per kilowatt hour to $150 per
kilowatt hour is that what we uncovered
when we looked at 20 years of data on
the solar and wind energy resource and a
bunch of different locations is that in
all of these locations you have a small
number of very large resource shortage
events so you know overall over the
20-year period we have these
fluctuations and the solar and wind
energy resource but maybe you know
handful of times maybe five times over
20 years you have larger fluctuations
where the amount of solar energy
available drops significantly or the
of wind energy available drop
significantly so these rare but it
rather extreme events are ones that we
need to be able to deal with with energy
storage and batteries and other kinds of
energy storage technologies as well as
some of the other approaches that I
mentioned so that's kind of a big focus
of mine and I think it's it's becoming
you know an area that people are looking
into to look for solutions to that
problem of course with a new problem
requiring new technology or new
approaches there's an opportunity there
and I think there's a big opportunity in
that area I'm gonna throw one out just a
radical idea I'm just thinking out loud
and probably but whatever right
suppose we made a major social change
which said that we're gonna have 15
floating holidays on average which is
gonna be on days where energy production
isn't real high everybody just stay home
read books yeah play games right it
could do a social operating system
change exactly we say all right you know
here we got 48 hours notice this is
probably going to be a day where it's
way better for everybody just stay home
yeah and on average was 5% of the time
that's you know 15 16 days a year
the world would not end if people stayed
home 16 days a year
no exactly and I think those are the
kinds of creative ideas that we need to
be thinking about and in all of this
work when I'm thinking about technology
I'm using a very broad definition and
it's inspired by the philosopher Lewis
Mumford and that definition covers not
just hardware but also software
institutional design really any codified
knowledge that you know can be used to
produce some sort of service so this
definition of technology that I use is
anything that transforms raw materials
that we have here on earth including
biological and geological materials into
some more useful form so you know those
biological materials include the
information processing capabilities of
the human brain and we can use software
and computers to augment that and to do
new things so that definition of
technology is very broad and to solve
this problem we're talking about
I think we want to be thinking about how
to combine hardware and software and
other what I call soft technologies
that's non hardware technology to
solving this problem so social
innovations like the one that you talked
about would fall under that category and
of course we'd have to test out these
ideas we'd have to you know see what
people might accept but I think that
there's so much we can do in this area
and especially with the growth of
artificial intelligence which is a very
broad term but in fact the practice
already in place of accessing data and
understanding preferences and behaviors
I think we could put that to work to
solving these kinds of problems and for
like social hacks we can use agent-based
modeling to get at least their rough
idea whether it's feasible or not yeah
sure and of course with those models we
always want to make sure that the
decision rules and the agent behavior
were modeling is somehow accurate but
yeah we can run surveys we can figure
out what people are willing to do and
and I think we could get quite far with
that all right now let's ratchet in a
little bit a little bit more details I'm
gonna run across a number of
technologies basically SolarWinds
storage nukes and hydrolysis and get
your take on where we're at in terms of
innovation learning curves etc on each
of those technologies that's that okay
sounds good all right let's start off
with solar where are we and what are the
prospects look like for the you know the
next decade or two yeah so costs have
fallen by about 99 percent over the last
40 years for solar energy and here I'm
talking about photovoltaic solar energy
specifically and costs have come down
significantly we're at a point now where
in many places solar energy is cost
competitive with other sources of
electricity now that is for a case where
you're using small amounts of solar
energy and so the challenge going
forward is to continue to bring those
costs down because if you want to bring
in what I call augmenting technologies
like energy storage in order to balance
the intermittency in the
ability of solar energy then you're
gonna need to invest more in these
plants so there's still a need for
further cost reduction in part just to
be able to bring in energy storage or
other similar technologies to deal with
the variability of solar now in many
places solar energy is just providing a
few percent at most of electricity so
there's still room for growth and that
solar energy will be cost competitive
it's just that when you start to get to
larger amounts of electricity coming
from solar that's when you start to need
storage and that's where we're gonna
need to see continued cost declines
what's the science driving the PV
improvement you know so we looked at
this and published a paper in in 2018
and and a number of others have looked
also at some of these factors like my
colleagues Greg Nimet and Kelly
Gallagher but our approach in the paper
that we published in 2018 was to start
with the devices themselves and say what
has changed since 1980 with a
photovoltaic module physically with the
actual device itself what has changed
and then how did that lead to cost
reductions and then from there we can
say how much of the cost reduction came
from research and development how much
from economies of scale how much from
learning by doing and then from there we
can see what kinds of government
policies were important so just to step
back for a second and say something
about these government policies you know
we we know that solar energy globally
would not have grown without some
government policy support because it
started out very much more expensive
about a hundred times more expensive
than you know the alternative sources
that were used at the time when solar
energy start to grow so it was more
expensive and government policy in
various forms
it could be subsidies we saw guaranteed
prices we saw regulations these policies
around the world incentivize people to
adopt solar energy and this is often
held up as a success story in climate
policy but before we publish this paper
I would often
ask audiences and frankly still I asked
audiences and and I'm still you know
trying to get these results out there so
they haven't necessarily read the paper
but I asked audiences what do you think
what policies were important for that
caustic line that 99% caustic line and I
give them options of different amounts
of the caustic line coming from
government funding for research and
development or a government funding for
those markets stimulating policies and
you know the answers are all over the
place some people will guess that only
10% came from government funding for
research and 90% came from the
government the market stimulated Paul
stimulating policies and you know the
opposite end of the spectrum two people
will guess that 90% came from government
funding for research and 10% of the cost
decline came from policies to stimulate
market growth so it's interesting to me
that you know despite this being held up
is probably the most significant success
story in clean energy policy and climate
policy people you know when asked many
experts you know the answers are all
over the place so this was one of the
motivations for looking at ok what can
we pin down what some of the reasons
were for the cost decline and so yeah so
we started with the low level mechanisms
the changes to the device itself and
then we looked at the high level
mechanisms and the policy drivers and at
the level of the device we see that the
single largest contributor that the cost
decline was an increase in the
conversion efficiency of the panel's
themselves but we also see that many
other changes at the level of the device
were important like changes to the
amount of silicon used changes to the
wafer size and other kinds of changes at
that level so that may be actually one
of the reasons why this technology
showed this steady and rapid cost
decline over time was that there were
many different mechanisms that could
kick in over that 40-year period I was
talking about it and then we go up to
the high level mechanisms I can talk
about that if you're interested but then
just to jump up to the policy
we estimate that 30% of the cost decline
came from government funding for
research and 60% from market stimulating
policies and then 10% from other sources
so this is important not because there's
been a debate for a long time about
whether government should be involved in
the market or if instead some would
argue government should focus on funding
research and then we wait until the
technologies are ready and the milk are
on the market but what we see when we
look under the hood at the this
technology and what actually changed and
who did what is that those market
stimulating policies played a really
important role in this case and my
takeaway from this is that we probably
wouldn't be where we are today if we
hadn't had these markets stimulating
policies and that makes a lot of sense
in the context of something like rights
law right as you pointed out you get
caught in this trap if it's market only
in the early days when it's a hundred
times more expensive no one's gonna use
it but if we have some reason to be
confident that rights law will work then
it makes sense to do things like
portfolio mandates or you know giant
subsidies even though they're not
economic in the short term to drive us
up the learning curve to the point where
it does make sense yeah and so this is
where like something like rights law it
may seem like a very academic kind of
niche concept to many people maybe some
of your listeners but it's actually I
would say pretty important to consider
for a forming in forming many different
kinds of Technology decisions that
people may have you know whether they're
private investors or government
policymakers or even engineers and we
can start with rights law to say okay
there's this relationship between
production and as I produce more I tend
to see costs come down following this
power law and that's a good place to
start but then of course if we want to
look at the underlying mechanisms and
you know the different kinds of efforts
that lead to improvement that's where
you'd want to go into applying the
approaches that I mentioned earlier so
there you
we're not just looking at production and
how costs come down with production but
we're going deeper into what are all the
different efforts that went into working
on this technology so it's it's actual
repeated processes or learning by doing
but it's also research and development
both publicly funded research and
development and also privately funded
research and development and economies
of scale which is more of like an
emergent property so we can kind of dig
into that more and come up with more
mechanistic explanations which then can
inform other kinds of decisions you know
like I have a portfolio of investments
as a government and I want to decide how
much do I want to mandate that
electricity should come from these five
different sources you might apply rates
curve but if you're somebody that is
deciding on the allocation of research
and development funding versus expanding
production either a government policy
maker or a private investor or someone
running a company then you might want to
apply that more mechanistic approach
that I mentioned it's gonna be a mix of
them it's a multi optimization problem
and it's also depends on the timeframe
you're looking at right yeah so you've
talked mostly about the past you have a
perspective on the future of
photovoltaic what are we likely to
expect to over the next say 10 to 20
years in terms of improvements yeah so I
mean I think we'll continue to see
improvements over the next 10 to 20
years one of the areas that is really
important to focus on though are what
are called soft costs so I can explain
what what that means but but if we take
the solar energy system or the
photovoltaic system we can break it up
into the module and what's called the
balance of systems so that's everything
else that includes the inverter it
includes a construction cost etc and
that gives us the total cost and so
looking forward I do expect that we can
see some improvements
photovoltaic module costs including and
in silicon based photovoltaic modules
but there are also some new exciting
developments like profs kite solar cells
the future there is uncertain but but
it's an interesting and potentially
promising area to look at but then let
me focus on the other those other costs
the balance of systems and then
specifically on what I mentioned are the
soft costs so that would include the
construction cost so it's the cost of
labor it would include the cost of
permitting and what's called the cost of
interconnection so connecting to the
grid and that's a really interesting and
important area because what we see is
that those costs are coming to dominate
the total cost so well the module costs
have come down an inverter costs have
come down those soft costs have not come
down we do see that in some countries
they're much lower than in others so in
Germany it's estimated that those costs
are about 50% what they are in the u.s.
so they're half what they are in the US
but we also see that you know within
individual countries that you know we're
not seeing as much signs of changes in
those costs as we'd like to see so I
think that's a really important and
potentially very rewarding area to work
on it's again one that I'm working on
and I know many others including the US
Department of Energy is interested in
this one of the things that I think
could work there is actually again in
this area of soft technology and and
basically finding ways to codify and
knowledge of what works to bring
permitting costs down to bring labor
costs down in our connection cost down
collecting data and making sure the
incentives are in place for those costs
to drop and that you know that could
really be very impactful for solar
energy okay quick aside it wasn't long
ago there was a fair amount of
investment including Google not dumb
people in thermosolar with liquid salt
storage whatever became of that
technology yeah so thermal solar or
otherwise known as concentrating solar
power is one that hasn't taken off
as much as people might like the concept
is different from photovoltaics and one
of the big differences is that you're
using direct solar radiation so you no
longer benefit from indirect solar
radiation and that's because the way it
works is you use a system of mirrors to
concentrate sunlight and to heat some
medium and so that could be molten salt
for example as you mentioned and you
bring that to a very high temperature
and then you use that to operate
something that's similar to a
conventional thermal power plant and so
those mirrors are set up to capture
direct sunlight we're not able to
capture indirect sunlight in those
systems and so that means that they're
really best applied in very sunny
climates and I think there's you know
there's still a lot of potential for
concentrating solar power and when we
look back at the history of technologies
it's interesting because sometimes you
see things coming into favor
you know expectations maybe being a
little bit too high the technology or
industry isn't able to meet those
expectations and then interest drops but
then it kind of has a resurgence so I
wouldn't rule out concentrating solar
power yet but it's tricky to say what's
going to happen with that technology
going forward yeah I was kind of
surprised that you know people as smart
as Google would have spent you know big
dollars on that and come up with a goose
egg but that's what happens sometimes as
you say maybe in the future something
will come back let's move on to the next
big one which is wind what is the
learning curve look like on win both
looking back a little bit and then
looking forward yeah so we've seen again
major reductions in cost and in wind
electricity and we've so actually let me
pause for a minute gem so part of the
reason it's tricky to make that forecast
that you wanted with time for solar and
also for wind it's the same is that it
really depends on what happens on the
policy side as well so we we wrote a
report ahead of the Paris climate
negotiations and looked at the different
commitments that countries had made
to the Paris agreement and asked how
much might solar and wind electricity
cost fall between now and 2030 and we
estimated that cost could fall by 50%
for solar energy and they could fall by
25% for wind energy and I will say that
so far since we did that study ahead of
the the Paris climate negotiations costs
have continued to come down for both of
these technologies now that's one
estimate and indiscernible into these
technologies if we increase that effort
then things could improve more quickly
or if we decrease we fall back on that
effort then things could be slower yes
assuming that rights laws the main one
in operation it makes perfect sense the
more we build the cheaper it gets right
yeah exactly
and yeah so that's you know and I think
it's it's fair to assume rights law
given what we know so far I'm not saying
it's the best forecasting method and
certainly with any forecast you want to
also forecast your expected errors so
that's something that we typically do so
there would be ranges around those
estimates that I just mentioned that's
really important because then you can
figure out how to diversify your
portfolio you know to deal with those
uncertainties but yeah a lot of the
research we've been doing does provide
some support for for rights law now if
you're a small player and you're someone
that doesn't have agency you can't make
a decision about global production or
large amounts of production then you may
want to apply Moore's law instead to
make your forecast so that's something
that's what ways in which these theories
can be implemented and used by decision
makers but yeah to come back to your
question you asked about wind
electricity right and then where we see
that wind electricity costs have fallen
and shown a pretty impressive trend and
there's room for further improvement and
one area that I want to highlight that
looks very promising is offshore wind
this is a market that's growing and one
of the benefits of offshore wind is that
you're able to access more predictable
more more sustained less
variable wind speeds and wind patterns
by putting your systems offshore so
that's one of the benefits you're also
able to access a better wind energy
resource in many cases so that's an area
that many are working on there's still
some innovation challenges and a need
for research and development investment
in that technology but there's a lot of
potential there and currently if we look
at the costs of wind electricity again
you see that it's cost competitive in
many locations but it has the challenge
that I mentioned before with solar which
is one of the reasons why you would want
to bring the cost down further because
if you need to install energy storage
alongside these technologies that's an
additional investment that would have to
be made and as you start using more and
more wind energy you'll need either
supplemental generation from other
sources or energy storage in order to
reliably meet demand gotcha
that's a perfect transition to the next
technology which is distribution you
made the very good and important point
that Geographic what's the health damned
word I'm looking for here
diversification diversification the only
free lunch and Finance is
diversification right and while it's not
quite free and energy you can get a lot
of free lunch with geographic
diversification but to do that you need
an upgrade of our distribution network
sometimes I talk about you know building
these high voltage DC long-haul cables
as the interstate highway system for the
21st century if you could tell us a
little bit about what's going on in
distribution and what needs to go on in
distribution
yeah so in improving and expanding the
transmission and distribution
infrastructure for electricity is
absolutely critical especially if we
rely on increasing amounts variable
solar and wind energy it's important to
improve and continue to expand the
transmission and distribution
infrastructure and so there's a lot of
interest in that and you know that the
costs should be manageable at least the
engineering cost estimates the
challenges come in in terms of other
factors
like whether people in the areas that
would be affected if you're building a
new long-distance high voltage
transmission line whether people in
those areas will be willing to allow
those projects and also whether
investors are willing to take on the
risks of those projects also
coordination across different
geographical areas within the US can be
a challenge some some of the
institutional design issues have to be
worked out but there's a lot of interest
in that and I think whether or not this
really takes off will have to do with
what kind of climate policy we have but
also from a bottom-up perspective it has
to do with whether people are able to
get together and coordinate and make
decisions to go forward with some of
these projects or whether you know that
coordination proves too difficult so
again I think about this problem in
terms of what is the right portfolio
approach and certainly we need to keep
pushing on transmission and distribution
infrastructure improvement and expansion
and I do think that in some places it's
going to have a very big impact and but
it's probably going to be more
applicable in some places than in others
so if you have obviously small islands
that becomes more difficult in those
cases or if you have areas that are
separated by large mountain ranges or
national parks or other you know
pristine wildlife areas that are
protected and that people you know
understandably don't want to go into and
and build on then you're going to have
some limitations there so really for
transmission and distribution
infrastructure expansion we need to look
at the specifics of the continents the
countries the states that we're
considering and see whether this is a
practical option in those locations and
in places where it is then it's a great
idea you mentioned the coordination
problem what I tend to call the
collective action problem right it makes
sense to do it but you can't get people
to agree for
you know local interest reasons
self-interest etc that's why I put the
framing on it maybe we should think of
it as the interstate highway system of
the 21st century where we just decide at
the top it's worth spending the money to
make it happen you know the interstate
highway system for those kids today
don't remember was built in the 50s 60s
70s and the federal government paid 90%
of the cost as a way to incentivize and
override local objections and it worked
yeah I mean certainly those top-down
approaches can work and we do see that
in some nations today we see more
top-down decisions happening and in some
places that seems to work better than in
others we've seen strong climate policy
in the Scandinavian countries if we look
at the case of China in that area in
terms of you know planning for energy
infrastructure they take a top-down
approach as well in some other places
these top-down policies don't seem to be
really the way in in which things are
moving so in the US for example you know
the current administration isn't
focusing on climate policy or climate
change is an issue and what you're
seeing is more bottom ups what are
called sub-national actors you know
basically mayors and governors of states
and other local policymakers stepping in
to work on these issues and adopt
policies but of course those policy
makers are covering a smaller area they
have jurisdiction they're representing
smaller populations and so then you have
a bit more of a coordination challenge
but I don't think that all is lost I do
think that there are ways in which we
could think about and again be creative
about finding ways to move forward with
coordination to incentivize coordination
and again we can potentially use
software for this I think we can be
thinking creatively about how to absolve
the collective action problem that you
that you talked about many people
individually would like to make a
difference
we see that we see that based on math
surveys you see that if you go around
and talk to people I mean I was just on
a sabbatical and I was in various parts
of the country and I would talk to
people with all sorts of different you
know backgrounds and about this issue
and you do see that there are some
common views even though people may be
skeptical of climate change when we
start talking about things that affect
them personally there is a desire to
protect the environment so anyway that I
think there is there's a desire among
many people to do something about this
problem but each person can feel
powerless because their decision alone
can't bring about a large change so
again we I think we should be thinking
about technology and new creative ways
to bring people together to allow for
this bottom-up action and bottom-up
coordination that could accelerate this
transition to low-carbon energy systems
well talk about the policy too little
bit later yeah I don't have to be
politically correct I don't have a job
I've retired I don't give a right
so what I would say is we got to vote
out politicians who have their heads up
their ass on this issue right when he
both bottom-up and top-down and
currently with the idiotic political
leadership we have we're not getting any
guidance on the top-down side so that's
got to change
yeah you don't need to agree or disagree
but if you want to you can well no I was
just gonna say that policy is is really
important government policy is really
important and national level government
policy can be very impactful
international agreements can be super
impactful and so it is I think important
to highlight for people that their votes
matter and when they're voting for in
demanding climate policy the reason for
that isn't just to bring about emissions
reduction but it's also you know
alongside that you have technological
innovation anytime things are changing
especially in such an important sector
like these energy service and youth
sectors that I've been talking about you
know if technology is changing there's
opportunities there's opportunity for
job creation of course
there will be winners and losers but for
society as a whole there is great
opportunity there there's opportunity to
address inequities to you know address
all sorts of environmental and social
justice issues so I do often try to make
this point that voting is really
important you know and that if you vote
for options you know if you vote for
climate policy what you'll get are
options that will allow you to kind of
act and make decisions and take action
along your values and so it's important
to to vote for a climate policy you know
for all of those above reasons there
it's a huge opportunity I guess I worry
that people feel like all is lost and
feel very down and think my vote can't
matter but when we look at some of these
trends in the past
like we talked about for solar energy
you see that we saw this really rapid
improvement in this technology that came
about because of efforts all around the
world by many different kinds of people
and different countries kicked in
support at different points in time and
it was kind of this emergent trend that
we saw that is really pretty impressive
so I think people I like to share that
story because I think it can lead to
more optimism around this problem we'll
talk about optimism and and how to get
rid of despair at the end but let's we
need to move on here getting into the
weeds a little bit more actually I like
the week the truth is I like the weeds
well we're using up our time so let's
hit a learning curve what's going on in
storage and nukes quickly will drop
hydrolysis and then we'll move on so
storage what has happened and you know
where are we on the trend on storage
yeah so we've seen significant declines
in the cost of lithium-ion batteries for
example so now you know there are
estimates of costs around $200 per
kilowatt hour as I mentioned before once
you use these as stationary storage
devices
and installations there other costs that
are incurred but costs have come down
significantly and the other important
trend to know it is that people are
working on many different kinds of
storage technologies you mentioned
before that you had worked on vanadium
redox flow batteries that's one kind of
flow battery but there are many other
kinds of flow batteries that various
researchers are working on some of them
here at my institution at MIT and these
are batteries where you're basically
replacing the electrolyte and this opens
up some design opportunities to really
bring down those energy capacity costs
that's important and so basically
because you don't have to be able to
carry these stationary storage devices
around you don't care about the mass and
the volume so there's all sorts of
interesting ways in which these
technologies are being developed another
important energy storage technology is
pumped hydro storage now that really
only makes sense in places where you
have enough water and where you have the
right topographical features where you
have some reservoir of water elevated
that can be used for this pumped storage
site and the way it works is you pump
water uphill and then later you let it
run downhill to generate electricity so
where this makes sense where you have
the right conditions water and
topography this is an important
technology to to adopt and of course
there I want to make sure to highlight
that there are many concerns in many
places about building a hydro facility
and a hydro reservoir and so we really
want to take those into account as well
there can be ecosystem impacts and
impacts on local populations so you know
it only really makes sense where you
have the right conditions and and people
and ecosystems aren't negatively
impacted so the future development
potential there is somewhat restricted
by those factors so those are some of
the electrochemical storage devices the
batteries and so batteries and Pumped
hydro storage are some of the important
storage technologies to keep an eye on
and as to where things are going to go
in the future
are certainly a lot of room for
development as I mentioned before we're
just starting to get working on
stationary storage devices and in
earnest and there's more enthusiasm in
this area there are many different
directions these technologies could go
in different forms of energy we can
store the energy in different forms and
so I I think there's a lot of potential
but the future is uncertain so there you
know in terms of our portfolio again
we'd want to diversify our investments
across a number of different options and
I should mention lithium-ion batteries
again come back to that there is
probably a significant room for cost
reduction and lithium-ion batteries too
so that's another technology to keep an
eye on okay how about nukes nuclear
power you know again people often forget
about that when we're talking about
greenhouse gas free power sources but
hey there's one that emits almost
nothing in terms of greenhouse gas I
have a fair big upfront cost but if you
look at the energy return on investment
I mean the things about a hundred to one
say it gets a very good return on energy
invested where are we today with nuclear
power and what do you see coming down
the pike yeah so nuclear fission
reactors are an important option to look
at as well so what we've seen in the
u.s. is that the development of new
reactors really slowed and essentially
stopped in recent decades and you know
there are a couple of possible reasons
for that but what we see over time with
nuclear fission reactors we're actually
working on a paper on this right now is
that the cost actually rose over time so
if it didn't follow the kind of learning
curve we were talking about earlier and
we think that one of the reasons for
that Rises the increase in in soft costs
so that's basically all of the on-site
construction costs the permitting the
quality control some of this was in
response to safety regulations but in
many cases we think there could be
opportunities to respond in a different
way to safety regulations
and that this cost increase could
potentially be reversed if we rethink
how we're developing and constructing
these nuclear fission reactors so
basically costs have come up in the u.s.
in other places costs have not followed
the same trends and development has
continued so France as many people may
know relies a good deal on nuclear
fission for electricity but in the u.s.
we haven't seen growth trends in recent
years so it's a big question as to
what's going to happen in the future and
my thoughts on what could happen are the
following I think there is potential to
find ways to reduce the costs of nuclear
fission and to reduce those soft costs
that I talked about one of the ways to
do that is to possibly to transition to
small modular reactors where much of the
construction is done off-site and the
on-site construction requirements are
much more straightforward and that could
help drive costs down the other big
question with nuclear fission of course
is what is the public acceptance of it
and in some places like in Germany and
Japan you see that the public acceptance
is low in other places it's higher and
so this may be a technology that works
in some places is a good option in some
places and not such a good option other
places I think we should be bringing
people into those decisions and having
conversations about that in places where
it makes sense then this can be a
contributor to a low-carbon electricity
there are a couple of other issues that
we need to think about as well like a
long-term storage of nuclear waste and
of course there's always the question of
nuclear weapons proliferation
and certainly continuing to focus on
preventing nuclear weapons proliferation
so those are some of the challenges but
also some of the opportunities with
nuclear fission technology yeah when I
think about the algebra you know it's a
multi-factor equation and if we were to
say triple the amount of nuclear we had
in the world that would provide a pretty
good sized base load which makes a lot
of the other problems much less pressing
that's right that's right so nuclear
fission could be used as a base load
technology and the question is really
about those three factors that I
mentioned are let's say for actually the
answer that question will be determined
by those four factors one is social
acceptance the other is the costs and if
we can bring those soft costs down the
other is what we do with long term waste
management and then finally the question
of nuclear weapons proliferation so
those are four important factors to keep
an eye on yep that sounds good
one last technology before we move on
what about carbon atmospheric removal is
that a thing is that gonna really happen
is there a chance for it where's that
stand yeah again this is a technology
that I think we should be investing some
amount in there are some challenges
having to do with coordination again and
public acceptance and some of these
challenges that we talked about
regarding you know these not in my
backyard kinds of challenges now I'm not
saying move it's too early to see if
that will really be the determining
factor for carbon capture and storage
but these coordination challenges and
public acceptance challenges are ones
that could certainly be important
factors but what we've seen so far
limiting investment in this technology
which which may have to do with
investors perception of those two
factors that I just mentioned is that
there hasn't been as much appetite to
take on the risk of investing in these
large projects and there have been
successful demonstration projects but
the technology really hasn't taken off
there are a couple of other challenges
that still have to be addressed so
is in looking at what are the possible
storage sites I'm in what form do you
store the carbon dioxide ideally we'd
like to be able to convert it to a solid
form and one of the reasons for that is
that even a very small leakage rate for
carbon dioxide could lead to a huge
problem down the road because carbon
dioxide once it's in the atmosphere
sticks around for hundreds of years so
even if you have very small leaks over
time you get to a very big climate
problem so that's something that we'd
like to avoid so researchers are looking
at turning carbon dioxide into a solid
form it's not an easy thing to do what
you're doing there is trying to drive a
mineralization reaction which isn't all
that easy so I guess the bottom line is
carbon capture and storage is certainly
something we should be looking at it may
end up being more of an niche technology
for certain niche applications like
industrial emissions that's something
that could turn out to be how this
technology is used I think we should
keep it in the portfolio of technologies
that we're investing in trying to
improve okay it's a good thought now I
will skip over with my last few nerdy
topics because I think it's particularly
relevant for this carbon removal and
sequestration issue into the policy
space right we have a whole lot of
different knobs that as a social
operating system we could set to help us
move towards carbon neutrality before we
meltdown in some of the ones we've
talked about before are things like
portfolio mandates where you know just
by regulation we say that utilities must
convert X percentage of their capacity
to renewables cap-and-trade where
there's a complicated market-based
system and greenhouse gas emissions and
then things like carbon taxes what do
you think about those policy things and
what else do we have in the policy space
yeah
so there are a handful of different
policy instruments that we have to
choose from I mean some of the major
ones are government funding for research
and development and for really all of
the technologies that we've talked
about there is a need for further basic
research and publicly funded research
that could really go a long way in
addressing some of the specific problems
and challenges that still remain for
those technologies we talked about so
that's one set of policies that's really
important and then the other policies
are ones that I would we can put all of
them into one large bucket which has the
label market stimulating policies for
low carbon technologies so these are
things like various kinds of incentives
so subsidies for low carbon energy
feed-in tariffs are guaranteed prices or
regulations that mandate a certain
amount of renewable energy for example
one example is the renewable portfolio
standard that you see in some US states
so those are all market stimulating
policies but also carbon taxes and a
cap-and-trade system could also fall
under those markets stimulating policies
those are a little different in that
you're not picking individual
technologies to target but rather
targeting the carbon emissions coming
from those technologies but but those
can also fall under that category so we
have a range of different instruments
that we can use and they've been shown
to be successful yeah though it's funny
we don't seem to have much will to do it
you know the name very people are trying
cap-and-trade and truthfully I've got a
fairly strong economics background and
when I first heard about cap-and-trade I
said ah this is obviously the right
answer because you take out the most
cost-effective carbon first right the
idea is that everybody bunch of people
have rights to emit carbon those rights
go downhill every year people trade them
amongst themselves so carbon that's easy
they got getting rid of gets rid of
early etc but unfortunately there's lots
of problems with it like who gets those
credits right you can imagine any
society that has even a little
corruption it's gonna be driven by
political corruption to a large degree
so we saw in Europe they set the caps
too high and basically didn't do jack
 price dropped is almost zero so it
had no effect etc so I've come around to
believe very strongly that this is the
right economic
for carbon reduction which is a carbon
tax which is set relatively high say 30
or 40 dollars a carbon tonne equivalent
today and is set statutorily to increase
linearly to $200 per tonne in 20 years
and continue thereafter further this
carbon tax will be refunded to the
populace per capita after a small amount
may be later a larger amount is used to
pay for carbon sequestration
so first what use of the tax is to
actually pay people the exact reverse of
the tax rate for taking carbon solidly
out of the atmosphere and no
but you know the real deal I hear the
pier the bricks I can count them and
then the rest goes back per capita to
each individual now the beauty of this
is you don't have the political kick
back because the average use of
greenhouse gases is quite a bit higher
than the median use what does that mean
it means that the majority and a
significant majority of people in a
country like the United States will
actually be economically ahead if they
got a per capita redistribution of
carbon tax and yet every decision they
make at the micro economic level is
fully informed by the weight of the
carbon tax so you know their gas still
costs twice as much so they're gonna use
less gas even though in the aggregate
they're gonna get all that money back
again at the end of the month so I've
been thinking about this for a while and
I can see no better powerful stimulus to
our innovators to our own conservation
instincts to everything by a strong and
rapidly increasing carbon tax that's
refunded per capita on a monthly basis
yeah I mean you know I think one of the
important issues that that your proposal
will deal with is the otherwise
regressive nature of a carbon tax or the
inequitable impacts of a carbon tax you
know that's one of the concerns is that
if you have a carbon tax that will
affect lower-income households and
people you know more and so with the
plan that you're talking about you could
you could begin to deal with with some
of those issues
I think certainly a carbon tax could
work a couple thoughts on that it's
really important and you touched on this
it's important what the actual value is
and whenever anyone says they're
supporting a carbon tax I always come
back and ask okay what's what is the tax
what's the value what value does it
start at what happens to it over time
and once we start to get up to $100 a
ton that's when you really can start to
see significant changes we know this
because you can simply look at the cost
of energy and the carbon intensity of
energy of different options out there
and you could see how they change
relative to one another with different
levels of a carbon tax and we know that
you know we can see those changes and
I've done this analysis and $100 a ton
is and you'll start you'll see things
change even at a lower level but $100 a
ton is when you can start to see these
shifts and the energy supply
technologies and really that's what's
needed you have to get fossil fuels out
of the energy system or to the extent
they remain capture the carbon dioxide
and ideally turn this to a solid form
that's still a technology that needs
some development so you know but yeah I
mean I think a significant sizable
carbon tax could be a good way to go of
course the question is will people
accept it will they support it and some
of my political science colleagues have
looked in the into this in detail one
colleague of mine she's actually a
former student of mine Leah Stokes at
University of California Santa Barbara
is doing some great work in this area
but anyway you know it's important to
look at what what do people want I'm not
saying that that can't change over time
but we want to pay attention to what is
acceptable to people what are they going
to support and some of the studies out
there are suggesting that people like to
they don't really like attack so maybe
we could reframe your policy in such a
way that it's you know an environmental
rebate because they're getting something
back but you know that idea of paying
something is less popular than the idea
of investing in something and getting
something back
so you know when we talk about investing
in solar and wind these can be more
popular policies actually than taxing
carbon emissions and that perhaps is
rooted in human psychology but I mean at
the but at the end of the day I guess
what I would say is that we have these
energy supply technologies they have a
certain amount of carbon emissions
associated with them they're they cost a
certain amount they have a certain
amount of scalability and we can use a
collection of instruments a carbon tax
would work a carbon cap would work it
would lead to a price on carbon
different technology specific
instruments would work apply to the
handful of different technologies we
have we can use a combination of all of
these but the idea is to it all of these
essentially put a price on carbon they
bring in that external cost of carbon
emissions and climate change and bring
that into the price that consumers see
and another it's getting a little bit
kind of technical and I don't know how
much we want to go into these details
but one of the challenges with setting
the right carbon price is actually to
address some of the questions we've been
covering which is how our technology is
changing with time because at the end of
the day if what you want to do is to
reach a certain emissions target all of
these policies need to be informed by an
understanding of the dynamics of
technological change if you have a
technology changing and cost by an order
of magnitude over 10 years that's
something you really want to take into
account in your models and use that to
inform policy so I guess I would tweak
your proposal a little bit I think a
carbon tax where it makes sense where
it's socially acceptable and by the way
we we have a significant carbon tax in
Sweden you know I think that makes sense
to go forward with that but we're
probably also going to need a number of
these other policy instruments for
investing in government-funded R&D but
also these market stimulating policies
that target options that look like they
could be
very that you know where while the
evidence suggests that they could be
very important for addressing climate
change going forward I think I probably
is the right answer there is no one
answer we're all looking for the Silver
Bullet but it's a question of
coordination you've mentioned several
times through the day that our research
priorities are real important and I saw
that you'd recently co-authored a paper
on that you know what are the four
research priorities for making progress
on climate could you give us your
thoughts on where our research
priorities ought to be yeah sure so
there are a number of really important
areas I guess I'll start with technology
specific priorities and which
technologies I think we could focus on
and then I'll go into some other
priorities so in terms of the
technologies certainly bringing down
energy storage costs is really important
and there I'm referring to not just
batteries but also other kinds of energy
storage like technologies figuring out
how to draw from a more diverse and
wider geographical area through
transmission infrastructure expansion
how to draw solar and wind energy from a
wider area a larger area along with new
approaches to demand-side management and
also integrating energy demand and
supply across different and new sectors
electricity transportation heating an
industry to electrify those services
those energy services as much as
possible but then also to find ways to
maybe generate and produce low carbon
fuels to meet the portion of the demand
that can't be met through
electrification so I I kind of lumped
these under energy storage plus so the
physical batteries and then all of these
other ways of managing and matching
supply and demand I think that's a huge
research area and really important so
that's one certainly bringing down the
cost of solar energy and specifically
the soft costs of solar energy is
important focusing on reducing the soft
costs of nuclear fission along side
be creative about ways to deal with the
waste storage meant and the waste
management problem as well as the risks
of weapons proliferation that's really
important offshore wind has a lot of
potential and then continuing to invest
a bit in carbon capture and storage and
converting carbon dioxide to a solid
form I think that's important as well we
should keep an eye on that and keep
pushing on that now you know if I were
to make allocations across those areas
I'd use a portfolio model and you know
different ones would receive more
research funding than others but those
are some important ones oh and also
continuing to work on electric vehicles
so that includes battery electric
vehicles as well as fuel cell vehicles
and then also transportation technology
and software that allows us to match
vehicles to the kinds of trips and the
features needed for a particular
transportation service and then finally
developing technology that allows us to
seamlessly provide transportation
services to people combining electric
vehicles with public transit and other
low-carbon forms of transportation so
those are some technology areas that I
think are really important in terms of
general themes I guess I'll highlight a
few one is this issue of soft technology
and soft costs and just in general
finding ways to match a low-carbon
supply to energy demand and to shape the
energy demand so that goes beyond the
specific example that I gave before in
managing variable renewable energy and
matching that to demand to looking at
you know the example from transportation
matching transportation services to
people's needs but I think we can use
this as a concept more generally to look
at industrial energy services and you
know heating and cooling energy services
so kind of looking at using soft
technology to match supply to demand and
then also you know across the technology
of the example technology exam
as I gave I mentioned soft cost
specifically so that's the cost of labor
installation maintenance and this is a
category of cost that hasn't seen as
much improvement as it could across many
different low-carbon technology so
that's specifically something that I
think would be important to look at one
other area I want to highlight is
artificial intelligence I'll just give
one trivial example which is
self-driving cars the algorithms that
are being developed for self-driving
cars aren't focusing as much as they
could on energy efficiency reducing
energy demand per trip but then also we
should be thinking about how do we use
automation of vehicles and other
automation to make our resource use more
efficient you know so in transportation
there's a concern that automation could
double you know or greatly increase
transportation energy demand it could
also cause the trend to go in the
opposite direction and my point is we
need to be deliberately researching
these different options and try to you
know if we care about climate change
which I obviously do you know try to
understand how we can use automation for
benefit in order to bring about
emissions reduction and decarbonisation
of transportation so those are a couple
of general themes yeah well when I
become president you're gonna be
available believe my Secretary of Energy
sure there's one more can I say one more
sure okay so another theme that's really
important and this is actually one that
I'm going to be working on with some
colleagues at the Santa Fe Institute in
a small working group next month and
that's on thinking about how the
decisions we make today will or will not
allow us to reach deep decarbonization
path targets one of the problems that I
and earlier is a problem that came out
of some research we did and this was
published recently in the journal Joule
on the energy storage requirements of
almost entirely on solar and wind energy
and what we see there is that you know
basically if we go down this path we
need to be thinking about ways to be
able to address these large unexpected
shortage events and solar and wind
energy and be developing the
technologies for that ultimate goal now
even though we're far from you know
using eighty percent renewable energy or
more we need to be working on that now
and then we also need to be giving
ourselves retaining the option to reach
deep decarbonisation targets in
different ways so basically what I'm
saying is we should be researching and
understanding now what kinds of policies
are needed to allow us to retain
different options so if we think of this
as a decision tree you know we retain
certain branches of the decision tree
through our investment decisions and our
policies and we want to make sure that
we can get to these deep decarbonisation
targets and be deliberate about that
already now so many states have very
ambitious
decarbonisation targets by mid-century
for example New Mexico recently adopted
one new york state california both have
very aggressive decarbonisation targets
and it's important to be thinking about
how the policies we adopt now give us
the options that we need and take into
account some of the uncertainties that
are there in order to reach those deep
decarbonisation targets yeah I think
that's critical as a society that we'd
be thinking about that but that we be
thinking about it realistically one of
the things that really pissed me off
about climate change and thinking is how
a lot of what I call magical thinking
has been floating around recently
exactly opposite of the kind of thinking
you just laid out for instance Bernie
Sanders a guy I supported in 2016 right
on his website under his climate change
policy he puts out as his goal reaching
100% renewable energy for electricity
and transportation no later than 2030 I
mean that's total horseshit
can't possibly happen yeah I mean I
think you know
I have a couple comments on that I think
really what we want to keep our eyes on
there as a goal is decarbonisation so
net zero emissions energy systems is the
technical term I guess or the jargon
that use right so that could come from
renewable sources it may be largely
solar and wind energy but also from
other sources like hydro in places where
it already exists nuclear fission and
you know that could come through
electrification as well as producing
some low carbon fuels like hydrogen
which is an important one to keep
working on that's actually an another
research priority there but yeah so we
want to be aiming for net zero emissions
energy systems and it could be that
that's largely coming from renewable
energy but the target the policy target
I believe should be focused on the end
goal which is getting carbon emissions
out of energy so that's that net zero
and emissions energy systems that's
important and then you know if we set a
target for a certain time you know so
say we set a target for 80 to 100
percent emissions reduction by 2050 it's
really important to make sure that that
can be reached and to make sure you have
a plan for reaching that so the Obama
administration published a mid-century
strategy report shortly after the
elections in 2016 this was something
that they had been working on for a long
time and this is the kind of analysis
that should be behind policy targets for
2050 for example for decarbonisation it
is really important to be thinking about
how we're gonna get to those targets and
to put out those plans alongside the you
know a statement of the end goal yeah I
agree that it has to be realistic
because again this Bernie thing I mean
think about what he's saying a hundred
percent renewable energy for all
electricity and transportation no later
than 2030 impossible and what's gonna
happen is you put that out there as his
on his platform and it doesn't even come
close I mean we'd be lucky to get 20% by
2030
it's gonna cause people to believe that
these forecasts and goals are utterly
unrealistic you know it seems to me the
takeaway is that political statements
about goals need to be based on science
not just on God knows what that damn
thing was was made up from what I want
to see first is candidates supporting
the idea and really engaged and
understanding the importance of climate
change mitigation so that's the first
thing I look for and actually I did
write some live commentary during the
candidates climate Town Hall that was
hosted by CNN last fall so I got a close
look at all of that time the list of
candidates Democratic candidates their
policies and I have to say that I was
really heartened by the fact that first
of all this event was being held at all
if you had told me four years ago that
CNN would be hosting a primary debate on
climate change only I'm not sure you
know how likely I would have thought
that that would be at that time so the
fact that this was happening at all was
really important and you could also see
that many of the candidates have learned
about this issue some more than others
and you know have an understanding of
the issue so that's one of the first
things that I look for and a number of
them I would say we're stronger than
others in terms of their plans and how
well thought through they were certainly
having a plan a tall hat and actually
wanting to do something about this
problem is really critically important
but then of course we want to back that
up and make sure that those plans are
informed by achievable targets and
achievable actions that's of course what
we want one last thing and then a half a
thing global collective action problem
you know the United States or Western
Europe we could do our thing and we
could get our carbon equivalent
emissions to zero but if the rest of the
world doesn't follow it isn't gonna do
any good what are some of your thoughts
on how we address the global collective
action problem yeah so one of the
questions that got me interested and
starting down this path almost two
decades ago of this
search that I'm doing was exactly this
question of how do you bring about
agreement among different
decision-makers and specifically among
countries and regions that are at
different levels of Economic Development
so you have some countries that have
rapidly growing economies they're still
growing and income levels are rising
more rapidly there's others where income
levels are already high fairly high and
you know growth has sort of leveled out
some more so basically you have
developed economies and then rapidly
growing economies and these
decision-makers have different problems
that they're confronting and the
question was always how to bring these
decision-makers into agreement because
rapidly developing economies it was
thought would not want to sign on to
climate policy because they don't want
to have to pay for the carbon emissions
that developed economies have already
contributed you know the feeling was
that developed economies have caused
this problem and they should be the ones
to pay for it now from the developed
economies perspective they said we don't
want to do this alone you have to
contribute your fair share to the
rapidly developing economies and so this
was a problem but one of the motivations
for the research that I started to do
was to ask okay well if we consider a
technological innovation how does this
picture change and I can say that I
think you know there is there is actual
actually reason for optimism that
agreements could be reached because what
you see when you look at what's happened
over the last few decades is that in
cases like in solar energy where we had
policies around the world there wasn't
much coordination but there were
different policies at different times in
different countries you brought that
brought about this very rapid and
significant improvement to this
technology that created a lot of
opportunities in places where
manufacturing innovation happened it
created jobs in installation and
manufacturing and then this technology
was used everywhere
the world and so I think this is
something that could be repeated and
other technology so I guess what I'm
saying is that by adopting climate
policy what happens is you can and
especially if you do this in a way
that's that's you know carefully
designed and strategic you can stimulate
very significant technological
innovation that benefits you and that
leads to new technologies better
technologies that can then be exported
to other markets and so so it can really
be seen as an opportunity and this is a
message that was in a report that we
wrote ahead of the Paris climate
negotiations it's something that was
referenced there and used at least in in
some of the discussions based on on what
I've heard and this is so it's basically
it's pointing out that when you adopt
climate policy and you enforce climate
policy you don't just get the emissions
reductions out you also get technology
innovation out which creates lots of
opportunities and so I see that there's
there's actual potential once we
recognize that innovation opportunity
for greater agreement decision-makers
around the world and actually that
people will not want to be left out you
know so at some point we'll hit a
tipping point where this decarbonisation
trend will really take off I mean I hope
I don't know if this is going to happen
but this is something that could happen
if we put the effort in and so this
tipping point would then you know once
we cross this or hit this tipping point
it's in everybody's interest to kind of
stay onboard and and just stay on top of
this and not be left behind so I feel
like that was a little bit of a
confusing answer I don't know if I
should start I think you hit on the key
point let's let's exit on I hear people
talk about despair about climate and
that really makes me mad you know cuz it
from what I see it's certainly a fixable
problem you know it's probably on par
with you know world
- or something like that in terms of
percentage of GDP and instead of being
concentrated in two or three years at
spread over 50 years so why why do
people despair I shouldn't say why they
spare I know why they despair because of
bad memes floating around social media
but do you think that there is more hope
than despair appropriate and where you
sit and knowing better than almost
anybody on earth where these
technologies really are and what's
possible yeah I think there's a lot of
reasons to be hopeful now I'm not gonna
say that it's a done deal and that we
are you know definitely going to address
this problem I don't know if we will but
there's so much opportunity and you know
I guess my approach and and sort of what
I would encourage everybody to do is to
try right if we're not trying if this is
a problem that you care about and you're
not trying you're not doing what you can
then the problem definitely won't be
addressed but if everyone tries everyone
that cares about this problem tries then
will I feel very confident that we'll
get to where we need to be so I I remain
hopeful but I don't spend my time
thinking about whether or not we'll
address this problem of course that
thought you know does come to me and I
do I do have those thoughts but I
quickly try to refocus my attention on
doing what I can
and trying my best the approach I take
yeah Matt note I want to thank you for
everything I was hoping this episode
would be great detail great thoughts and
a great wrap-up ångström that was that
was a lot of fun
[Music]
production services and audio editing by
jerod Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space music