[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis today we're going to
depart from our usual procedure in which
I lecture and I what like instead and I
will do this periodically I'd like
instead to talk and have a discussion
with somebody who's doing work on either
understanding or responding to or both
the meeting crisis the first person I'd
like to talk to is the co-author with me
and Philip missive ik on the book on
zombies zombies in Western culture 21st
century crisis and I've alluded at the
beginning how the zombies are a
mythology for representing the meaning
crisis and we need to now spend some
time unpacking that and Chris Master
Pietro is going to do is he's going to
help lead us through that and then we're
also going to talk about the symptom
ology of the meaning crisis what are all
the different ways in which we can see
evidence for and understand the meaning
crisis so welcome Chris and as I
mentioned Chris is second author on the
zombie book we are currently working on
the follow-up book called unsheltered
but we want to talk now a little bit
about the symbol of the zombie and why
it is our sort of current cultural
mythological expression of the meaning
crisis so Chris what do you think about
the zombie in the mean crisis well I
guess it's interesting the first
question someone might have watching
this is why does ahhm be because yeah
zombies are the subject of a fairly of a
multitude of different opinions and
perspectives right there's a fair
breadth of work that's been done already
on this don't be some of it we've
actually rolled in and included in our
book right yeah that's right yeah it's
done a little bit Jonathan pazzo who
you've had some oh yes discussions with
yeah yeah that's right so I'm a zombie
and zombies I would say especially since
they came to rise through Romero's films
have stood for a variety of different
kinds of symptoms and everyone has their
own ideas about what they mean what
we've tried to do obviously in our book
and what we're going to try
again here is understand how the variety
of symbols sorry the variety of symptoms
rather that are captured by the zombie
our symbolization Zoar rather their anti
symbolization as we'll get into what we
mean by that pressure of the features
that correspond to that crisis and that
the mythos of the zombie the symbolic
order that the zombie stands for threads
together these symptoms and depicts a
not only a creature but a world and an
entire mythic dynamic and series of
patterns that stand for what you could
call kind of human senescence or
distension right the kind of breakdown
of the agent arena ecology and a
worldview with Tumen fundamentally
zombies are miss attunement right yeah
understand if we understand the positive
function of symbols as a way of tuning
the self and tuning the sauce
relationship to the world
right then zombies fundamentally are the
Mist attunement of that relationship and
that expresses itself as a decay of
ecology right and so that's gonna line
up then with the way the zombie symbol
has sort of been magnetically attracted
to the apocalypse symbol and we now
they're often frequently paired together
the idea of the zombie apocalypse
that's right okay exactly so the zombie
isn't just a creature it's also an
entire world and fundamentally what it
is moreover it's the relation between
the creature and the world which is to
say it's the relation between the self
in the world so what I think we're gonna
argue and try to explain is that the
zombie we refer to the zombie casually
as a symbol because it's a little bit
simpler to do that right but what we
really mean by the zombie is we mean a
kind of we mean a pattern of mythili we
need a mini we mean a consistent
constellation of symbols right that all
revolve around that creature in its
relationship with the world and it's in
that relation that the positive function
of the symbol is operative in its in
this case it's the negative function of
the deterioration of that symbol that we
want to focus on and talk about okay so
talk a little bit more about how you
want to use this notion of symbol I like
this idea about the constellation and
the tuning right so so in order to
understand this properly what we
actually need to do is we need to make a
really really important
Station right and this is very easy to
confuse right and that is the
distinction between a sign and a symbol
this is Pierce's distinction well it's
Pierce's distant I don't want to claim
it as Pierce's distinction I don't want
to map that perfectly okay Pierce's
semiotic says very very complex and
there might be some alignment to it but
fundamentally that's actually incidental
it's just I should let everyone know
that Chris's academic background is in
semiotics so can't continue okay so I'm
not actually invoking Persis semiotics
by doing this I'm going to make a very
clear and simple distinction okay it
might have some overlap with first but
fundamentally what I'm I'm borrowing
much more from two people in particular
Paul Tillich all right
obviously the theologian Paul Tillich I
don't want to say on the topic symbols
especially sacred symbols yeah
and Carl Jung who also made this very
careful distinction so you made an
observation that signs and symbols he
used the term semiotic to mean sign I
used the term semiotics to mean both
right right but you made a claim that
the BA spec xual referent of a sign
whereas that is greater than the sign
itself right so the tree that the sign
refers to is of a greater being let's
say then the word tree right right but
that actually the symbol the opposite
the the signification of a symbol the
meaning of the symbol is actually of a
greater being per se then the object
that seems to represent the symbol right
okay so the kiss is much greater in its
signification than just the active right
right just get into that example a
little because that's a really good
cause you're also using this term not in
the way it's used in my computer science
just as a token that stands for the
world that's right you're using it more
the way it's used like in theology or in
anthropology that's right okay that's
right now I'm not making an essential
claim that this definition and this
distinction has to apply in every case
right I'm simply framing the terms for
our use right right
so I'm going to say that signs and
symbols actually do something very
different what signs do is they were
further right right word tree refers to
tree fairly straightforward rather
beyond semiotic ly it's a fairly
straightforward relationship they call
it the signifier and signified in
semiotics that's what that's the old so
Sir Ian no it's not going to get into
that but I can just refer to it right so
the symbol does something different it
does refer but what it does is it in
acts or it expresses look okay now this
is something that Tillich really aptly
identifies because what Tillich says is
yes the symbol refers to something but
the symbol has a unique participatory
quality right the symbol not only refers
but it actually participates in what it
refers to
so symbols are nearly bound up then with
participatory knowing that's right
that's right so the symbol instances the
very phenomenon that it refers to right
gestures - right Matt still excrete
insight is that the symbol is to use a
term that you use off it's an enacted
analogy right fundamentally it's tied to
participation which means that
phenomenologically it has a much much
different effect than simply a reference
okay it's not a referential tool we
would call it rather more of a unenacted
vessel okay right that's good so the
idea is this this is going to really
lock you mostly towards propositional
processing but this is going to be an
Seadrill and purchases to do it I think
respect ival okay okay that's exactly
right
okay so the idea is that the symbol
doesn't just refer to a signified state
but it actually actually it's the state
and then crucially because it's a matter
of identification we identify through
the state price right so the symbol is a
vessel for identification because when
we participate in a symbol what we're
actually doing is we're momentarily
becoming the symbol with our identity
right right right
okay that's very interesting really
important so especially before we saw
the example of the kiss right so so when
I'm not just referring to love
I'm enacting it and
I'm also becoming a lover in the act of
kissing okay I got that I'm expressing
love and I'm potentially also opening
myself to the experience of love perhaps
to a depth that I hadn't before
right right so what's what would be the
sign or the semiotic equivalent of the
kiss we might say that yeah right part
the heart we know that that means love
generally speaking but the kiss that
doesn't participate no love the kiss
actually participates in other instances
the phenomenon right so what are some
other examples how about how about take
a very different kind of example right
the difference between a uniform as a
sign of service right a sign of loyalty
or service to one's country and a salute
an actual gesture that analogizes an
expression of belonging membership
participation ticular identity you
assume if ticular identity but when you
actually engage in the salute okay and
it's spatially referential - right
facility which is also what makes it
particularly inactive let's take one
let's take an example that I've heard
you use it which i think is kind of
interesting it kind of goes with the
kiss it's a wedding ring okay now I'm
gonna make a tricky little argument here
to say that a wedding ring actually
falls into both categories right I put
it right so I would say the difference
between a wedding ring that's placed on
display at peoples diamond store and a
wedding ring that is worn actively is
the difference between a sign and a
symbol the worn wedding ring actually
instances the participation in it right
because it changes my status and
actually makes me somebody that's bound
to somewhere else where if it's just
sitting there it merely signifies the
potential for marriage okay I get this
okay all right so I wondered also make
so we're gonna kind of leave the sign
behind now okay
suffice it to say for our purposes is
very important not to make the mistake
of identifying one with you yet so we
want to argue primarily the zombies
we're working in this domain right
okay we're not talking about science
interestingly and that's why Jonathan
has oh he calls his series the symbolic
world okay now interestingly this is a
bit of an aside but the it's it's so
important to contra distinguish sign and
symbol because I think erroneously
they're conflated and I would probably
make a side argument this is a whole
other discussion for another day that
part of an entire dimension of semiotic
switch is post-modernism or post
structuralism which is the semiotic
expression of post-modernism arguably I
think languages over this ah erroneous I
said I miss identity so is it is it
possible is it both conflation and
sometimes also equivocation I think so
okay that's interesting so if you can
get we can get locked into especially
when it comes to identity and
identification we're going to talk about
this I think when we talk about modal
confusion all right we can get locked
into relating to ourselves as signs
mm-hmm rather than as symbols we can get
locked into understanding ourselves as
fixed referential entities would you
think that profiles on social media do
right right right right to ourselves as
it assigns money to ourselves as fixed
semiotic entities that are fundamentally
objects in nature and so I think that a
lot of them a lot of the a lot of the
anguish that comes with
self-identification and a lot of what
post-modernism is responding to I think
responding with a misdiagnosed framing
is getting having identity improperly
bound up with something so this this
confusion the semiotic confusion right
is that it sounds like you're saying
it's bound up with modal confusion - I
think so okay that's interesting yeah I
mean I'm mapping this a little bit
crudely it's more texture than this but
this would be something like getting
locked in a having mode right and
getting opened up to an opening to a
being a being that's simplistic but
generally I think that map's okay okay
so if I can just proceed with one more
characteristic of the symbol writ large
right let's go to erase that
and this is something that you're going
to talk about when you get to talking
about relevance realization a little bit
more so I'm gonna gesture forward ever
so slightly to some of the theoretical
work that you're going to be talking
about right is that symbols symbols by
virtue of the fact that they exist
liminal II between states they have a
property that I'm going to call
translucency right what on earth could
this possibly mean excuse my terrible
terrible there's some sense of that the
viewers have because we've talked about
transparency opacity shifting exactly
okay exactly so and this is a way of
understanding what the function of the
symbol is to the phenomenology of how we
relate to ourselves into the world right
so that's perfect you've already talked
about transparency and opacity and I
talked about how mindfulness involves
transparency opacity shifting or any
things like that okay so we can scale
our identification at intervals along a
continuum right right be transparency
and opacity and what the symbol is it's
not something we look through it's not
something we look at we do both
simultaneously
right we are the in symbols right yes we
don't travel straight through them right
you read right because of that top-down
processing you read a paragraph you're
not reading the words you're reading
through the words completely right
that's how we treat language opacity
right your example with the glasses my
glasses right I can look through my
glasses with the symbol I would argue
we're actually doing both of the C so
we're looking at it but we're also
looking through it and by means of it to
something beyond it because of the way a
symbol represents a greater reality than
itself exactly so there's a tension
correct what you might call it opponent
tone all right there is a tone ass to
the translucency of a symbol now that
also Maps on to another concept I know
you've talked about you we'll talk about
more with relevance realization and
that's all right it down here trans
ductility
yes so we'll come back to with that it
basically is that right this is
something that binds together
subjectivity and objectivity and grounds
the relation between them I know that
was central until its idea of a symbol
so one of the things telic was causally
arguing about is that theological
symbols are terms that are meant to
right point to the grounding
relationship between subjectivity and
objectivity exactly I see okay good so
let's do a little bit more mapping then
William James among many other things
was one of the first many people have
talked about this the pragmatists
continues and so on but James was one of
the first people to talk about the
tension between the eye and the me yes
that the individual as a self-organizing
mechanism we are fundamentally this is
an insight that gave the GAR among many
other people had that we're
fundamentally relational yeah right and
that we subsist in a tension between the
walk between possibility and necessity
for one thing between the I mean I
talked about a little bit and being an
object that we can then be hold treat
address respond to it cetera well here
so let's talk about this for a sec
because I think that's important okay so
James Wright famously and what I will
come back to this when we talk about the
phenomenology of relevance realization
and things like that but how this that
the self has this relationship to it the
me is that aspect of the self that you
can render opaque it is what you can
become aware of so I can stand back and
reflect on myself and say John has these
properties etc etc that's me looking
well that's me looking at me but to peek
to speak more precisely and Dyckman
talks about this in his book the
observing self when he's talking about
mysticism there's always some aspect of
my processing that the eye that is
looking out to me so there's that's John
look at all of his characteristics but
what's not included in the me is the eye
that is doing the observing right the
observing self is never one with the
observe self but they're also not
distinct things there's a weird non
duality because
that there is some kind of identity
relationship between the me and the I
know you can say but you can step back
and look at that I yes I can I can step
back and look at it I can do a
transparency opacity shift I can become
aware of that but then that's not the I
that's now another me and the point is
you can't ever right see the eye the eye
is always that by which you're seeing
I'll use an analogy and it's also you
know hominem right I can't see my eyes I
can only see with my eyes
you can only always the eye is always
capable of observing the me but the eye
is never itself observed and there's
always some important aspect of who and
what you are that is not captured in
whatever
oppai opaque grasp you have on yourself
we'll come back to this later about how
this renders an aspect of who and what
you are mysterious then the important
point is logically ontological II in
that sense these are not identical but
of course they are bound together in
your sense of identity and that's what
makes you in inherently in tension as an
identity is that a fair representation
very fair more than fair yeah that's
perfect that's perfect and actually you
know remember how we were saying a
moment ago that what symbols do
fundamentally as they are they are
mechanisms of tuning yes there's this
great orchestral metaphor I'm going to
come back to in a minute because I think
it's very act and it's very telling and
it didn't it's it's beautifully
illustrative and it goes all the way
back to Plato right this orchestral
metaphor of harmony right harmonizing is
the Tigris Pythagoras that's right sorry
yes starts with the ferris and then
Plato picks it up
so the symbols have a tuning effect and
we become symbols as I said a few
minutes ago with our entire arendelle
our identity and tyre becomes the symbol
right such as our participatory
interaction with it that we become it
but it becomes a vessel through which we
identify as we've said so what the
symbol then does right between and I
would place the eye right here right I
and I'll place the me you are me right
here what the symbol does
is it triangulates right what the symbol
does is it has a collapsing effect right
these two these two valence iself these
two different expressions of that
relation are at opposite ends of the
telescope and one that what the symbol
does is it then collapses them in
together right it creates a kind of
non-duality an expression and a sense of
ones so the the symbol is a way of
making an identity relation between
things that are ultimately not logically
identical because that is fundamental to
selfhood and understanding selfhood is
fundamental to understand participatory
knowing okay good I got that excellent
right exactly so to use that orchestral
metaphor and it picks up a little bit on
the way it's play this sort of idea of
the part tights already talks about in
the Republic is that you know if and I'm
I'm not making a metaphysical argument
for the nature of the self or what it is
I'm just talking about a way of
understanding phenomenologically how we
experience it and how its expressed sure
though I'm doing I would do that both
but if we were to understand the
mechanism of the self and its
self-organizing property as being
comprised of instruments right imagine
the self as a kind of orchestral
expression and it's composed of
instruments and then the the the effect
of the symbol is to introduce a melody
to those instruments to actually
harmonize them right in wordly intra
psychically we might say in order to
harmonize them inter psychically extra
second so but the tenor of I mean for
Pythagoras that would have been the
tenor of the cosmos right so rusyn in
his book on bearing witness to epiphany
talks about the musicality of
intelligibility and something analogous
to this was how I talked about how we
become we become a temporal self
temporarily extend it selves by
internalizing narrative but also by
finding ourselves participating in a
narrative in the world and you get that
sort of identity across the
me through the narrative okay so
narrative melody the musicality of the
mumait 'king sense of things okay that's
good
so the point that we're taking about all
of this is right we have to think about
all of this functionality of this symbol
and we have to remember that when we're
talking about the zombie as a symbol
we're not talking about it as a sign
we're talking about it as this right
because we're trying to talk about how
it impacts people and our expresses the
the the participation in if that's the
right word or at least maybe the anti
participation in the meaning crisis
that's right
okay so let's start should we start
talking about some of the aspects of the
zombie yeah so the zombie so what we're
gonna do I think is we're going to talk
about some discrete symbols
mm-hm of the zombie right we said before
the zombie is a mythic pattern right
it's a complex of symbols it's not just
one symbol sure sure so what we'll do is
we'll go into a couple of the different
symbols and show how they're ultimately
they're feeding into they're feeding
into a relatively coherent and
consistent account of the symptomology
that we're then going to talk about
later right okay so the first symbol we
talked a little bit about this in the
book but part of what we're going to do
now is elaborate on that
right I mean we've done work since yeah
Chris and I have been doing some ongoing
work documenting picture right and so
we're gonna get into this so the first
symbol that we're going to talk about is
the symbol of the creature itself right
right not talking about the world now
I'm not talking about the narrative the
meta-narrative
right we're just talking about the
monster and what are these some of the a
spectral properties that's a term that
Jonathan emphasized in his discussion of
the zombie the way those zombies are
monster right right and exactly did you
get something very similar when we picks
up on the legacy of previous monsters
but subverts yes it's not the mummy but
the alien it's not the alien right it's
not the alien interloper yeah it's
something altogether different it
doesn't have you know we'll get there
so okay what's the
first rain that we want to talk about we
want to talk about how zombies don't
talk right now
I have to pause it for a second because
there are films so predominantly I think
about and I think you'll agree we're
taking our our feature list primarily
from cinematic representations of the
zombies and and and those in television
as well and some in certain canonical oh
yeah I would say canonical ones the ones
that do variations on this only take
precisely because the canonical ones are
in existence exactly and at which point
they're no longer zombie stories right
right you take a genre you subvert it
the point is that after you subvert a
genre it's no longer that genre anymore
so there are a lot of more recent films
that take the zombie and depart from it
but they depart from it very very
intentionally so what we're talking
about are the canonical depictions
beginning with Romero right and and a
lot of the branches that have reached
beyond right so zombies don't talk to
what does that mean they're they're
unintelligible right and that means they
lack what's fundamentally the chief
axial inheritance of our sense of
humaneness right our intelligibility our
logos right fundamentally zombies lack
they have they have no logos they have
no mechanism of Co hearing themselves
and do any sense of identity right
they're sort of the anti axial creature
the fact that they're sort of literally
falling apart also and really are there
like coherence not exactly exactly so
they don't talk and and they don't they
can't they can't engage in any discourse
right and especially in the axial
tradition discursively
that's our mechanism for self correction
right self reflection second-order
thinking all of the mechanisms that we
have to actually cohere and stabilize
and transmute mature as as I as an
identity as persons comes from this
capacity so zombies from the beginning
me like that right okay okay what's the
second one we want to talk about right
there perversion of good Moni tests or
culture both convinced relates to this
one right yeah well communica communitas
is the sense that sense of belonging to
and with other people right as something
you actively participated that's right
and it's not only the act of belonging
with and identifying with other people
but it's also actually being able to
interject and internalize oh right
wasn't able to create internalized
models of other people that actually
allow you and create the affordance for
growth and transformation and
fluctuation right all right so what
culture does it's not only a series of
linked minds problem-solving but you're
feeding in and feeding out and that's
actually allowing a an evolution of
wisdom and attunement all right so what
culture is doing is cultures growing
together it's not just a bunch of people
late no people have their theorists who
talked about the ratcheting up effective
culture exactly right the concerted
effect of culture is what's truly
lacking here right because they are
communal in some sense they travel in
packs and they have some nominal
interaction but they're not coordinated
in any sense and they or not they're not
producing out of it right so there are
shambling horde rather than a culture of
any kind
exactly okay what's the third one they
are untouchable so this is very
interesting right and there's a couple
of different ways to well this points to
me for me to you know the real loss of
the axial legacy because this is the
loss of the contact epistemology and
really powerful resemble ours right a
loss of a sense of realized right right
I mean we make all we talk about this in
the book a little bit we make all of our
assertions of truth and parity with some
kind of iteration of a judgment right
right you're talking about closeness in
terms of touch we talk about the grasp
ability of and ideating it's the ability
of an idea and the plausibility we use
being in touch with reality being in
touch with reality out of touch with
reality right being close to someone
having a hold on something right we use
permutations of a touch metaphor to talk
about to talk about intimacy and you
talk about our sense of realness and our
sense of comprehension of intelligible
I mean you I grasp something that
even comprehension comes from like comp
rendre to you to to grasp to hold yes so
the fact that the zombie is untouchable
is is actually exemplifying a loss of
all of that contact epistemology exactly
exactly
okay what's the third what's the fourth
one they're homeless right and so this
is something like the idea of Dom aside
yes yes and the dumb aside and also as a
decay of that agent during ecology right
they don't belong anywhere
right right all right so so they haven't
embedded themselves into a world they
don't belong to anything right they
aren't coherent with their environment
and so they're they they're Damas I
didn't because they they have no sense
of reciprocity with their environments
right they have no pneumatic exchange we
might say right there's no there's no
breathing and there's no respiring with
their environment so I mean the idea
here is that they're homeless but it's
it's such a depraved version of
homelessness that it's not like there's
any possibility of them ever returning
home that's right there and there and
that in that sense they're unlike the
other monsters in a lot of powerful ways
yeah I mean um other monsters actually
have very stylized homes right the
vampire rather has its you know it's
Kauffman and the weirdness has the lair
and you know they're most most monsters
actually are associated quite closely
with a particular environment and so
either and the alien et either wants to
go home or the alien is coming here and
trying to take our home from us right
but it's still a home orientation like
in one of the worlds or something that's
right that's right
homelessness I think also incidentally
is one of is one of the aspects of a
zombie that that is very very evocative
of nihilism right because we talked
about this understanding nihilism is in
part a disinterest in the world
mm-hmm right a lack of connectivity a
lack of involvement with the world right
a certain apathy and sense of
indifference of boredom right and so
there's something almost bored of course
zombies aren't aren't they can't take
enough of a perspective on anything too
be bored right that's a different issue
but if they could they would be bored
because they don't have any interest in
the environment all right all right okay
they're insatiable right
moreover what they do eat and these are
kind of two different things but we're
bundling them together they eat brains
yeah so what zombies are among other
things then this is part of how they
float and defy the sort of the axial
Paragon of the person in some sense that
is defined by by by Philae by the
discourse and intervals is that it's
their insatiability is a perversion of
arrows right the consume to come one but
they actually never become one they
never become one but they never become
one because they don't vet that their
air on their erotic instinct isn't
actually cultivated with the practice of
any other kind of love right finally is
the love that consent errs are us within
a community tasks within a communal
practice right that internalizes others
and actually sort of transmutes it right
and they got Lee of course the love of
creation fundamentally the love that
Christ symbolizes is is the is the
erotic instinct is the impregnation by
the erotic instinct leading to
parturition needing to burst Tillich has
this great metaphor actually what he's
talking about symbol he talks about how
the effect of the symbol impregnates are
I can't remember when he's he says one
of the if he said either says it
impregnates object it impregnates our
subjectivity with objectivity or vice
versa
right maybe both maybe both but the idea
is that this idea of pregnancy and birth
is really fundamental to understanding
how an erotic instinct is transmuted and
transformed into something the core
fundamental adopted right into creation
and and so they're zombies a perversion
of all of that because the zombie the
zombies erotic instinct has no no no
object in communitas right now so if
it's left it's left to sputter and
also isn't contributing to the zombies
own agency because it's actually not
constituting the zombie in some way like
the zombie eats and they're never
satisfied so it's also an open-ended
consumption very much like aspects of
some of the criticisms people have of
like a market economy in which we're so
beset by the of the having mode
that we just were uselessly and
endlessly consuming but we're never
satisfied right exactly and that's why
and that's why especially after Romero I
think most people will say if you talk
to the average person and say what does
the zombie mean they say oh it's
consumerism right that's are
irresponsible without realizing the
depth of the meaning of consumerism
right concern that's right it's ours
once that would be well yes it is but
that's this is part of schema that's
that has much more breadth than just
consumerism precisely in the way that
you framed it so it's eating brains
precisely because brains are that symbol
they're the source intelligibility and
ability to make meaning so it hungers
it's insatiable hunger for the ability
to make me the same thing happened and
what it's like a mind devouring mind
there's something I think that gestures
in some sense to to a form of our
perennial despair which always threatens
to not itself right right or something
there's something self-destructive about
the zombie and what the zombie expresses
so there's something sort of also I mean
and this is a cooker Guardian idea
there's something about our
self-consciousness that unknown that can
it can can can go that way
yes it's a perennial feature it's a
perennial possibility of the spirit yeah
constantly in we're constantly
despairing and we're constantly
entangled in this in this tension and
that's why you know that's why being
able to that's why the cultivation in
this case Christian spirituality agave
is so crucial because it takes that
erotic instinct and again it cultivates
and transmutes it impregnated and allows
it to become a vessel for creation in
this case the creation expressed by the
idea of God so that that essentially
undermines all of them all of that
machinery really okay
what's another ugly they're ugly yes by
definition in fact right now again more
recent in
senses of the zombie have tried to play
with that a little bit they know how
they're really cute cuddly they're not
right they're not and that actually
again differentiates them from a lot of
other creatures right because I mean
vampires are imbued with someone they're
flushed with sex appeal
well literally since the belle of egusi
right and then and of course in the
whole that dreadful Twilight series
right they became incredibly sexy just
to be a vampire and and then in it and
that saga was also doing the same thing
with the werewolf making that the
werewolf something sexy and interesting
right right whereas the zombie just does
not know that you don't want to again
use players words for symposium you
don't want to give birth to beauty with
the zombie yeah you know it it's it's
it's it's an image it's or tuck goes
along with the intimacy issue right yes
it's completely it's inimical to any
kind of substantial contact but it's
also it's also a way of representing the
zombies decadence in fact that the
structural functional organization is
breaking down right that's right that's
right and it's a disruption of our
cosmetic sensibilities right there's no
there's no coherent cosmos within the
zombie right cosmetic obviously deriving
from cosmos so fundamentally instance
it's the apse it's also the absence of
any kind of it's the absence of the
cosmic order right zombie right okay
keep going this is excellent oh this is
an interesting one this is one of my
favorites actually insofar as you can
have a favorite horrible things they're
not evil right so I think this is
fascinating
um because yeah we've talked about
there's a lot of lack of malevolence
is something that really really forts us
because it actually undermines our
purchased on the phenomenon and it
denies us the opportunity to arouse
ourselves in defiance it's really really
important to have that right it like the
the espousal of virtue has a lot to do
with the defiance of malevolence
um as represented certainly in our inner
great meta-narratives and as represented
I think also in our day to day life
right and so the zombie actually denies
the survivors of the situation whether
angling with the zombie the zombie
denies them that there isn't any sort of
moral superiority oh that says because
they write that the zombie wasn't evil
the zombie is not does not have
mal-intent the zombies even less than an
animal and some traits and so it's not
inspiring right that's not to kill it
zombie is not inspiring at all
perfunctory right there ya go
there's no just feel great there's no
there's no great there's no great
declaration of moral superiority right
there's no great stand there's just it's
it's so this is the opposite unlike
empty gesture killing a zombie it's
meaningless except in terms of that's
why you have to repeat it that's what
you have to keep repeating again and
again and again and again right so the
lack of that the absence of evil really
it undermines that no but it also does
something else I want to stop here
though it doesn't the absence of evil
point to the fact that we've lost that
yeah normative water and platonist right
because the evil there's no there's no
sort of metaphysical place for evil in
our cosmology no moral arbitration right
right so exactly that's I was just gonna
say the same thing that they also in
addition to sort of within narrative
sorting the resistant you know the
efforts of the survivors the absence of
evil is also representing the loss of a
fundamental need or any framework right
right okay that that we call the moral
compass right our our ability to map and
chart right normativity and the zombie
expresses the undermining of that that
the disorientation of that right and the
fact that they drift also points didn't
them not having a compass and things
like that exactly exactly
that's right and then another one I
would add let's check here and this is
actually not one that we talked about I
don't think in the book but the lilac
perspective right and this is what draws
the semiotic zombie into discourse with
the philosophical zombie right right
right so let me just introduce this
issue of the philosophical zombie and
it's telling that it was natural to
philosophers and cognitive scientists to
use the zombie as a way of talking about
this so one of the issues of course and
we're going to but we bumped up against
this we're going to bump up
again is the issue of consciousness and
one of the things that is problematic
about consciousness is why you have it
and what does it do for you because
first of all most of your processing can
be done unconsciously in fact most of
your processing is being done
unconsciously most of what's happening
so that I can speak to you is not any
process of which I am introspectively
aware my consciousness in no way
penetrates to tell me what's going on
such that I am being grammatical such
that I'm an articulating etc all these
things when I'm remembering something I
don't know what I do to remember I just
remember what other end so one of the
great difficulties is well what is
consciousness for now let me explain a
phenomena for you to try and extend the
possibility of how much you could be
unconscious and this is the phenomena of
blindsight by the way I recommend the
book by Peter Watts a science fiction
book on blind sight it's one of the
great science fiction novels dealing
with encountering aliens that actually
did not present possess consciousness
and what that might mean for us and how
truly alien that would make them so
here's the phenomena of blind sight the
person has blind sight you bring them
into a room and they are it's absolute
sincere and so phenomenologically
experientially they are blind they
cannot see and there's all kinds of
reasons for believing that they're being
absolute so they are not having what we
would call the experience of sight right
and and then what you could ask them to
do is you can you bring them into a room
and you say okay there's a there's a
bottle somewhere in this room point to
it and they'll get angry or they'll say
what are you doing you're being cruel
and you'd say just trust me
you know point to it and and they'll say
okay I just I guess a bottle they're an
8.0 ball there's even been experiments
where you can change the orientation of
the object and they can guess the
orientation it can be that quite precise
now here's the interesting possibility
right so what's going on here is you
have what we might call a lot of the
intelligence of sight the ability to you
know detect not experience I'm trying to
pull these apart but detect and pick up
and potentially interact with
objects in a very efficacious manner
without there being any experiential
component to it so is that does that
make sense blind sight okay so now let's
consider that we have a creature that
had not only blind sight but deaf
hearing and notice how that might strike
you as a contradiction but it's no more
of a contradiction than this right so
that their ears can do all kinds of
detecting of you know air disruption but
they have none of the experience of
hearing they have numb touch right so
there's none of the feeling of contact
but nevertheless all the mechanics on
all the intelligible interaction
interactions presumably now put these
two together pay attention to this
you've been driving down the highway for
the last fifteen minutes and you realize
I haven't been paying attention at all
right and in fact in some of the
literature people talk about this it
yeah and people talk about this as your
their inner zombie so do that they were
there was something in them that was
successfully driving but it was not the
part of them that was having the
conscious experience so take that
capacity to have this intelligent
interaction and then imagine that that
creature has blind sight deaf hearing
and numb touch so here's the thought
experiment right I get a creature that
acts as well as you do they can move
around the environment right and there's
a completely sophisticated fashion it
could drive a car down a highway right
it's doing all of this but it's doing it
completely through blind sight deaf
hearing and numb it is completely
lacking in consciousness it has no
conscious ability now whether or not
such a creature is philosophically
possible right that's that's part of the
dispute that's not at issue here I would
argue that ultimately I don't think it
is but that's that will come later all
we need for our purposes is this
creature that is completely lacking in
consciousness completely lacking in
triable knowing was without hesitation I
think without without any thought was
referred to by many philosophers
spontaneously as a a zombie and so and
then they would also often call it a
philosophical zombie because they wanted
to bring out this particular thought
experiment so the whole issue of
consciousness and are somewhat in
security our metaphysical insecurities
like what is consciousness what place
does it have right it's it's the locus
for so much of my identity and who I am
and meaning but how does it fit into the
scientific worldview all of that right
in security is wrapped up in the
possibility right that we might not need
consciousness at all and so the zombie
the philosophic that was called a
philosophical zombie again that zombie
idea points towards this insecurity this
kind of potential loss the threat were
feeling and the complete lack of
perspective and perspective of knowing
okay I think that that concludes the
features of this so all of this I'm
gonna just going to remind everyone of
this again all of this is one symbol
right this is all the symbol of the
creature right this is an aspectual
feature list of the similarly but the
thing about it is it's a symbol
precisely because it triggers things in
us we participate in as we all can feel
a potential homicide we can walk down
the streets of Toronto especially in
winter and there's a horde of people
around us and we are lacking in
communitas we are insecure about the
status of our consciousness we right we
feel that we might be immersed in a
having mode consumerist way of being we
worry about meaning hence the meaning
credits all of this is being activated
in us and that's why of course some
people in fact choose to participate in
this symbol they go on zombie walks and
enact being zombies they do they do and
and they identify it's interesting that
it's we took
we said before that it's it's this is a
symbol insofar as it has it it extends
to the function of symbol but it's a
negative function right because it what
the symbol the body of symbol if I can
refer to the semiotic vessel of a symbol
as a body
right but the body of the symbol does is
this actually delivers especially the
sacred symbols delivers the participant
beyond the body of the symbol itself
right it's part of a gesturing effect
but I'm sure that's the translucency
right it Usher's us through in forward
what the zombie simple symbol does
conversely the zombie symbols like an
ointment you get trapped in right it's
like a viscous film's body the zombie
but the zombie doesn't take you any
right so it's kind of an anti symbol in
that that's why it's an anti so it and
this is part of the decadence right it
actually is a symbol that is undermining
symbolization that's right it's the miss
the Miss attunement right right instead
of tuning us again Co hearing our sense
of identity to espouse that kind of
transgender function to involve us to
afford our participation in the world
and are in our accession to new states
of perspective what it does is it it
traps us it prevents us from doing just
that that's why it has that negative
function that's why we're associating it
with this now you know the expression of
going on a zombie walk are dressing up
as a zombie that and of itself is a very
interesting behavior and I think you and
I are under understand that phenomenon
to be a kind of mostly unconscious in
fact arguably it would have to be but
that's a different argument I'm mostly
unconscious expression of this crisis
yeah I think so at least what it does is
gives you a moment of instead of you
know nebulous disconnection you at least
have connection to the crisis yes yes
exactly
okay so we're talking about the
transitivity we're invoking the agent
arena relationship why don't we move to
that part so now the relationship
between the cinema right and and the the
the zombie symbol which were originally
was a separate symbol and the apocalypse
which is magnetized towards each other
right that's exactly right
um so the zombie apocalypse is an
interesting idea right that that has
been contorted or distorted rather over
time and now somehow it's in a
synonymous with calamity right which is
of course not the immunity the original
meaning the original meaning is
revelation it's something like an
insight like you the world was framed in
one way and it's gonna be restructured
and reveal a greater depth a better
reality which is a kind of just like so
again I'm just saying this is one way of
understanding I'm gonna I'm making this
disclaimer because I'm gonna invoke the
symbol of Christ again that this is just
one aspect of that symbol so I don't
mean to say this is a comprehensive
account but because one way of
understanding the symbol of Christ is as
a symbol for a part tuition as a symbol
for the the transmutation of eros into a
gabay the birth of the individual the
birth of the self into eternity you've
heard something like that right and the
zombie because it is because the zombie
is a resurrected corpse the zombie is a
resurrection without rebirth right so
it's a perversion of that whole thing
this but the same is also true of the
world itself so we're just as the zombie
perverts the red there resurrect the
rebirth of Christ the resurrection and
therefore the rebirth of the the rebirth
of the V of the integrity of the south
and tire it also does that it makes that
same contortion with the world right
because the world is a world is
resurrected after the apocalypse good
when we say apocalypse what we really
mean is post apocalyptic their zombie
world is post apocalyptic right the way
it's depicted especially in cinemas the
calamity has happened this is now that
the world looks like all right it's
post-apocalyptic the post-apocalyptic
world is a corpse just like the zombies
right because nothing has been disclosed
there's been nothing that's been
revealed that is gonna give a new basis
for meaning it's nothing like the new
heaven or the new earth at all right no
no it's just a it's it's a scarce it's a
scarce place well emptiness and scarcity
and fill the zombies and oh yeah scarce
except for the presence of constant yeah
constant horror but so the same the same
the same corruption that the zombie
mythos has administered to the symbol of
Christ as a symbol for the self which is
I to believe saying a symbol for the
process of symbolizing but for the
process of introjection Buhl's and using
them to scale and transmute and
reconfigure our identification right
current all of that is bound up with
that symbol really really powerfully
that's why it's I mean that's part of
why it is as deeply deeply part of the
fundamental growth still is all right
even in even arguably in something of an
afterglow right um but the zombie has
that same effect the zombie myth lesson
administers that same corruption right
the world
so what we see is these two symbols
right the symbol is being perverted
right into the zombie and then the
symbol of the apocalypse is being in
perverted and then these two now belong
together in the way in which the thing
approximating a cohabitation wait what
you don't really call have no right
there's the zombies homeless right right
right they just happen to be there so
they uh they're disconnected they're
unglued from one of them
yeah so they rep they represent there's
no exchange right there is no agent
arena relationship here but what there
is is there's a sort of you know
calamitous slamming together of them
right that's right that's right that's
why it's an anti ecology right right
there is nothing reciprocal in that
relation
they don't perspire keep coming back to
this idea of respiration which is
something that so be the pollution of
the atmosphere right so costano
invokes that a little bit Kierkegaard
way back and talked about the despair of
the self as being kind of
hyperventilation asphyxiating yep
sensation not being able to get a
purchase on the world is is analogized
by essentially not being able to believe
in the world and have the world grieve
you right right right right
so they so the apocalypse in the zombie
have found each other because it's the
the perversion of the rebirth of the
world and the perversion of the rebirth
of the south all right now and then
there's even another way in which this
is symbolizing the meaning crisis right
so of course the the that apocalypse
points to our disconnectedness from the
world but also the
being threat of the biological ecology
so you've got both the undermining of
what we might call the existential
ecology and the biological ecology and
they're they're sort of reinforcing each
other but also the whole thing this
whole package also symbolizes the
meaning crisis this point about the sort
of the meta-narrative yeah the
meta-narrative too because you know when
we it has to do with the way that the
viewer or the reader or whatever the the
person who's who's who's in whose party
to the story right from without the way
that they relate to the story so not
only the characters within the fictional
story but how we relate to how we relate
so the yeah so the idea here is right we
got like typically although we we have
this weird thing right and movies are
great for this idea of translucency I'm
identifying with the characters but
there's often dramatic irony I often
possess knowledge right well this is how
you deal with the vampire I know this is
common I know this is coming in and
nowhere to be yeah yes right so there's
a kind of self transcendence in the
dramatic irony yeah that's completely
locked in because because the situation
is an archetype we recognizable right we
don't look into it and instinctively
know it and recognize that's why we
can't interpose ourselves right right
right
we couldn't intervene in any kind of
productive way that's part of the
problem right and and where were we to
interpose results we wouldn't be able to
extract any wisdom from it either so
there's also no reciprocity between the
person that's party to the narrative
from without and the narrative itself
and because it's unrecognizable to us
and because it doesn't seem to tend in
any given direction right and that's
it's the directionality of the narrative
that creates the kind of meta meaningful
effect right right because we know how
the story is going on right oh it's
going to end right and we're so
preoccupied with that right now as a
culture the idea of the loss of the
meta-narrative is deeply deeply deeply
destabilizing right right sorry
and any zombie it's not even just I mean
this is one of about this I think in our
next discussion but this is one of the
things that Han talks about when he
talks about the atomization of time time
no longer leads into eternity no it just
buzzes just buzzes and so too does the
narrative up this on
just spiders - it doesn't conclude ok
well that's very good so I think that
gives the viewers a very good
understanding of some of the main
arguments and how they're ongoing and
developing that we pursued in the book
trying to show how much our culture is
expressing the meaning crisis
symbolically
and how how we could therefore use this
as a way of roof reflecting on how
people are fundamentally experiencing or
not experiencing perhaps and Mamina
crisis the way in which it's eating away
at the sense of identity the sense of
connections and and it's interesting
what what it what a very powerful symbol
it is for us so Chris I wanted to thank
you for coming and there was a very
excellent discussion very lively yeah
there's a lot of fun and and I think and
this dovetails with what I'd like to
talk about you knew next because this
mythology is often is obviously not
often well it's often as well but this
mythology is obviously a symbol symbol
yeah right but it's a symptom also it's
a it symbolizes right it's something
what I mean by symptom is it is a
something that is an effect that has
been caused by the emerging they mean so
the meaning crisis impacts on us and it
expresses itself right symbolically
right and that's evidence that's a
symptom of the meaning crisis itself so
what I'd like to talk with you next time
is about some of the symptom ology of
the meaning crisis what are the symptoms
are the meaning crisis how can we
organize them together and make sense of
it and I think when we have that
discussion they'll see only incidentally
well we'll see how they gesture back in
this direction to deserve right thank
you very much for your time and
attention
[Music]
you
you