[Music]
so close been quite a journey over the
last four years or so have you been
surprised at the success of Colette yes
and no I mean we've worked very hard to
get where we are today and so it's kind
of the situation where the public sees
the tip of the iceberg and the iceberg
is all of the hard work and the stress
and the problem-solving that has had to
go on behind the scenes and we were not
successful for a long time we were
plugging away doing our thing publishing
what we thought were great articles for
a long time before many people knew who
we were so it hasn't been an overnight
success if that makes sense it's been a
work in progress as you said it's not
been an overnight success what do you
think are the key things that have made
quill out the success that it is not
just the hard work you've done amazing
work behind the scenes but what do you
think is is a reflection of the culture
that has that has enabled Colette to
kind of have the resonance that it has I
suppose a few cultural events really
came to the fore one was James d'amours
sacking from Google that was our first
real breakthrough article because we
asked for scientists to comment on his
arguments and to comment on their
scientific validity and the for
scientists who we spoke to
all said that his arguments were quite
reasonable and within the bounds of
normal scientific discourse and when we
published that that was the only piece
out of all of the mainstream media
coverage of the issue which actually
looked at the science and took a
measured approach and so
popularity increased substantially after
that and then there's been a few other
cultural episodes that we've responded
to and and then there we've also just
benefited from a general Network effect
where we publish dissident academics so
academics whose field of work rubs
against the more mainstream narratives
either within their field or within the
general culture and so once we publish a
renegade academic his or her friends
will read that work and they'll think oh
I want to go and publish with them
because they're a friendly space for
people with dissenting views so we've
benefit benefited from that kind of
network effect I can remember the Google
memo and there was an article in the
Atlantic I think by Connor Frias Dorf
saying that he couldn't remember how so
many journalists had mischaracterized a
document that was freely available to so
many people yes and that's just one
example in and there are other examples
too for just think of a lot of the
mainstream coverage of Jordan Peterson a
lot of there's a lot of extreme rhetoric
you know he's such a nurse he's this and
that when all of his content is
available to anyone who has an internet
connection so I think what happens is
mainstream media present a caricature of
an individual or Ihnen or an event and
regular people in their own homes can
just connect to the internet look it up
themselves and make their own form their
own views and their own opinion and the
disconnect that they see between the raw
materials or the primary source and the
interpretation offered by the mainstream
media creates this cognitive dissonance
and that that dissonance is something
we've been it benefited from because we
view ourselves as being a media platform
that doesn't engage in these
flagrant misrepresentations and what do
you think is the nature of that
corruption of the mainstream media well
I think there's definitely more than one
variable at play but from my
observations a lot of journalists live
in a bubble in the United States so they
might be located in a couple of urban
centers maybe in New York or San
Francisco they have their social circles
are collapsed into their professional
circles they're all on Twitter so
they're immersed in this social
professional milieu where they're all
trying to impress each other and this
feedback loop just becomes very tight
and it's hard for reality to sort of
penetrate that bubble Qualis has now
been called the in-house magazine of the
intellectual dark web what does the
intellectual dark web as a concept mean
to you well it's a broad term but I
think it would apply to anyone who's
trying to understand the current moment
but is simultaneously questioning
dominant narratives that are most
frequently offered about the current
moment something that Colette has done
from its inception is question blank
slate narratives so blank slate
narratives about human nature so this is
the idea that we're born as blank slates
everything we do or every sociological
outcome is determined by culture and so
we we've challenged that narrative by
looking at things that like biology
evolutionary psychology economic factors
other than this cultural deterministic
model so if you look at something like
the gender pay gap through the cult
for deterministic model women earn less
than men because they're being
discriminated against but if you look at
it through a a model that takes into
account biology psychology and economics
you'll see that there are a range of
different variables and women are often
choosing other priorities in life they
might have different preferences for the
jobs that they undertake they might
prioritize intrinsic motivations over
extrinsic motivations such as money so
there are a range of other things going
on the story is much more complex than
simply one of discrimination so we've
we've tried to challenge this cultural
deterministic model that is very
dominant within mainstream media and
have you been surprised at all at the
way that quill ette has been framed in
some circles as kind of outriders for
the OLT right and stuff like that not
really I think the people who frame us
in that way generally don't read our
articles and that kind of simplistic
framing is just immediately refuted by
reading any of our most popular articles
that articles are sophisticated and
nuanced we don't present simple binary
arguments of the oppressor versus the
oppressed we're looking at things we're
trying to understand reality how it is
how it is we're not trying to just
present these black and white stories
that appeal to preschool children and
how would you describe your personal
politics well I consider myself to be a
centrist I think in the United States
I'd probably be on the left because I
support things like the minimum wage
universal health care I support a
welfare net but in Australia I'm
probably center-right but
we have a welfare net already and a lot
of that low-hanging fruit has already
been picked and so it's context-specific
the thing that puts me up against the
left is I reject identity politics and I
don't think identity politics is helpful
I am a critic of feminism mainstream
feminism I'm a critic of things like
critical race theory and postmodern
discourse and that kind of thing so that
that's what puts me up against the left
but on a lot of other issues I'm very
sympathetic with the leftist worldview
and what topics for Colette bring the
most kind of heat from critics I suppose
anything that we publish on explaining
gaps in society with so anything on race
would be one any any topic covering any
article topic covering race which is a
hot-button issue but then there are
surprising topics like parenting is a
controversial topic people have very
different views on parenting styles we
published an article on spanking which
was very controversial lots of people
arguing that spanking is child abuse
lots of people arguing that you know
it's reasonable in some situations so
it's it can be unpredictable what is the
most controversial topic you mentioned
race obviously Coleman Hughes has been
sort of one of your star colonists what
do you make of the reaction to his
articles well I think his critics don't
know what to do with him because he's
come out of nowhere he's very young he's
extremely talented and he presents his
arguments in a very reasonable and
measured manner and I think he's his
critics so far haven't been able to
deconstruct his arguments or dismantle
his arguments and they've attacked him
on criteria that is irrelevant such as
the fact that he's an undergraduate
student or that he hasn't cited their
favorite scholar in critical race theory
so but but he's he's received a lot of
positive attention as well as criticism
so that's that's good to see because I
guess there's a paradox of someone like
Coleman because he he has had a huge
amount of success with you can argue
that a lot of these perspectives are not
getting a lot of play in the mainstream
media but then someone like Coleman
Hughes comes along and he's immediately
swept up by an alternative network of
media organizations and there's a kind
of is there a paradox there that we can
say oh well these views are being shut
out but then someone like him has become
hugely successful at a very young age
for this perspective he's bringing
why do you think these perspectives are
necessarily being shut out but from my
point of view I see a lot of low-hanging
fruit so there's a lot of perspectives
that aren't being explored simply
because those who are populating a lot
of the elite media institutions aren't
covering them so I mean for example
there are only so many ways to analyze
sociological phenomenon through the lens
of race and gender and if someone comes
in and has a different analytical
framework then they're just offering
something fresh and interesting and the
problem that I see is that these elite
institutions are populated by people who
all think the same and who have been
educated at the same schools and there's
a lack of originality more than anything
has any of the criticism been personally
hurtful to me to you no I don't think so
no I would you say you're pretty
thick-skinned yeah I view criticism as a
positive thing I would be much more
concerned if our
wasn't receiving any criticism and I
know that you have quite a lot of your
audience based in the US yes as as do we
I mean we cover some similar topic some
rebel wisdom we've had people like Brett
Weinstein Eric Weinstein Jordan Pederson
on the channel and so it's very easy
well it's interesting because we're both
based outside the US but we're also
exposed to the u.s. conversation in
quite a major way how do you avoid I
mean I guess we're both aware of like
how toxic the conversation can become in
the US but with a sort of slight
distance to it as well do you think that
distance is really important to what
you're doing with qualit I think so and
and the distance allows one to have a
meta perspective so a bigger picture of
you I think one of the problems in the
u.s. at the moment is that people are
focusing on the the small partisan
issues that occur from day to day
there's a lot of noise and it's hard to
get the signal but if you step back and
take a bigger picture of you and you
look at the cultural trends rather than
the little events that are happening
every day you can see larger patterns
more important patterns and so on
Colette we I mean we do sometimes
respond to current events but we try to
take a bigger picture of you and I think
I think it's been successful because
there are a lot of people around the
world that that like that approach
and they're not interested in just the
the the partisan squabbles that are
happening day in and day out and how do
you cover these kind of topics without
getting dragged into sort of the culture
war of the u.s. well I think where we
are a part of the culture war in the US
but we're not part of the partisan
political war in terms of partisan
politics in the u.s. we are non part
even the intellectual dark web was was
framed as a space for conversation and
it seems that the nature of the
conversation in the in the u.s. is that
everything seems to become polarized
almost immediately so even this idea of
a space beyond the polarization then
becomes a polarizing thing in itself
even the attempt to carve out a space
beyond the culture war becomes part of
the culture war I think that's true but
what one has to understand about the
United States right now is because they
are a very polarized society there's not
a lot of trust and so it's difficult for
people to have conversations in good
faith people are on edge because they
feel like what they say might be
cherry-picked or misinterpreted and
people are searching for secret signs
that they're a secret supporter of Trump
or a secret white nationalist and so it
inhibits people a great deal I think the
benefit of being an outsider is that we
have less inhibition and from my point
of view being an Australian I still live
in a society that is not so polarized
it's a high trust Society so I know that
when I go and talk to friends they're
not trying to find me out as a secret
supporter of such-and-such cause I can
say what I genuinely think without being
afraid and I think if we bring bringing
that in lack of inhibition and that that
earnestness to conversation is
beneficial and even though people will
try to smear the IDW as you know
right-wing or whatever that doesn't mean
we can't have these good faced faith
discussions within it you were in
America for I think you
you appeared on the de Bourbon show and
a couple of other media media
appearances quite recently what really
struck you about the American
conversation while you were there or the
American culture while you were there
people get really emotional talking
about politics if any political topic
enters the conversation you can feel
people's blood pressure rising you can
get really emotional like either doesn't
matter which political persuasion they
are part of but I noticed that it this
there's such a heightened level of
feeling and I feel I feel sorry for my
American friends because I think it's
really difficult to have meaningful
conversations in those conditions yeah I
think my my perspective I guess there's
a similarity with between the UK and
Australia and some differences but there
does seem to be perhaps because we've
had the BBC for many years as a kind of
respected voice in the conversation and
media environment is very different from
the u.s. it just feels like there's a
there is more of a sense of a civil
space beyond the polarization in the UK
and maybe in Australia as well whereas
in the u.s. there doesn't they don't
seem to be any spaces for people to meet
that are not polar that are not
immediately seen as being on one side or
the other there's almost no middle
ground left I think that's true and I
think it's very unfortunate and in
Australia we have the ABC which is
sometimes considered to be extremely
left-wing but it really isn't it's
really quite a balanced organisation and
they do a pretty good job of presenting
diverse views and and so things are a
lot calmer and more relaxed here and and
we're very lucky to have so far escaped
the polarization that has
that is afflicting the United States and
something I've been very conscious of
since starting rebel wisdom especially
on YouTube where YouTube is is a very
different culture to probably many other
places on the internet there's
definitely a much more I'd say a more
right-wing bias probably on YouTube
generally yeah and is is the the
phenomenon of audience capture there's
this kind of idea out there that if
you're if you're self-reliant if you're
finding yourself through patreon or
through some other kind of crowdfunding
site then you're immune from the the
biases of the mainstream media but my
experience is that it can bring in
another form of bias because you learn
what your audience wants and a lot of
the time especially on YouTube what they
want is stuff that is attacking the left
or is is is anti the mainstream media
because they feel that the so many
perspectives are not being represented
in the mainstream media yeah how do you
feel that sense of or do you feel the
danger of audience capturing what you're
doing and if so what do you do about it
that's an important point I think one
thing that we've done at Collette is
focus on our guiding principles so we we
have a very clear mission to preserve
free thought so whatever kind of
authoritarian influence is imposing
itself on freethought we will try and
defend free thinkers and free thought
from that so if there's an authoritarian
if there's a thorough Aryan ideology and
universities for example we will push
back against that however if there's
some kind of authoritarian movement
coming from the right then we will push
back against that so we aren't oriented
ours
around protecting something quite
specific and easily definable and that
is free thought free thinkers people
wanting to explore empirical questions
without having their lives destroyed
people coming up with original ideas and
so that gives us the freedom and the
responsibility to be relatively
independent and we do I mean we are
aware of what our audience likes but we
also have to know our audience so our
audience will become bored if we present
the same arguments over and over again
so we need diversity we need a variety
and we seek that out as much as we can I
mean one of the big questions in this
space is where the boundaries are and
how where the gatekeeping comes in I
think Barry Weiss wrote the article for
the New York Times and that was her
conclusion was okay it's it's it's a
great or it's a positive thing to have a
space for heterodox opinions of the
intellectual dark web but how do you
where are the boundaries where and how
do you draw those boundaries yeah so on
Colette we draw a boundary around ideas
so we we generally have the view that
empirical question all empirical
questions or scientific questions are
legitimate however we don't publish
arguments that are not well-formed we
don't publish overly emotional
histrionic diatribes that are you know
written by people who are angry or upset
or just bitter so we try and filter out
a lot of the the the pieces written when
people are in a hot and motional state
and we look for the the arguments that
are constructed from people from people
having a cool level-headed point of view
that being said it's difficult it's a
difficult space to negotiate we also
have to have very strong spines I mean
people will attack us if we publish
heterodox opinions and arguments about
race for example or gender and we have
to we have to have strong spines and
just say look we are a space with free
thought that's our mission and we're
going to defend free thought that being
said we're not a free-for-all people
can't just write something because
they're upset or angry and send it in
we're not going to publish it we
meticulously curate the articles that we
publish and one of the criticism that
I've seen because that there I have seen
quite a few articles more and more and I
think you alluded to this earlier in the
interview when you said that when one
academic is published often other
academics will see that and then will
approach you but there has become there
are quite a lot of articles more
recently about people who've fallen foul
of who've been excluded because they
wouldn't go along with a certain group
think yeah is there a danger and I've
seen that framed as the Colet is just
publishing victims stories of of people
is there a danger of being stereotyped
as publishing many articles around the
same topic like that
well these articles that we've published
have been quite serious cases where
people have had their lives disrupted or
in some cases destroyed by social
justice mobs and we're not publishing
articles about someone experiencing a
micro aggression in their university
classroom and their day was ruined with
publishing articles written in the first
person by people who have lost their
jobs
who have been attacked and hounded on
and harassed and we do not feel the need
to apologize for that and I would turn
it around and ask progressives why this
these particular cases of injustice
worthy of public consumption well we
think they are and I that they're the
kept the stories that we've published
are important stories to tell and do you
have a sense I mean the big question I
guess at the moment especially with
America and this sort of its sense of
increasing polarization is whether the
center can hold do you have a sense of
whether the center can hold that's an
open question we'll see what happens in
the 2020 the lead-up to the 2020
elections I my view is that probably not
in the short term I think I don't see
how the current polarization I don't see
any signs that it's de-escalating and I
don't think it's just I don't you think
it's just Trump or just the Democrats I
think there's a lot going on involving
technology in social media that we don't
currently understand and we're all too
close to it at the moment to really to
really know what's going on and and the
future is is very unpredictable at this
point are you are you worried about it
yeah I am and I wouldn't be doing what
I'm doing with quill at if I weren't
worried about it from my perspective I
see the the reestablishing of a place
where genuine dialogue can take place as
an existential question for our culture
at the moment do you feel the same way
yeah
I'm aware that there are thousands of
people all over the world who feel like
they can't have open meaningful
conversations on lots of important
topics and I'm trying to create a haven
whether these kinds of discussions can
occur and I do believe although I am
pessimistic about the trajectory of
polarization particularly in the United
States
I am also I do have a lot of faith in
the human capacity to solve problems and
we've certainly faced larger problems as
the species before and have solved them
successfully so on the one hand I'm
pessimistic on the other hand I'm
optimistic that we can solve these
problems together why do you think that
the conversation is so much more toxic
in America compared to elsewhere in the
world well I mean it's it's really hard
to pinpoint one particular cause or
variable and there are a range of
different variables impacting the
situation and I think it's a very long
term it's a what's built it's it's built
up over a very long period but I can see
that they have a lower level of social
trust than other nations and they're the
clustering of educated professional
white-collar people into these urban
centers such as New York San Francisco
and other cities has meant that there
are generations of middle-class people
who have lost all contact with people
who live in rural areas or people who
work in work and working-class
blue-collar professions and I see a lot
of upper-middle class a sort of what you
would call elites in the urban centers
just having very
caricatured views of people living in
rural areas now don't think that's
something we have so much in Australia
we don't have this bubble effect where
everybody goes off and lives in urban
environments I mean we do have that is
happening more and more but I think it's
happened to a much greater degree in the
United States the best book I've read on
this topic is coming apart by charles
Murray and he charts this process as
having occurred you know from as early
as the 1960s where people have just
clustered into these like-minded
communities and they've lost contact
with each other and they have lost
understanding of each other and what's
next for Toilette are you are you
interested
I mean one thing we're trying to do is
to take the discussions that we're
having on the channel and try and take
them out into the real world and create
events for people to discuss these
topics is that something how do you take
the kind of conversations you're having
and take them out into the world well we
had our first collect social event in
Toronto in January and that was a very
fun event and very successful for
everybody who came and we'd love to do
more events like that in cities around
the world but we're so busy right now
trying to run the business and scale up
that it's just a matter of finding the
time but yeah I think I think it's it
would be really beneficial for everybody
if we can bring these online networks
into the face to face real world and
help people establish authentic and
meaningful connections with one another
because another thing that we're dealing
with at the moment is loneliness a lot
of people are quite lonely and they feel
left out of communities that they're
involved in either at work or in their
social life
and bringing like-minded people together
can is really can be really beneficial
on the individual level particularly for
people who who are lonely and I would
love to be able to bring that to cities
all around the world
and that's definitely something that we
will hope to do with quill ed into the
future
[Music]
you
[Music]