hello and thanks for tuning in
okay before I address the conversation
that you're about ready to watch a few
housekeeping things
the art of circling which is a year-long
trading that I the main thing that I do
for a living and my company does which
is the training in circling so if you
haven't heard of circling before some of
the ways of being that you see here on
the on channel and some of the the other
videos around like deep listening and
philosophical insight and ways of seeing
and seeing what isn't necessarily
immediately apparent but seeing the
background you know opening your heart
all the different flavours of things
that you've seen on the channel there's
there's actually a there's a there's a
skill in the capacity that that you can
train it to develop that machinery to be
able to deeply connect in that way with
other people on an emotional level on a
cognitive level on a bodily level a way
of responding a way of listening a way
of sovereignly speaking your mind while
staying deeply connected to the other
person and also really really being able
to I would say fully go on someone's
ride in such a way that you both are
more nourished through the interaction
in the dialogue
so anyways circling so the training
starts in about a week and a half so so
if you are interested and you haven't
contacted me do please do that like
right away my emails below and I also
have a slot open for coaching and
one-on-one work so if you're interested
in that email me as well the link for
information about the courses below and
this is the second part of the dialogue
the 3-way dialogue between John for
Vicki Johannes and myself
and if you haven't watched the first one
I would recommend that you could you do
that
but if you can also just start here and
launch off because you know the nature
of these dialogues especially the ones
with more than just two people you kind
of there it's interesting there's so
many levels of things being revealed and
at once almost I find them kind of a bit
fractal right if the whole thing is kind
of in every part and so there's many
many many layers that are being revealed
in the dialog in the way that we're
dialoguing that I want to encourage you
just to tune into so you can just jump
right into this one because it's not
very linear we we kind of follow the
flow of the conversation this one is
particularly looking at Heidegger
looking at Heidegger's notion of the age
of Technology and the history of the
understanding of being as the
forgetfulness of being in Heidegger
speak right and how that relates to
John's notion of the meaning crisis and
getting those two two talking together
and I think that really happened and so
much more so without further ado enjoy
it's all the hands it's like we've been
hiding assess ever binden to get over
instead of overcome instead of over we
were common so so tame technics and
framing must be forbidden that means you
don't go over it you go right in and
then you turn it from within because
it's not about getting rid of it it's
about understanding where it comes from
hiding who keep saying it does have an
origin we must find that origin because
if not them we're cut off and that means
we live in Amity in a meaningless world
it's quite vacuum
that's that just that notion of origin
right what I the picture I get from how
I hear that is it's like different than
source right source has kind of like a
from to right sense to it origin has
more of this it's somehow present right
now right it's like somehow present
underneath the origin of something I can
add the sense of where I can reveal the
scent the origin yeah of this sentence
or the origin of this moment there's a
quite there is this kind of quality to
it we carry that in the adjective
original yeah we mean it's a current
it's a property that something can
currently have that will point back to
his origin right so there's a there is
that sense in the adjective to say that
something's original is actually to talk
about how it is now people even though
you're presumably referring to something
in its past yeah I agree with you
original does carry that scent origin
does carry that sense with it yeah
origin is a is like this right in terms
of the hand it's the wellspring of
meaning yeah it's it's it's not the
source right we said that could give
rise to being a resource etc which then
could be sound like we're exploiting it
but no origin and this is what hiding
keeps coming back to when he says the
origin is not something two and a half
thousand years ago I'm not saying go
back to the Golden Age of the Greeks
know there is something of origin
waiting in these texts in these
testimonials of logos of knowledge of
ratio and of being itself of course that
there's still something to be found in
them right and and the other way of
dealing with philosophy so we've made
this distinction John you made a
situation between if you go Sofia of
course the love of wisdom and academic
philosophy now it was Afiya means okay
there's a sense of origin
there's something there there's
something there's something there when I
read these texts I come to these texts
not not to be right or to find the place
who was wrong but to be transformed by
this because there must be a reason why
Plato is Plato right and what I see in
academic philosophy now is something
else which is in my mind a bit cut off
from warranty because what we now see is
Spinoza a realist so is he more of an
idealist if he is an idealist is he a
Dogma etcetera whatever he is some kind
of isn't that that's no longer this
sense of an original access to this
because ultimately this isn't don't
matter what matters is something else
and that's this sense of getting back in
touch with what there is with meaning
let's just say it's I think it is I
think that that that connectedness with
what is that affords transformation is
what people are even talking about in
the psychological literature ultimately
about meaning yeah so two things come up
then to tie back to previous things like
that the discussion of the origin I
think resonates with the discussion we
were having about tradition and then
yeah and then I think I think of the
Enlightenment right and the
Enlightenment rejection of tradition as
an oppressive it's a gnostic attitude
right it's in the pejorative sense of
gnostic the rejection of tradition as an
oppressive structure right that is
keeping us you know from the promised
future or something like that and then I
think that is bound up with what we were
also discussing this truncation of
rationality down to basically monologic
inferential argumentation and losing the
connection with ratio and logos those
two things seem to be coming to meet
together at sort of a historical moment
in the Enlightenment
mmm-hmm and that's pertinent to me
because we have people obviously the
person that comes to mind is Steven
Pinker yeah basically saying
enlightenment now right the problem is
the doubling down right the the the idea
the problem is we were just we just not
accepting how really really wonderful
the Enlightenment is and and again to be
high daguerreian about this is to not
deny
seriously to not deny everything the
Enlightenment has given us right and I
you know science isn't is an important
thing I'm a scientist I value it you
know the increase in in healthcare that
is not a minor thing in human existence
etc so not and he puts up all of his
graphs and there's note there there's no
denying that well actually some of the
graphs I think are controversial but
there's no denying most of the graphs
but that's but there's a sense in which
the graphs for all the ways in which
they're graphic they missed the point
they missed the point in what the how
the Enlightenment again cut us off from
Rotti oh and cut us off from tradition
and in that significant deep way cut us
off from a cultural cognitive grammar
for falling in love with being yes yeah
it's yeah it's you know to make a high
to garyun point a full agreement the
trouble is and enlightenment forgets
darkness concealment and yes in the
horror right yes that part of the sacred
is the horror yeah if you're not open to
horror you're closed off to all and if
you're closed off to all you wonder
differs from curiosity in that wonderful
everything into question yeah
but yes and and on top of that you could
say horror comes back to haunt you yes
I'm different level and more fundamental
and then you no longer even capable of
dealing with it because you're not used
to it being there being part at the
heart of existence you could say what
why is death so so extremely outsourced
or the nine-hour epoch it's nobody spoke
about the the loneliness of the dying
that this is a tremendous societal
problem but death itself what is it for
the Greeks for the Greeks death is at
the heart is an irresolvable mystery or
problem at the heart of off of existence
but for us today it's according to
Harare just a technical problem waiting
to be solved
right and and I think maybe pink it
would be in agreement with her re here I
don't know but when I interview you
might know John Gray in is a British
philosopher and in one of his books I
think the soul of the marionette which
is a reference to hang me from Christ he
says that what he sees with this new
enlightenment movement by people like
Richard Dawkins and pink and others is
what's the world they want to live in do
they wants to live as in the machine
stops in a in a bunker somewhere looking
at graphs where they get new a news feed
every day how much better the world is
in terms of oh look it's all going
moving upwards but what's hidden in
these graphs is that even if we've got
all the best health care and people live
longer etc the intricacies to prop the
existential problems of being a human
beings don't go away they don't just
disappear they're still right you still
have to die you still face all the
horror but everyone else has faced and
and hopefully not as bad as some some
have had to go through but still this is
not it forgets darkness this
enlightenment movement but it it brings
back another kind of darkness right if
you keep staring at the Sun the Sun will
turn dark you will turn blind you can't
just be in sheer light all the time yes
yes I agree with that I think that was
very very well said yeah it strikes me
even if we move to the sort of popular
culture because I talked about this in
talk about how even in my class how in
fact even many of the movies we call
horror movies are not horror movies
they're just you know they're just
I call them startled and puncture movies
they're just movies that are designed to
give us more and more intense
experiences of our fear of predation
we're wired to be afraid of predators
because we you know are you know all of
the previously we would preyed on for
very long time so that deep in us so we
can push that button just like you can
push you know the glucose button and
people will gorge on sugar and they will
or John the fear of predation but
there's very few movies that actually
give you like there should be something
that's on the same scale lives just
should be an aspect of wonder in horror
like in wonder you call yourself and
your grip on reality right into question
and whorish be like where you and your
sense of self and your sense of your
grip on things it's called radically
into question now there are some I found
a few there are a couple of movies that
do do that they try to do horror but I
think it bespeaks the point we're
talking about that popular culture
actually also and this is such a high to
get in thing a it hides horror under the
mask of what it calls for it actually
prevents us from encountering more yeah
right and we can get this mask on front
of it which makes it basically a monster
to be killed like all you have to do is
actually if you can just face your
favorite predation and turn and face the
monster yeah there dr. Don right kind of
thing where there's no right horror
should should leave you with a mystery
that undermines your sense of you know
ultimate security that's part of what
horror should do for you a joke it
should be like it should having us in my
to my mind it should have aspects I
think it is just psychologically it's
not a continuum with awe and Wonder yes
so yeah there's something you said about
about like bringing in a contemporary
culture right I was like where is it and
this is one of the things I'm I think
I'm getting more of a sense of okay to
relate with to look for the place that
where we can genuinely find the horror
right is the senses which what's really
interesting is that and this is one of
the things about the this notion of like
detect the age of technology right is is
that for example when I go to actually I
was in Atlanta visiting my mom she lives
in Atlanta and we
went to this some this temple that they
had actually shipped over block-by-block
from India and was a it was a like a
like a Hindu temple like to the however
I went in there and the whole thing and
every single part of it was carved and
animated and told a story and I didn't
even know what the story was I couldn't
understand it but like you just it
communicated just this deep sense of
this ever and fractal in sense of yeah
recognition of being nothing everything
like did you get to the you get to the
senator thing you look up and there's
this like it goes into it's like you're
walking out you're just like present man
like vibrating it and then we walk back
out and I looked up and I looked across
the street and there's this like there's
this shopping center thang
and there's the people walking along and
like this awful there's a whole road
right with ya and I just I was so struck
and horrified but here's the thing
that's like here's the thing that seems
horrifying it's it's not it's not that
we live in places like that and that
they exist it's that and that they're
horrifying the horror is that
everybody's walking around and nobody is
saying this is horrible right so there's
very few people that are walking around
you're just in the flow of it but
they're as you as you look like at these
houses that are the same it's just a
little bit of difference like buildings
are built to look like something right
versus being something right yeah
there's a that's where I feel a
particular if the thing the thing that
is horrifying and fascinating and I'm
wondering if this is like an example of
starting to actually look at the
withdrawal right seeing the withdrawal
and being in relationship to it
is it seems like part of the withdrawal
is no one is noticing the withdrawal
right
isn't that what well yeah Nietzsche says
in the genealogy of morality and to all
these P also speaks at the holder of och
we so the shihoro of emptiness and he
says rather than not willing the will
wants nothing right so I just I'd rather
become a great destroyer yeah yeah Fromm
said that too right wait and when people
can't make anything they'd rather than
doing nothing they'd rather smash
everything down because at least at
least they've got the last vestiges of
their agency yeah so I wondering what
about what I just said there's a sense
in which people and I mean that was part
of the whole book that I wrote with
Chris said Philip
like a zombie the zombie is is the is
the being that is completely unaware of
the fact that it's a zombie that it
disconnected from the world from itself
from its trip the zombie is all of the
disconnections unaware of the
disconnections and it's a symbol but you
know Leo and Anderson I we've reviewed a
couple of movies on the week that are
going to come out in the mind immediacy
with Joker in which you see a shift from
the zombie to something were and it goes
to the point we just spoke about where
now of course the Joker exploiters here
by the way spoilers Joker's about the
meaning crisis I think that's very clear
because you know all of the tropes of
meaning you know his connection to his
past is undermined if the very story
that we're watching we lose any sense of
dramatic irony because we don't know
what's real and not in it right his name
is oxymoronic he's Arthur the great king
Fleck I mean is immediately a
meaningless piece of crap the Arthur
flack like you know come getting pounded
over the head and then we see him sort
of devolve into all he wants is whatever
kind of attention is left right that's
all right there's no meaning no value no
connectedness it's just it's just the
sheer it's even beyond like even beyond
sort of destructiveness it's just right
the you know that the last
narcissism is the last vestige of
attention
well at least you know things are people
are still paying attention to me and
then what was interesting about that is
you know the way the way again what
we're talking about instead of the
shuffling zombies at the shopping mall
you have the angry crowd in riot focused
on a figure that's not a leader in any
sense but who what who what what he's
doing is he's trying to make the
environment as absurd as his own
narcissism because that's the last bit
of conformity that's possible for him
that's the last bit of him having a
connection to reality available to him
right and so you I think and the fact
that that movie was so like popular and
got so much attention yes I people
aren't talking about it and so you're
right guy there's still zombies but I'm
afraid that we're actually moving
something beyond them not talking about
it I think we're moving to the
possibility that they might start acting
out from it not acting on it but you
know how we talk about somebody acting
out like when they're acting out like
when a child is acting out an issue that
it doesn't properly understand right
that that's why I'm trying to use that
phrase because that's what Joker is
right he's that he's the child man
that's acting out how the meaning crisis
is shifting from the zombie horde to
like the north the the the violent
absurdist narcissist I think that's
something you really really pay
attention to and for me that that
brought with it again kind of horror
that goes beyond so I'm not trying to
trump you or anything guy yeah yeah on
the horror of the zombie the horror of
the zombie is that bacon see right but
the horror of Joker is it it's a
different thing it's that this is now
twisting in a way that I think is
extremely dangerous extremely dangerous
if
if if it portends if it is I think if
the movie isn't just a movie it is a
myth of some kind it's emerging the fact
that it takes place around a mythic
character is also you know kind of kind
of something thought provoking I would
say this is I just want to make sure I
got what you're saying like that the
extra that the new loop around right
which is it's not just the vacancy right
eating a zombie it's that I act out of
being that that vacancy and my only the
thing you said about conformities the
last conformity that I have left last
way in which I can be identical to the
unfolding of being is if being is
private if the unfolding of being is
primarily absurdity right and especially
if that's how I'm participating in it
because a narcissists existence is one
of enacted embodied absurdity like if
then I've I can if I can you know if I
can make the absurdity out there as
comprehensive as possible than it then
at least I have that final last ditch
connect connection defense but this is
extremely important to think this
through further and and and it also make
as many people as possible aware because
I think what we're pushing against is is
is you can call it late modern
subjectivity hyper-modern subjectivity
exactly subjectivity collapsing into
itself and it's this it's it's becoming
paranoid you can see how it's losing its
grip on reality how it's losing its
sense of certainty that it was given by
descartes and others right absolute
sense of certainty is now collapsing and
all I'm left with is as you said is this
absurdity is being unfolding as absurd
and now all I can do to make sense of
anything or posit myself again is by
acts of sheer and outs of brutal
violence for example bring my horror
that I can't cope with because the world
isn't supposed to be horrible but
somehow it's completely absurd I bring
this horror into the world and I assert
my
outwit and give myself some certainty
before I ultimately collapse what I see
in all of the madness is subjectivity
pushing to its utmost limited I think
that was beautifully said I think that I
think that I think that developed my
point very well I I really like what you
just said I think that's I think that's
an that dimension you added is
insightful yeah it's interesting it's
kind of like there is this there was a
sense of that movie actually right as
everyone gathered along did it looked
very much like some of the some of the
the protests at Berkeley right like I
remember walking out one time I used to
live right across the street from
Berkeley like the main the main campus
and I we had a meeting and helicopters
were going and you're hearing noises and
there's riots and and it was just I
don't know it was like Ben Shapiro or
something speaking right and I walk
outside and there was literally the
hammer and sickle spray-painted on all
the buildings and it was this um it's
interesting because I'm thinking about
this sense of like it was like it was a
very moral stance like how could you
have this whatever whatever the
assertion was about that person but it
was like an can it was eerie walking out
in in the streets afterwards and yet it
was very tied to a morality weirdly
enough and I'm and I'm just I'm just
when we at the end of that movie when
everyone was like all right like told
them reality there's no I do anything
yeah and I mean and the thing is I mean
I don't want to get into the politics of
this yeah yeah totally
their it but but there is there is the
collapsing of morality to the assertion
of rules and propositions so morality in
those kinds of protests has been
divested from virtue it's been
disconnected from virtue in and
really really important ways that needs
to be talked about again I don't I I
don't want to claim that people within a
democracy shouldn't protest obviously
good etc I'm not I'm clearly not saying
that but what I'm talking about the
content in which the protest is
expressed not the fact or the goal of
the protest okay
so let's be clear about that now they
may act or the goal of protest when
talking about the content in which it
expressed and whether or not that
expression actually sits well with the
fact and the goals of protest I mean it
claims to be
it makes moral claims but when you when
you separate morality I think from
virtue especially the virtue the virtues
of wisdom and courage right and software
son then that your protestations
literally about justice are going to be
very hollow in an important sense that
we're talking about you know and then so
I see that as actually what you get sort
of before you get what you see in Joker
which is you're pointing to you get the
Prout the protest that is just protest
yeah it serves absolutely it's not even
it's not even it's even giving up the
pretense of virtue signaling or or
making moral assertions it's just
smashing and anger and let's just let's
make everything let's just let's just
break apart whatever structures are left
because structure itself intelligibility
itself has now become oppressive to us
yeah I agree with that I agree and I
think that's that's right
hmm now you see where we are we're in
the Hat we're in the depths of the
meeting crisis when the day is about the
meaning crisis yeah do you think as a
question on that that intelligibility
has become oppressive to us is that has
that anything to do with what I would
think of his paranoia of late modern
subjectivity I I think so III think that
we've lost and they're like well you
could correct me on this but I think
that this is something I sort of see in
Heidegger I see it also in bit consign
in a way that Intel
is supposed to be something that gets us
beyond our subjectivity that it's that
it is not just about what you get what
starts to emerge right in the 11th
century it's not just internal coherence
amongst my my propositions right it's
not just the coherence yeah you know
that intelligibility is supposed to do
give me AK it's supposed to get it's
supposed to give me some kind of access
beyond my subjectivity and I think when
you you lose that right when you when
you lose that sense of intelligibility
that way then of course our isn't it
going to go from being like a lens
through which you see if you'll allow me
this metaphor it it has it had some bad
connotations that I don't want but if it
goes I want to pick up on the double
sense of the word true right then
intelligibility is something I see
through like you know armed and by means
of if I if I lose the sense of seeing
through all I'm gonna get is seeing
looking at and then that's a wall yeah
right that's a wall right if I can't see
through in both senses of the word
through that I'm looking at that's a
wall and that all it is is just the
echoing of my own subjectivity it's just
the prison right it's just the prison I
think I think that is exactly what
you're pointing to with what you said
and I that that's how I that's why I
placed so much they can talk a lot about
the transparency opacity shifting of
attention and we have to remember that
and then we have to somehow work that
back into our understanding of
understanding yeah yeah standing yeah
because what I think is that just in
mind that what you just said is so we
look at someone like 50 all right for 50
50 says something along the lines of I
always recognize myself in nature he has
to say that because nature is just
fiction for him yeah you have ego and
Schelling could try to rescue nature a
bit but that had didn't really work out
and what I'm trying to say said what the
trajectory were on is it the self
certainty of the self asserting self
referential subject or ego has lost its
certainty with the death of God
it was importantly
and because God let's not forget God
it's a hypothesis that Laplace no longer
needs right
God is a hypothesis that Descartes needs
in order to guarantee that the world out
there is actually there
it says the ancients and make sure
they're actually all these people out
there they're not robots / psalm bees
but they're actually human beings God
makes sure of that but I can't really be
sure of that myself because all I know
is meaning me and once this certainty
disappears once the cows are Suey this
ungodly is non God like God just
evaporates into a never exploding non
cosmos and black holes what we're left
with is something subjectivity doesn't
know and can't make sense of so hence it
it's as you said stuck in a wall fucker
in itself and it reacts violently and I
keep saying it's because I don't want to
pin it down on anyone right now because
I think it is ultimately structural
historical yeah but but there is to me
at least it clearly are parts out of it
and they have to do with what we talked
about now is you could say you call it
tradition you could call it sources or
origin or wisdom sources of wisdom etc
those would be fight that those will be
different paths out of it into a
different way of as you put an
understanding of understanding that
takes us out of ourselves and into this
the non propositional commencing world
oh well said well said beautifully said
yes what did he just say here I just I
wanted something hit you there I want to
hear well I I got from that I think I
agree with the idea that you know
Descartes represents this pivot point in
which the conformity to the world is
withdrawn until the specious moment of
self-conscious conformity with itself
sort of pure subjectivity and what
Descartes needs is he needs he needs he
needs right something that gives him
egress something that gives him a
a way out of that and God is supposed to
do that and but this is the god of
certainty right this is not the God of
sacredness this is the god of certainty
and the problem is that God ultimately
it operates as johannes says and then
what we get is we get trapped within
this subjectivity and i think it's not
even that it becomes opaque i would
wanted to add that we it's collapsing
because if what you're trying to find is
the moment of certainty its vanish it's
like it's like almost like a singularity
you're vanishing and vanishing and
vanishing towards it and so the wall is
closing in and closing so rather than
paranoia you'll haunt us I would suggest
it might be something more like
existential claustrophobia that we're at
right that's what I heard
that's what I heard him saying yeah hey
something is something about like if I
just sit if I sit with all right so it's
like there's a sense of like
claustrophobia I am like I'm being
closed in right and the rages come out
like joke boobies like all of that so if
we bring in if we bring back in Nick
Nick atashi the guy is returning yeah
funny I just find myself going like okay
so what is so if that's how it's
happening this is what how things are
occurring for us right yeah yeah if we
look at it like I just thought about
this of like okay what would what would
he do right and there's a sense of where
I was like oh he would probably I just
had this sense of it would just go and
something you would think about and I
think this is one of the things that I
like kind of in a certain sense being
right sighs to what's actually happening
in being built being immortal and
realizing on some level that we are you
know until like ontological abeer it
being is that one thing that we can
never get clear on
Western Western late modern subjectivity
we're all fish Tian's as I'm gonna say
you know we're forever saying but I am I
I am I ich bin ich ich bin ich posing in
but that I know right even if
everything's absurd I can still assert
myself by bringing sheer horror and
absurdity to a hyper modern hellhole but
the other response would be I am mortal
I am nothing you begin with nothing I am
sheer withdrawal and all of a sudden Shh
he could go away that's the exercise
because if I am nothing it doesn't you
know it's not a self this line my
holistic self-denial and I yourself
annihilation I shouldn't be nothing of
the sort
no there isn't this core self perhaps
but there is a sense of nothingness but
in a different way that we think of it
in the West right and beginning from
this stance you open up again and this
wall that ron was describing this wall
disappears is no I I would yeah I'm
gonna say something that I think it's
definitely convergent with that you
mishit Ali would say as you move towards
the center of the self you're not moving
to the foundational certainty what you
do is you suddenly uncover the mystery
of the no thickness from which the self
is always emerging but never in some
sort of fixed and stabilized way and if
you can get and that the end of like you
know and I think I think James was
getting towards us too when he made the
distinction between the me and the I the
words aren't totally right but that's
what he was trying to get at he was
trying to get out when you move towards
the center you don't move to the fixed
foundation you actually move into the no
thingness you move into that aspect of
mystery that is it is act I don't like
this metaphor but it's at the center
right you and so nishitani would point
to the fact that if you follow it far
enough in you find that there's no
difference between moving in and moving
out that there you find a different kind
of conformity rather than the absurdity
absurdity there's a deep conformity to
between the know
thickness and the no thickness and then
that affords right that affords you
moving back into an agog a that's what I
see him basically articulating so that
if you can see the no thickness as that
which affords radical transfer aiming
rather than as the privation of
graspable securable actuality then you
can get out of you can get out of the
the claustrophobia that's what I see him
is saying it's because the West can only
if you'll allow me to use these two
words because the West can only
represent no thickness as nothingness
that it can't make that move and so all
it does is P right it gets to that point
it gets to that point yeah and then the
actuality we need actuality to come back
to that source so what do you mean by
that you're honest no but this is of the
self is the actual yes rather than the
potential or the possible sorry yeah yes
exactly
I'm sensei I'm just sensing into that
kind of figure ground shift of like
reversal yeah it's a fundamental figure
ground shift yes and it's not it's a
perspective a participatory thing it's
not an argumentative thing yeah yeah in
that equation it because argumentation
always works within a stabilized
perspective and an existential mode and
we're talking about a fundamental
reversal the argumentation can come
after and perhaps engage in explication
and elucidation but that the process
itself is not an argumentative process
right so it's like really like I'm
wondering about just the sense of so
when I kind of just feel into it like
one thing is like I I sign my taneous
League oh there's some kind of risk like
if the walls Kerr coming in there's like
a risk I in some way actually have to
I'd almost like let go of all of Western
metaphysics right like there's a there's
some kind of leap in there of uh of
rather than pushing away but actually
whatever the experience is I keep
getting the sense of keep watching it
not like I getting the sense of
meditation in that sense of the word of
some kind of vulnerability to be with
the horror and everything that we're
talking about I'm just sensing a certain
kind of like a response is a certain
kind of vulnerability there is I mean I
mean within my own practice you get to
this place where you step into sort of
because you can't grasp it you can only
be it you can you can feel I'll use
youngness as language because it's
perfectly appropriate actually for the
phenomenology you feel the perpetual
withdrawal the meditation right the
perpetual withdrawal you you suddenly
it's like the back falls out from behind
you that's why I like Jewish yes because
in meditation you're stepping back and
you're stepping back and you're looking
at and you're looking at and then all of
a sudden the what you're stepping back
into it like and you get the sense of
like that that's why I like that noise
that you get that sense of you know of
withdrawal which is not the sense of a
thing it's not even the sense of a
presence it's that I I have no other
word for it it's just the
phenomenological experience of the sense
of withdrawal and that can be initially
really really as you can imagine
horrifying to people it can be very
horrified right yeah especially having
got you know having had facilitated
experiences of that horror that sense of
like everything slipping away very thing
that you just it's almost like the last
bit of concern or care is glittering
that and then at some point because then
you're everywhere there's a sense of
like that was a that's been my
experiences with those places where I've
done a Delic or I've had an experience
where it's like
Oh like the ground starts to slip right
and then I can't grip onto anything in
that sense of and then there's a kind of
like a some kind of threshold of where
it feels like a death of some kind right
in a dissolving and then this
recognition that the whole time the
thing I'm expanding into was present the
whole time right somehow like and I just
there was some way I was standing in
relationship to it or identified it had
it show itself as that which was
horrifying just that that kind of
process yeah I agree
that's it sounds very similar to what
I'm describing nishitani that's what I
mean I mean obviously there's
argumentation and religion and
nothingness but religion and nothing
this should not be read separate from a
deep kind of meditative contemplative
practice just like you shouldn't read
the teletype Shen if you're not doing a
Chi Chuan
you hear you're just deeply not getting
it in in a really important sense yeah
that's interesting
because I'm interested in which people
have these kinds of experiences because
sometimes um the phenomenology is one of
like almost like like I said this whoosh
and then the other is it's it's it's oh
my gosh it's like it's all it's it's not
directional you know sometimes the
withdrawal feels that way but sometimes
it feels more like everything is almost
holographically everything is opening up
hmm almost like sort of you know that
helpful the tiniest describes the one
you know all the forms are reflecting
and interpenetrating each other but the
one is what allows for all the opening
up and interpenetration that is not
actually in any one of the forms you can
fake that get that to that that that has
actually become more common for me than
just just the withdrawal
right right yeah that sounds very
familiar - yeah totally
so the point I'm get back to it the
point nishitani is making of course is
of course again you don't stop doing the
argumentation I'm gonna keep saying that
do you create religion and nothingness
but you also do these perspectival
participatory transformations and then
there is some kind of allow me this
metaphor this there's a deal logos
between them that and and the response
is in that dialogo so it's not in the
text it's not just in the meditative
practice but in the yeah Oh change it
exactly like I started I started
meditating I went to a good posture in a
retreat
right and then I think a few months
after that is when I started reading
being in time mmm and it I remember that
it after reading being time and
meditating couple hours a day back and
forth that it it changed my meditation
right yeah it was a kind of a sense in
which you know like the reverse was also
the case I respected the meditation
afforded you seeing things in being in
time that you wouldn't have otherwise
seen that's what it we've circled back
around again about trying to get to the
place of the philosopher rather than
just gather their propositions and
there's yeah there's all these and this
is a law this was a lot for a long time
in the Neoplatonic tradition that around
the text was a whole ecology of
practices and the text or the desk and
the practices were always in dialogue
with each other yeah and this is what
Hado brought out so beautifully I think
this was one of had those great points
yeah not to make this too biographical
about anyone but Heidegger had circles
of students that he invited over for
long extended sessions of simply
thinking and sometimes they would
collapse and sometimes they they
wouldn't sometimes they were successful
and
and yeah as you know he worked with my
dad boss from the 50s to the late 60s
who was a Swiss psychiatrist mmm in what
was now published as the sole econ
seminars and there are still people
practicing designs analysis or
existential therapy that came out of
that so highly worked with psychiatrists
for a decade or more until he couldn't
anymore longer and that was his way of
off of you know and he provoked them but
because they were totally within a
Cartesian framework they were very often
out rich but what he said then you can't
begin with the ego you have to begin
here you have Madonna's I mean thousand
is out in the world and it's being with
others etc um but he but he never shied
away from that he it was it was about
bringing it into practice it wouldn't
have been him to do it it would would
need someone else to do it that was not
his role and he was aware of this
because for him this was antic this was
something that others would have to do
and but he provided the until ontology
for that right his thinking and yes it
needs practice and I see with students
to I bet that it actually it it you know
they come to university and they're
quite enthusiastic and after a couple of
years they sound like everybody else
and rather than still having because of
what I always do it first seminar
first-year students engineering
philosophy why are you here that's my
first question
sometimes again it is this relevant for
the exam and some time but and sometimes
I get my mug everything I say will be on
them and I bring it I keep bringing it
back remember back the first lecture why
did you come here because usually people
are drawn to philosophy for a specific
reason they're looking for something um
what is it that they're looking for well
usually they're looking for meaning why
are they looking for meaning and why is
it that I mean first of all why is it
that perhaps like
McClosky doesn't really do this or
doesn't acknowledge it but but second of
all what is it that can be done should
be done must be done in terms of
providing again a space for these
exercises practices etc yeah I agree I
think I mentioned this to you last time
yeah my discussion that I mean guy also
knows this you know there are emerging
communities of practice that are trying
to create set ecologies of practices but
what I often find is that that's missing
from them is is philosophy a-- so
there's a lot of the other stuff around
a lot of the things that we're talking
but there's mindfulness practices and
movement practices and authentic
discourse practices and narrative
practices and all of this and don't get
me wrong I think this is great and I and
I actively work to support and
facilitate this but what I often find
missing is the philosophy right and
what's it what's what's uh what's
interesting about that right he's like
I'm wondering about like but did you
correct me if I'm wrong but the the
religion without religion religion
that's not a religion that's my like I
don't get the sense from it it's that
you're not looking to build a
non-religious Church or something found
a religion I will keep saying that and
I'm wondering about if the bring the
thing that unites all of these practices
the theory the philosophy awakening
because to me this is about like
philosophies about awakening the Wonder
Ray and having that sense of things and
I find with teaching people that there
is a sense where you have to awaken it
like in a oh yeah that's what I called
it awakening for the meeting crisis it's
it's because people aren't walking in
with
Ernest and in fact the idea word
philosophy they they will proactively
feel that that's like assaulting or
something to being her head or something
like that so one of the things I found
is it's like and I think I've gotten
better as a teacher over the years in
that sense of feeling the place where
you can have them see it yes and you can
see that moment where like they see
something they experienced something
that was right in front of them their
whole lives yeah and it never there's
all it never been questioned and it's a
question and you can see that awakening
categoría that's really what that's what
really what Socratic aporia is supposed
to do yeah yeah YouTube what you thought
you what was so familiar and so obvious
suddenly is now mysterious team in a
profound way I mean that's the whole
point of Socratic aporia I agree i I
mean that's that's why I and Johannes
picked up on it that's why I try to make
a distinction between philosophy which i
think is still important by the way but
and philosophy a-- which i think is is
something more that i'm not i'm not a
i'm neutral on whether or not everybody
needs to do philosophy but i think
everybody needs to practice and live
philosophy a-- in a profound way and so
I think those are because I guess I want
I want to pick up on that that point you
were making about you know you you can
bring people to that point where they
get well it's to use our metaphor you
get you get a crack in the wall yeah
opening right it's like the Leonard
Cohen line well you know there's a
there's a there's a there's a crack and
everything and that's how the light
shines through all right um really yeah
I think everybody because of what we're
in and where we are I think that's why
everybody ultimately needs philosophy ax
so well I deeply applaud and I really
and I put time and effort and talent
into these emerging
communities I think there is still right
we've got to get philosophy ax into them
in some way that's why this discussion
is very important by the way that's one
of the reasons I mean other than really
liking you guys and enjoying the
conversation what I mean in this
conversation is precisely because I want
I think it's trying to do that it's
trying to bring philosophy ax into this
attempt to get these Ecology's of
practices going right on this point of
philosophy ax perhaps also some other
point we'll have to carve out what that
is and what that means and you might
disagree with this totally both of you I
don't know but what are the dangers I
see in Hegel speaks of this I think in
the difference shift well he says it
would be absurd to call oneself up late
in this today and and what I think what
he means by this is that you you can't
just pick and choose no no you can't
just go back and say well I'm an heiress
I'm a new in New York still I'm an
Aristotelian i'ma Clayton is a mistake
I'm this and that as if from a
metaphysical supermarket because that's
very easy to do right I'm gonna be a bit
of a Buddhist over here I'm gonna but
what what does it mean that that we have
this this rich source or origin but also
this miss this burden of all of this
knowledge because it philosophy is also
extremely abstract and and and well it
also is a burden to have access to all
of that potential knowledge and the
question is so if we use the word
philosophy ax to some degree that's it
going back to the Greek word of course
that's the fear but how for me I think
it would be extremely important to not
be some isn't some part from this is
something uniquely off this ebook right
uniquely of this age that that speaks to
this age but then that takes of course
direction and an orientation from the
wisdom of what has been
but but doesn't sort of mix it up too
much
you see what I mean it's it's sort of
it's it's generating itself out of that
which has been but in such a way that
responds to us or to us specifically
today and how yeah I totally agree with
that that's why I don't know how to
articulate it I've been tracking I
talked about salvaging which is my way
of trying to like you know you're you're
sort of diving into the depths and and
bringing up what was valuable and then
trying to refurbish it and it's a poor
matter for me I need a better one yeah
but that's part of what I'm trying to
say when I say the religion that's not a
religion the reason why I think even for
even though I find Plato sacred and
Platonists is sacred for me to I you
know I'm not a neoplatonist in the sense
that I can't the the the axial age two
worlds mythos is not viable for me it's
just not viable of one so so well well I
want to respond to and I want to let the
I want to let the tradition flow into me
but exactly what you said yeah I want to
open to the I want exactly I think what
you're saying that's part of what I'm
trying to put my finger on with the
religion that's not a religion yes and
upon the sacredness but it yes for now
okay cuz no I get I think I understand
that name better because it reminded me
of Heidegger's unnamed gods yeah he
doesn't name them because he doesn't
want to give us oh look you should
believe in Susan Hera and no we can't go
back to Greek mythology that would be a
bit ridiculous so there unnamed for now
because this unfortunately or
fortunately who knows is an epoch where
gods have disappeared where the godly is
disappearing withdrawing but what we can
still say that there is a flickering
some lingering some some gloom of them
so there some something that's still
there that's still an echo of the divine
but we can't name it we shouldn't name
it because if because what I don't like
about isms is that they are already
there already ossified but it's already
I miss
ISM and that's it so this is what I this
is no but if we because Alma that's
almost against subjectivity is asserting
itself right I'm I'm this isn't and
therefore everything's fine and I have
to worry about it no that's not the age
we live and we live in the age of four
nothing makes sense to some degree but
this is the tide is already coming back
there is that it's like they have
Nietzsche speaks of the healthy own tone
right of the tone of the hell's in bird
which already here's the so it the
halcyon bird breeds during a to two
weeks off a couple of weeks when when
the ocean is still and and knows that
tempest will come again and it's it's
prepared for the horror terror that's
about to come but it's so it but it but
it doesn't sort of what I'm trying to
say is this this way of thinking from
the Sofia is a good name for it because
it's also quite open right but if we if
we stifle it with isms then we it's
almost like we what happen is you can
produce a consumer product right exactly
I mean and and so part of it I think is
actually a bi-directional critique which
it the one we're giving voice to now is
to try to try to try to resolve this
through nostalgia and that's yes that's
a deep mistake I think also trying to
resolve this through a utopia which has
a completed picture of the future is
also a deep state I think these things
are not the proper framing that we need
for what I'm calling philosophy a-- well
that that's the work and that needs to
be done right that's the what not sort
of framing all of filo sofia but
bringing while giving birth to
philosophia
yes it's more about exemplifying and
participating in it yeah again i'm good
i'm gonna be uh I will of course
theorize it because that's also
yes Robin my work step on it and then
but you know it's really interesting how
hard it is I mean I you know it's coming
sort of easy for us but it's hard to get
people because often if you say or you
know give up nostalgia they go oh yes I
get that utopia and you say or if you
say to people no no not utopia and they
go oh yes I get that nostalgia right and
it's oh no no the the grammar that's
generating both of those is what I'm
asking you to step beyond and then
that's when there's the glimmer of
horror in their eyes right that that's
the moment that requires deep respect of
the person you're talking to
deep sensitivity and a willingness to
linger and be patient with them and I
I'm sorry that came off as condescending
and I didn't mean it to be kind of thing
I meant it to be caring yeah I'm gonna
have to go soon guys we've been talking
for two hours and right I foresee that
we could talk for without any without
any difficulty this was extremely
fruitful I found this very helpful and
also deeply joyful to participate well
thank you very much over the both of you
well I'm hoping this this is the first
of many of these I would like it if I
could have the file of this because I'd
like to put them so I'm gonna upload the
discussion I had with your harness to my
voices with verve a key site that comes
up one Sundays at 1:00 and I would be
great if I had this as a follow-up oh
yeah I got sent it over to you that'd be
great
no let's let's let let's keep doing this
let's meet up again yeah yeah let's do
this again because I I found it
extremely valuable also we just want to
say that that from my experience of
doing these great and putting them up
and having people watch them if these
things in them
selves is awakening yes totally meeting
and there is just grinded like a hero
fights right fights participation it
does yeah something I just want to say
that like what the very thing that we're
talking about is actually like actually
the thing that the thing that we're
doing in some regard and just people
watch yeah yeah as I've heard people
talk about like it awakened something in
there yeah totally that's the logos it's
what we're both what we're X located and
exemplifying are in deep resonance with
each other and they're mutually
affording each other that's part of the
logos for sure for sure so we will talk
again soon I hope yes