okay or meaning we're starting to record
right all right now everything is I was
talking in um I think our roundtable on
Saturday how we hadn't had part two who
Shila wanted to so it to listen to part
two and I was like well I'm pretty sure
they will be made public because both
Ramon's and I are very big proponents of
transparency yeah watch.watch will say
I'm being absolutely horrific that
this'll be the one actually I actually
had that I did an interview with a guy
Londo and recorded the whole thing and I
realized halfway through I was being
completely incoherent I had a mishap
with my medicine and this thing like
just always I said could we just redo
that but yeah yeah I know it's nice to
be able to do those things I have the
I'm just like right my brain doesn't
work out the time if I have to do this
only when my brain works it's not gonna
work so if I'm coherent half the time
we're good and I'm hearing in my head
it's just like the filter of it coming
out through my mouth like I know that
wasn't clear like I know that didn't
explain the picture that's in my head
but it's the best I can anyway there's
just better times to do it like in the
mornings better for me - waking I'm
totally luck but having good movie like
honestly even though I'm groggy it's
better right now than it will be at like
4:00 p.m. it's after 8:00 cool with him
I was like six and seven II I'm actually
it's perfect it's just most other people
don't quite that early right so last
time I think was Monday I think it's a
week you we we talked about everything I
didn't watch it so I'm not gonna but I
remember that we ended with transparency
and how we were gonna get into that with
is it just left org I feel like I'm a
protocol a protocol dot love it's
actually the URL yeah all right and oh
just our love not org
I'm at even more to it protocol that
love I love it all right
that um I love the idea you only want to
invoke voluntary transparency
I have this like almost two tiered
system and I don't know whether it's my
own shadow or theirs but I'm okay with
my two tiered system of like organizing
information that's already out there for
governments and corporations the big
guys that I'm like it's already their
son organized capitalism in its current
incarnation which has never been a
perfect incarnation learning about
capitalism in school it's like consumers
have perfect knowledge and externalities
should be included it's like no
externalities are included if you can
get away with it and consumers
definitely don't have perfect knowledge
we have marketing which is millions of
dollars thrown at us
and so to know to truly know what is
Coke stand for what is their history
with with people and the environments
and then be able to actually have a
number and measure them so that when new
coke company starts you we start a new
one you can easily see that transparency
we invoke it on their behalf because I
think that especially for the big
multinationals there isn't enough people
like you and me who want to boycott the
bad ones that it doesn't work unless
it's truly like right you can't you like
very few people choose child labor
especially child slave labor over not if
they're aware of that there are things
that like just aren't controversial it's
just that our heads are in the sand and
anyway so that's a bit of why I think
that like a bokken transparency on
behalf of CEOs of companies like oh look
what you you worked here and here and
these are your buddies and you're giving
them a good way come on taxes isn't that
interesting and want to explain that a
little more it's different to me than
like Ramon's annoyed me and I'm gonna
put all of his information out there and
Doc's yeah right like there's a very big
difference between like public
information organized so that it's
usable and you're held accountable
versus the individual feeling safe to
offer their data for their and the
collective good which is a very big
difference and so what are your thoughts
on them transparency mainly for the big
other for like governments and CEOs and
corporations oh yeah well you're you're
safe from daxing if you inherently
started with vertical transparency
there's nobody there's nobody anybody
can Docs you
is already all out there and if so if
that's the norm we don't have that
problem anymore but uh yeah and that's
just it I mean it's gonna take a while
and and I think you might be alluding to
the point that you my recommendation is
that obviously you cannot enforce
transparency in a judgmental way or
you're in a judgmental like you're not
transparent enough and I am therefore
I'm better like it second you start
doing that you're backing the rival risk
behavior so it's like as interesting
paradox where it asked us have to be
implementing the completely voluntary
way we got into government coercion
around transparency that wouldn't feel
as good either
right like because if you have to be
punitive if if you end up having to be
punitive over lack of transparency it's
just yeah just creating a whole game
dynamic that and that is where I think
it is different between again the
individual and that if we have to coerce
their dad out of them or trick it out of
them it's not going to be as powerful as
if they automatically give it and the
only way to do that is have it be non
putative have it be an invitation have
it be something that they are gaining
something right away about their data
and having the transparency of the
transparency view be transparent like
it's the meta measuring yeah
how much transparency do you have or
your are you operating under is the meta
metric yeah for sure but yeah and it
can't be punitive absolutely and it's
just it should be more rewards in theory
at the end like if we have enough people
playing game be in this way and
embracing vulnerable transparency there
should be it's more of a reward in
theory the market will reward you this
free market concept where energy will
come your way people will come your way
customers and partners and and the right
ones to the really good customers the
really good partners the ones you really
want are the ones who are quote higher
conscious in the sense that that really
again is like for me I'd probably said
this on the last call but that's not
it's not some woowoo term that really is
literally consciousness is in my world
the ability for a being to understand
the patterns it's involved in and the
higher conscious beings can understand
greater complexity in those patterns
so literally we're talking about raising
consciousness is bringing awareness to
the higher complexity to the hidden
costs you wouldn't know where to already
be aware of so really what it's all
about at the end of the day so I think
you may have alluded to something like
that in our last conversation that's one
touch on I don't actually kind of follow
that that if you're doing things good
money and Health will find you because I
actually think the universe is here to
teach us exactly over here to learn and
if you're here to play game a which I'm
not who's here to play game a then you
don't even like that kind of makes it's
like the the positive washing of
spirituality like just be positive then
everything will work out and although
there's some truth there just because
you're at a higher consciousness doesn't
mean people are necessarily attracted to
you and sometimes a higher conscious
actually pushes people away exactly as
its supposed to
and so it's like to me it's like the
right things happen because game a
rewards sociopaths game a rewards like
the more money you have the more money
you're gonna be able to put in the more
health more nutrition the more
everything you get and so there's like a
real disparity that happens and then
people get success and they're like look
God told me I'm supposed to be the king
like I have this successor and then
they're the ones in turned with like
whoa I'm Bill Gates and I get to decide
what vaccines are okay and then who and
dole out the money and in my in my
supreme fashion which I'm just like as
somebody who's both poor yeah buddy
found me once I stopped pushing like
once I was like whatever I'm not gonna
make another business I'm just gonna be
poor money found me in weird ways once I
stopped so it's not that but it but like
it's like you can't look at it you have
to like look around it like there's a
big if I truly was like okay I'm gonna
fix my relationship with money that's
really hard cuz money is the part of the
problem
like how money's treated how it
circulates all of that and knowing that
I can't unknow it and so I don't want it
actually health I want I don't want
health and at the same time it gets me
my paycheck having a disability and so
I'm like subconsciously maybe I'm not
ready you did not have it when when
those things happen but at the same time
it's teaching me what I need to know and
what I need to be to do what I'm doing
and so there's that there's a sense of
being the universe giving the lesson in
exactly where I am and me being like
this isn't right I'm not rich and
healthy like it it's like right cuz
that's not the lesson today who said the
lesson was gonna be rich and healthy
right
that's easy mode on game mode that those
people signed up for they're here to do
different things they're here to learn
that's not where the is
you're here to learn from that we can
emerge together I'm not here to get
myself off of disabilities actually
don't think it's possible in our current
world I'm here to get the world off a
disability like everyone has a purpose
though and I think my health is
intimately tied to them were earth but
that's like so we haven't got to talk
about too often but it's like it's not
it's logically makes sense it's like I
said we're pumping into the into
the world and I'm a canary in the coal
mine until the coal mine gets better the
canary dies or you take it out you can't
take me out of the earth so I need to
make the earth better before I'm gonna
I'm gonna feel 100% I'm kind of okay if
that's not true
like if I heal the world without not
well I'm okay with that
if I get well on the way to healing the
world I'm okay with that too it's like
it's empowering to have the belief so
I'm gonna have the belief and that's
what most of my yeah full transparency
right there's a bunch of things to say I
wanted to maybe get to the essence
though is there you kind of reminds me
in one sense of the cover state or the
mistake that people making quoting the
Bible and they say money is the root of
all evil it's actually the love of money
is the root of all evil right and I
think that's a really really important
distinction because uh you know if
you're into the number side and you like
crunching numbers and doing economic
predictions and aligning things to make
the most efficient economic transactions
in there and doing all that you've
managed to make money you might just you
could say you love money you love doing
all those metrics and the metrics are
great ratings so protocol that love
definitely proposes we have lots of
metrics we have a lot more metrics and
we have now in fact so we give you more
into metrics with protocol not love and
in terms of mathematical recordings of
numbers and and meaningful things that
mean things to really impact the real
life is the object
so for anybody who wants to geek out and
that kind of stuff and really just you
know get off on the metrics that show
they're they're making the world a
better place by a large majority of the
impact currencies that's so that are
coming back protocol dot love proposes
in that currency is the means by lich
and the external you get your feedback
right so the external environment around
you can tell you how you're doing
essentially what impact are you having
good and bad and um because again it's
one of those things or the second if we
ever tried to have a central authority
that told us what is good and bad and
what metrics are good and bad and how
you will be rated now or china right
we're doing exactly what China is doing
right now having lots of metrics about
who you are and how you act in society
in order to judge you but it becomes
dystopian the second you have a central
authority that tells you what metrics
are important whereas it becomes
vulnerable traits vulnerable
transparency if you don't have a central
authority that's a line there so Jordan
Peterson talks a lot about Arum called
the Dunbar limit which is not true in
any way shape or for phone like the
square root of the people make fifty
percent of the impact right so if you
have ten people roughly skirt tested ten
of those people have do 50 percent of
the work and that this is why we need to
have our economic system be the way it
is that Joe Rogan has you know the vast
majority of podcast listens we're not
going to redistribute that that doesn't
make sense he just happens to be the
best of the best I don't think the two
things are in on alignment I think that
our current society definitely props up
people who are this that tiny fraction
of Kratos distribution and so it's all
and and so that in my mind the reward is
in and of itself that you're better at
it right back in the day when we were
all try and tribal and hunting and
gathering if you were if you were one if
you were that hunter right you're the
one who brings home 50 percent of meat
you're gonna have prestige you're gonna
have a little bit more meat at
dinnertime probably but you're not gonna
have 30 times the meat at dinner
you're gonna have a little x yeah and so
there's a big difference between like
doing what so as a business as a society
you want the best person at the job
right you want the best hunters but in
order to get the best hunters you
actually need the numbers the ten people
out of a hundred isn't the same quality
as the hundred people out of the
thousand in fact the ten people might
not even make it into the hundred right
so the the bigger the number the more
prestigious the smaller group and so you
wouldn't like it in a very well so the
more people you have trying hunting the
more likely you are to find that one
hunter and also it's like being the best
hunter is in and of itself the best
thing if you hate hunt see then you're
forced to be a hunter because you happen
to be good at it that's not good for
anyone but if you enjoy it its its own
reward and you're bringing you get to
know you're the best in your group right
and whatever that version is you make
the best symphonies and then there's
this other idea that now that we're not
in a tribe anymore you don't know what
other tribes are part of so you don't
know where I give my distribution you
don't know where I'm gonna be the square
root I don't know where I'm gonna be the
square root so I might show up and be
 at most of life but that wouldn't
place I'm going to some people might not
have that place so there's a difference
between getting the best hunter for the
group versus getting the person into
their best role and I'm wondering if
protocol dot love has dealt with that
difference that instead of just getting
the best people on the team and seeing
it whether they I know right now I'm
giving I would say a good 80% of what
I'm capable of doing 100 might kill me
so I might never get to 100 but I'm
doing a good 80% of what I can do
compared to the rest of the world
especially in the ways that I show up in
community I would say I'm average on my
good day right and so below average and
that's what it looks like but so I'm
doing my preto distribution it like
changing the world but they don't know
that right even if they even if I tell
them that they don't believe that so
they don't you know what I mean like
there's my role that I feel good that
I'm doing the best that I can but I'm
never gonna show in any kind of metric
I'm probably gonna be some part I'm
probably gonna be it looks
like I'm giving less until I give my
mouth right until I'm 80 and like who
knows what time your your purpose shows
of that and you're here to give your all
of it like if that made sense the
difference seem like getting the
individual their highest contribution so
they feel the best about themselves
versus getting the team the group the
best act and those are both important
but all of society's focused like great
we want the top lawyers coming to law
school so we can hire them instead of
wait how do we make sure all the lawyers
come out of law school can practice law
that they went to school for and it's
what's best for them right and best for
us if they wanna be yeah yeah Lots there
again so I talked about ACOG II I think
that's how you say it it's a Chinese or
Japanese picture of it on my on my
desktop yeah so that's definitely the
goal it's which what you're good at what
you love doing what the world needs and
then the fourth one is interesting when
we talk about a game be version in a
game a version of it I think acog e even
changes with game game B so in game a
the fourth the fourth parameter is you
can get paid to do it yeah that's well
wait a minute that's kind of frozen rent
to do it that's a little awkward when
you really gain be set but I think what
that is it's it's it's a temporal thing
there's only so much energy that you
know like investment and payback in an
economic system so as you invest your
energy it needs to return to the
community and create the benefit within
some short period of window reasonably
short period of window so that people
your written your that you can actually
have a feedback loop that works if your
feedback loop it takes you 50 years to
provide anything right and it would get
to see the benefit till you after you're
dead it looks like you actually just
were a drain on society for your whole
life and there's gonna be some pressure
around not for people not do that right
so I think that's where something you
can get paid to do the fourth thing of
Akagi is relevant it means what you're
good what other people find value in it
right and that's short enough for us to
see the value in what it's doing
to continue to iterate good value out of
it right and if they're cool along in
the period you say no I swear I'm
working on changes I got the thing
that's gonna change the world but it's
the only thing you work on for your
whole life and it's your only
contribution to society and you got
there again you'd you're dead before we
ever see the returns not likely you'll
be supported by your tribe by your
community yeah especially if it does
need to support you right if it's 150
people and you're like no this art is
gonna change they're like we don't like
the art though you're like the world and
you're not feeding anyone and you're not
you know raising you're not doing
nothing else except your art then yeah I
think everyone should have a probably
have a problem with that like take some
time out to grow some food you know like
look out for the community and although
I know I show up in my community less
than other people I absolutely still put
in the contribution I still cook and
clean every you know for the meals and I
still because I felt bad when someone
did they were like you're a freeloader
and here I was like and the piece of it
that was like it was not true but there
was a sliver of truth and so I felt bad
and I was like okay what can I do and so
now when there's not a pandemic and I'm
actually able to go there I clean the
yoga studio every two weeks because it's
something I can do that's within my
capacity it needs to get done and I feel
good about it now anyone can say i'ma
for you and I'm like I'm good I can
tribute more of the most of the not most
I know I'm not in the top I'm not enough
course square root but I contribute
average and for me that's freaking good
so I'm like I'm good I don't care if the
rest of the world doesn't see it I'm
good and so it's not you just have to
have some amount of show up I mean in
the little communities right you can't
never show up and cook them you'll be
like but I'm so important you should be
cooking for me and so there's a balance
between brightly you need to get your
good the work that you live off in
society right the the goods the services
if you're getting those you need to be
contributing in some way that they're
benefiting from or people that they're
benefiting are benefiting from right
like it has to be part of something like
an economy and so in that world if
you're not an engineer if you're not a
doctor if you're not suddenly you can
totally see your value in society to
your essential and therefore your time
would be better spent doing that than
would be cooking or cleaning your
cooking and cleaning with the rest of us
right like no one's taking over your
role here unless you're like you're a
brain surgeon thank you go do brain
surgery
I'm good welcome lady for you I'd rather
whatever time you're able to do work
you're doing the work that you're here
to do if you want to be doing everything
the world wants you to be doing it
that's where we want you to be ready if
we can't see that clearly then yeah
you're in the field working but like ten
hours a week right like not and everyone
is it's not a disparaging thing it's not
like you're not a good enough artist
it's like unless you're Beyonce and you
have so many people who are like I'm
willing to put in five minutes instead
of you doing that so you can be Beyonce
because I don't like Beyonce but
Beyonce's fans like she has enough fans
never support her but I probably
wouldn't be one of those fans I don't
admire be enough contribution that I
would feed her right I think the tension
comes in in this example you're giving
is when the doctor is in med school or
grad school and all the things and yet
they become a doctor that's the tension
I'm like okay so you're okay so
eventually you're gonna be good at
something you're eventually gonna
contribute right now you're really a
drain while we support your education
like the actual metrics are saying you
you you aren't actually doing your part
because we haven't seen the feedback we
haven't seen the return we haven't seen
it come the close of the first loop when
you can provide something in society and
you get your feedback ratings on what
you've provided until we actually close
that loop for the first time you're
potentially just a drain and that's the
tension we get to look at and so I think
that's what it but it cog II when it
speaks to something you can get paid for
it's about that close that loop close
that first loop of your contribution get
the feedback from community in your
tribe and your global economy and see if
the yes the world does in fact want what
you're doing it isn't something the
world wants and needs and that's it
that's a tricky part for sure and just
allowing the an ecosystem that brings
transparency to all that as well I mean
food so your and your what is it six or
eighth year of you know post high school
education to become a doctor you know
the pressures on they decide to start
contributing to society that I think
that element is important for that to be
there
there's a feedback loop which i think is
part of like let's say you are in
medical school you're in your seventh
year and you're like turns out I don't
like blood this is maybe not the reason
that you're they put in all of that time
and now you feel like you have to
continue or your societies like you have
to continue even though you're never
gonna be the greatest doctor and that's
where outside incentives like we're
going to pay for you to go through med
school and you're gonna be on our dole
whatever that means right that first why
does med school need to look like that
in game B why aren't we all taking like
if I want to take med school I should be
able to take med school regardless of
whether or not I'm gonna be a doctor and
so out of the people who take that and
it shouldn't be 88 years of full-time
work it should be something that's
constant lifelong that there is a test
there is something that says you're good
enough that you could you know that
right no body will say that you can be
here but if it's not like why can't they
be working in the field 10 hours of
equal they're going to med school then
it's not you know what I mean like we're
not investing and you see you might be
our doctor one day we're investing
because you're a worthy human being that
you choosing to spend some of your time
going to med school and if we get
medicine out of you great if not maybe
you're an engineer who also know some
medicine maybe you're a parent who also
knows medicine and that's great and
that's for like the individual if you're
following in the akaki I actually I'm
like the paid one because I like
what you're saying right as soon as you
get paid for it it changes the incentive
because like what if my highest calling
is aren't that like a fraction of the
population likes I shouldn't get paid to
do that because there's a fraction of
the population and they're not gonna pay
me to do it but I think I'm choosing to
spend my time doing that there's still
value somewhere and but I still have to
contribute to the everyday system like I
still I can't pull myself out and say
I'm important very few people or
important enough to pull themselves out
in fact society basically needs to pull
you out be like golden brain surgery do
you like having your hands in the dirt
stay here otherwise go to brain surgery
that is what you're you know that is
what yeah so they think one of the
perverse incentives that ends up showing
up in game a in the example of like
medical school as I think subtly in
there is you will you will almost
certainly have to burn that midnight oil
stay at like push yourself way beyond
your personal uses there's no way that
you cannot become somewhat like internal
and have to shut down personal
relationships for certain periods of I
think I'm sure like so in other words
are you capable of being sociopathic
while you are learning all these skills
and like I like and I don't know I don't
know if that's the right word I well I
tend to say it - I've heard Daniels
rotten burger use it and so I'm rolling
with it but you know the again the
object is not to Platt the you know cast
judgment right on anybody who's but but
but there is something in there can you
disconnect from your relationships long
enough can you show that your
intellectual capacity in your learning
capacity is such that you're willing to
shut off relationships in your life and
pull away from perhaps things are that
feel good and then are important in
order to prove that you are committed to
your intellectual brain work to
contribute in this way this is this
little subtle tasks I think that are
throughout game a that test your
willingness to disconnect from
relationships and do your job these
subtle tests and then you know so yeah
that's built in a realist triangle yeah
can you disconnect from food and sleep
and still be cognitive enough to
function and the truth is no nobody can
you're not gonna be at your peak but
there's times you aren't gonna be at
your peak and you need to be able to
work in that state but why we need to
train them in it like you need to work a
48 hour day before you rest so that you
know you could work 48 hour day unless
there's a new pens like why is anyone
working a 48 hour day I don't want to
talk during the 48 hour I don't like
abuse themselves in that way yeah good
thing and would that would ever think
that was good did that right then you
have an entire medical system full of
people I have I went to not medical
school but I went to undergrad in
science so I went to school with a lot
of doctors none of which I would choose
to send my kids
like none of which I would trust to
actually come up with solutions but they
made it through med school because once
you're in you're in and you pretty much
funneled through unless you do something
absolutely horrific at the same time as
someone who has had to see many a doctor
there is I really wish there were more
with chronic illness and mental illness
because they have no compassion they're
like well I made for med school with
Cole that one time it's like yeah you
don't have a mental illness you don't
have a physical illness you don't show
up with physical like no one has chronic
very few people have chronic pain and if
they do have chronic pain I made it
through med school and they're probably
even more typing but like that you have
to be at your peak before you make it
through and then you're guaranteed to
make it for you just don't have empathy
for other people and it's like just
drink coffee if you're tired I don't
think the dynamic yeah it's called the
type-a yeah that's great it doesn't have
to be a judgment it doesn't it we don't
have to use words like it's sociopathic
yeah this type a you're type a you're
somebody who just like that that quick
feedback loop show me the shortest
course to how I can metric that says I'm
doing a good job and I'm gonna just keep
doing that thing and put my head down
and charge towards it you know there's
nothing wrong with that inherently
somebody who has that tendency um
hopefully the community has the ability
to guide them towards things that really
are a major contribution to the
community and at the end of the day and
then you know the level of transparency
that the community and the greater
community and the greater community and
the greater community can operate out
the more ability it is for that
contribution to find more complex ways
to have a feedback loop so one of the
things we talked about at the roundtable
and I've been sitting with is this
difference between being assigned a task
versus it naturally arising within you
right like I have this idea and I want
to run with it but I can't run with it
so I need other people to come on board
I basically need to give them tasks
right I need to like give them homework
and the the difference in that right
there's the odd time somebody creates
their own tasks and it's exactly what
the world needs and that's basically
entrepreneurship right then you get paid
the world finds value in it but there's
also a tons of time especially in
community and speaking especially about
the intentional community there are
rules that need to get done like me
cleaning the yoga studio where it was
like can we check off this box there's
other people who do their mission the
thing that calls to them they didn't get
assigned it and it is absolutely
essential one of the people there isn't
a maid not even just an amazing gardener
like knows what is to be harvested knows
whose is what just like the coordination
of the garden which is awesome great and
not wasting food it happens to me that
her partner is the compost guru is
always out there taking up the compost
knows exactly what we need knows and
it's like that's what's a role you can
assign someone like it has to be from
with and very much needed like if they
moved out we need a new one of them
there's other people in the community
who like do makeshift work like oh the
kids needed a play structure so I made
them one well we didn't have a meeting
this it's in actually that's not the
space for it that's not sometimes the
right thing comes up and sometimes it's
actually aunty work right it's like well
now we have to take that apart now use
some of our resources for this and I'm
guess I'm wondering how protocol that
love deals with that like is there a
difference between we're doing it right
now with mapping game B we have this
conversation that everybody comes into
game P and it's very complex and
confusing and they want to first know
what the hell is going on that's more of
like a manifesto which nobody really
wants to have because then that puts a
permanent right and it's like well if
one person writes it is it their version
their manifesto we need like 50
manifestos in verso may I to filter it
but but the bigger is like people are
like right what projects are going on
what people are involved and we want the
like directory of that and yet there are
multiple people working on that and like
because it's it's it's something that's
needed we absolutely need it but also
the fact that the coders are the ones
making it means they're making it for
themselves right they're like well this
is how I would want it to be instead of
us instead of us getting together having
a hundred all and here's what we would
want in a directory and then asking who
does this call to who does this who
wants to make this right so it's a
combination I've got your boss saying
you need to make this not it coming from
on high and not it coming from you oh
this is how I want it to be but like the
combination
and that's what we're doing a solution
raising this week on mapping gaming but
yeah yeah every every time you you know
you take a minute I could there's about
three or four different responsibilities
I could go so so much good stuff I
appreciate you know you thought on this
um but you're sure yeah the object is
between in there in task assignment the
object is that everybody is equally
assignee as a signer right so that's the
object in other words like one of the
practices I do in a collective
foundational document consultation which
is a combination of an Articles of
Incorporation meets a lean business plan
and something that the protocol that
love facilitators guild is currently
gifting consultations game be
consultations to the world so anybody
you know or anybody who's watching this
if you're interested in that we just go
to coca of tech or protocol that love
from you could find that but one of the
things we do during that consultation is
it's what we call initial team
accountabilities this is your first
iterative cycle of working together and
in that what you what I recommend is you
make a list of all the things we know as
a team we need to get done for this
project to even be meaningful in any way
to move us along the path towards our
first completed feedback loop with the
greater economy so we can see how we're
doing how are we doing something good
that the people want us to do or is this
a stupid idea
and yeah so in that so enlisting the
accountabilities generically is the
first step detach yourself detach
anybody's roles a lot of times people
want to jump right into the roles oh I'm
gonna work on this and I'm gonna work on
this and I'm gonna and that's well
that's great well but we didn't need the
playground right now the play that's
great that you're a great playground
builder we're not ready for a playground
until phase C you know whatever there
you go right so so being in feedback
being a conversation so you as the
assignor having the respect of the
assignor of the one stewarding the
community knows that we don't need that
playground yet and then but you being as
the
signee and the one who loves building
playgrounds and is good at building
playgrounds and knows the world needs
playgrounds it is a generic sense but
you can't get paid for it the temporal
space is not there yet to say this is
the time we need that service to create
a to complete a feedback loop it's it's
not there yet so he has both roles so
you're as the assignor you're realizing
you don't need a playground is this tiny
hey wait can we build a playground what
can we build a playground I want to
build a playground because I love I like
very grounds and I'm good at building
playgrounds so both of those so for
people to hold both those spaces
simultaneously is the object to be in
the kind of conversations that allow
people to have and really love to
information it's about co-op this ISM
right because if you have if everybody
holds the same view of the data and has
access to lots of data we can be
intelligent about the prioritization of
the tasks and in each one of us can see
the hole as well as offer our personal
interest and desire and certainly the
people with the passion and the
expertise on a particular subject or
offering is who you want doing it at the
end of the day so if everybody's brought
in both as the assignor as well as as
the assignee I hope option so one of my
other things that I personally love and
achievements which mean of me is that I
want my role in the world right I want
to know what my role is in the world in
my journey to figure out what that role
is I've realized I don't fit any of the
roles right like I don't have a like
even with together tech when it's like
what is your role and like a founding
member so not the CEO there's even a CEO
but beyond that nobody would give me
this position if it was somebody else's
company right like if somebody else
started it would be like you look like
someone who should be the CEO you should
have in charge of this because my
personality doesn't fit even though it's
coming through me so I'm like if no one
else is gonna do this I'm gonna have to
do this right I'm gonna do to the best
of my ability
I'm doing an amazing job at being
Jubilee I don't know if it's fixing job
being the founding member of together
tech but they're inter open and so I'm
worried not about me but people like me
people who don't know where they fit
right like like I can take on that task
I can do it right if it's a simple task
like building something Armus
she's doing something like that I guess
that is there that type of work that
anyone can do on and it can be open or
is it like we have a team we have
decided we have the marketer we have the
coder or we have this it's these six
people and they're gonna have to take on
the tasks like is it more of an open
project or a closed project or both sure
I think I feel like we're dancing around
really the same subject okay because
it's like you are good at being Jubilee
you're you like being Jubilee the world
needs more people to be like Jubilee no
only one real anyone me is it I say I'd
say we want more Jersey so the fourth
thing is can you get paid for it like is
the offering that you have within some
reasonable temporal space of getting a
feedback loop that would say yes what it
like if you're something really good but
can we have a feedback loop that really
confirms yes in fact we have the metrics
now say you are something good and how
much space are we gonna give you to be
able to prove that that's essentially
what credit is okay so something like
Wikipedia that nobody very people mostly
aren't willing to pay for they have
their people do give they make it more
than enough money but most of us don't
pay for it right most of us are not
willing to pay for a free wiki for free
encyclopedia even though it's essential
to our lives is this a way to funnel
money towards those things because they
have a lot of yeah
okay because there is also the thing of
like especially in technology creating
the thing that's gonna be lucrative
that's gonna work for 90% of the people
right like like the Facebook's like that
that type of stuff that most people
would never pay for a Facebook now that
we've had it for free even though
they're of course paying for Facebook
it's like we're all paying for it can we
use that another way my issue with once
you start incentivizing people in a
monetary fashion they find the most
lucrative positions so they're more
likely to go and work for the Facebook
project that's gonna be more lucrative
then let's say a niche project that
helps one in it one in
10,000 people but it's like
life-changing because they absolutely
need this technology there isn't a
market for that technology but it's
world-changing for a tiny group of
people does it value that does it value
the impact of it but like there's impact
for 90% of the population right you help
people eat better that's going to help
everyone versus hey you're allergic to
99% of the stuff we made a food
supplement that doesn't have any of that
in it right only one in a million people
needs it but they will die without it
like those are very there clearly isn't
money really in the second option if
it's one in a million people there's
only money in the first so everyone
concentrates on the one where anyone
could make you know what I mean
dietary stuff for the world this is
about the biggest impact right so one
thing I think we've we touched on this a
couple of the points that I wanted to
make clear is that you know supply and
demand is just a real natural phenomenon
it's not like a like like a lot of
people think supplying to manage some
construct invented by capitalism to for
them to take advantage of the system
your bike successful capitalists but
it's not it's you know my belief is that
supply and demand is just a natural
phenomenon where there is demand for a
thing much more of energy will go
towards anybody who can provide that
thing like lots of attention and value
and an interest is gonna be if you if
you can be somebody who provides that
thing and if there is not a lot of
demand for a thing and there is a lot of
supply nobody really cares somebody
values it as much as abundant and
everywhere and you know okay so that's
just so when you are offering something
that is low supply and high demand
you're gonna find perhaps that you don't
have to exert as much work as the next
guy who's doing something that's in
greater supply and less demand or both
right and you know your willingness so
so for there to be a built-in natural
incentive towards helping to provide the
things that there's high demand for and
lower supply you want to have a natural
attractor field that the help if you
come in and up create that thing so game
a has a pretty good system for that
right the supply and demand are of right
if you if there is a high need for
something and a low supply then you get
in and you get monopolize that market
until you get competition right and then
so the place is that like food we all
need that are saturated right it's
really hard to make a lot of money there
becomes the best cracker well good luck
competing with Nabisco and all them
right so but if you come up with a
peanut free sugar free
blah-blah-blah-blah-blah free cracker
that's for this very nice group of
people with kids with my allergies you
have a market and so they're not going
to touch that market until you prove
that it's lucrative and then they'll be
like oh we do like gluten-free
everyone's getting gluten free we'll
make a gluten-free cracker my issue with
that is game a that it only like that
whole incentive gives us what we
currently have that there's high
competition in those demands which you
don't it's not the best for me the user
but I have a lot of I pay a high price
to have the high level of choice in the
marketplace yes if instead we owned the
cracker company if instead we were like
right how many crackers do we need and
how can we make it as efficiently as
possible there's a very big difference
there and it happens in technology as
well so what speaking to there is is
that is the economic paradigm of the
haves and have-nots more so right in the
power pyramid so what we end up seeing
is those at the top top the power
pyramid get to say oh I see what the
world needs and then they're gonna lose
lots of capital investment to create
that thing and then they have to make
you want that thing there their perverse
incentive in the system here is to make
you want that thing if it whatever it
takes offering you consumer credit
putting ads on TV putting ads on
Facebook like jamming this thing down
your throat until enough people want the
thing so you can have a return on your
capital investment so the large capital
investment was not
so if this problem is solved right in
think with things like the the the
crowdfunding right this solves this
problem like like to me game be released
literally created and infused into the
economy using that exact methodology the
crowdsource so you are given a ubi and
not only can you buy your basics like
food and shelter but what it was like in
the long term what things would you like
to exist no use some of your newly
created capital to invest in things that
you actually want reverse that pyramid
around instead of people guessing what
they think you should want and then
trying to jam it down your throat
actually get the feedback the real
feedback mechanism from the bottom part
of the pyramid right from what what is
it that you want and what can we do for
you so we just take that pyramid we loop
the whole thing reckon around do it
makes a little fractal like amazing
beautiful natural flow pattern besides
the price so I've started something
under protocol that love we've made
white it's my favorite go there
supplement neuro brain so you know like
how does how do we know the price of it
how do we know whether it's it's 2 bucks
a pill 10 cents a pill is it them that
decides it and they price it it's planes
man do you want the answer in terms of
the trans transitionary system or do you
want the answer in terms like pure game
B when we're all like in it well in a
pure game B environment the way I've
looked at this so during the transition
system in a collective foundational
document one of the things we do is the
mission metrics currencies okay so
everything is the currency everything's
a metric a metric a currency is just the
flow of a metric okay see the current in
the flow current C and these are the
Medicare in C guys that came up with
this a long long time ago and those are
the guys that created holo chain of
course so meta currency org if you want
to follow that train of thought but so
until we identify the mission
Tricks currencies for this collective
one of the things that tell you you're
accomplishing your mission right so in
the transition phase we also have to
have we have to use money Federal
Reserve notes and the like and all the
other currencies spawned off it which is
every currency on the planet currently
so in the use of the Federal Reserve
notes you also have to have profits you
have to put out X amount of you have to
have some temporal feedback cycle where
you have enough capital to put to offer
some of the world and get a feedback
loop where money comes back and
hopefully more money came back then he
put in so your actual costs in the
transparent system your costs to reach
market to reach that offering phase will
be transparent and known and from that
you can give some idea of what of what
the natural exchange rate ought to be
right and so but here's the cool part if
we are tracking our mission metrics
currencies and we're being successful so
we're also having profits going up in a
game a type cents and we have a whole
ecosystem of businesses doing those two
things mission metrics and profits all
rising we have this old ecosystem all
these different collectives that are
having some offering where that
phenomenon is present at some point we
just ask what do we even need the money
for because we have all these missions
successfully being completed and the
feedback mechanism being there to say
yes more of that please optimally in the
full protocol that love meta currency
game be version of this there are many
many different types of currencies in a
flow so in it there's a if there's a 100
entities with 10,000 people hopefully
there's a hundred different currencies
in there a hundred different in fact and
so in the currency ought to recognize
something that an individual some living
being values mm-hmm every current if
it's built on the vast something that an
individual being values or your
individual beings value that's what
we're after that's what we want more of
for hey that's what we wanted it
identify the needs identifies what what
is valued and where the needs are and
then has a way to create have those
things he created in a system
and to do that as clearly as possible is
the object and then person so in the in
the pure game be we don't need the money
thing there at all
I think yeah I mean transparency helps
with a lot of it because if you're
openly transparent about how how and why
you're creating that drug right that
pill what went into it why is it there
if you're transparent about all that
we're gonna see it cost you a dollar to
make the pill so you selling it for a
dollar 10 it's all there 25 makes sense
like why would you sell it pretty less
than that I'll give you a dollar 50 I
really really need this if I then come
in there and I'm like wait why are you
sourcing this here when it's not ethical
and it's expensive and you can source it
like if I can view how to make it go
from a dollar to ninety cents but I'm
not part of that company do can I and so
I can tell them out and they can bring
it down they don't have to pass that
cost on a consumer but if I create a
competitor I could make it for ninety
cents no I can I can make it for less
and I'm transparent about that but it's
gonna cost society to have two people
one making it for ninety cents and one
making it for a dollar that's right and
it's gonna in fact now we're probably
there at a dollar five and I'm actually
ninety-five cents right because it cost
me more to have that competition you
know now we're competing for the
minerals are competing for all of that
how so in your game be world
what does if I have a new ingenious idea
to improve an existing product whatever
that improvement looks like do I create
a competitor or do I go to them and and
do it and if they say yes I think that's
a no-brainer but if they say no we'd
actually don't like that what are my
options right I think it boils down to
rivals behavior right I think both the
act of you saying hey get so first of
all one of the things I encourage in to
collect the foundational document again
which is like the Articles of
Incorporation me to lean business plan
is that you have the path towards
influence
okay so influence currency is another
one of the currency categories the
protocol that love recognizes in in
currency is like kind of the number of
votes you have on a given council which
is a give
council stewards a certain set of assets
so as you show to me over time to be a
wise steward and expert steward your
influence and theory ought to go up over
the particular assets
that's your stewarding as your wise and
expert in stewarding this asset your
influence ought to go up as compared to
everybody else right so there should be
always be a path so here's how you gain
influence currency over these assets in
a fully transparent way one of the first
things we answer on the document is
here's the current influence currency
holdings as we're going to instantiate
this collective and here's the path for
others to earn influence in the
stewardship of the assets so in other
words in order to have it have your a
good idea be heard you would there would
be a path for you that if you're that if
you're sure enough that you can go on
that path and eventually reach the point
where you can say hey guys I have this
idea to lower costs on the product and
be heard in that for that path not to be
there or for a resistance to your input
to be there his rival risk behavior for
I would say at least right for you to
then receive that no and then go start a
competitive company is also rival risk
behavior I would say right and so when
we see rivalries behavior in the system
we're going to see costs go up we're
going to see less efficiency inherently
and so you know the theory of protocol
love is with this greater transparency
we will be able to algorithmically
identify rivals behavior and I think if
we can do that we can have just all
these amazing conversations with people
where we see the behavior popping up and
we don't have to be in judgment humans
are human e we're gonna do rivalries
things we're gonna do all good yeah
we're gonna do all they're all the
negative things we're gonna do all be
sociopathic to some extent we're all
gonna be selfish to some extent and yeah
we just want a system that helps create
balance and does not reward those
perverse incentivize things and that are
in game a that prefers from Seneca these
behaviors sociopathic and selfishness
and looking at the short term is that a
long term and looking at the game for me
and mine rather than the game for
everybody like these are perverse
incentives built into game a and we can
we can change that in theory right
yeah absolutely and I think that's
important like you can't just squash out
the rival or as part of people me like
that's not welcome at the table and like
it's very much part of our human
existence to how even if you absolutely
want game be there's still rival errs
rifle risk behavior within you of course
and especially having grown up in a game
a world the more I think we raise
children in a game be in a transition to
game be world the less rival risk I
don't think they ever get to zero
rivalry nor should we
this has been such a mystery to me you
have kids like it seems like I've
noticed I don't know where they get it
kids start fighting over toys and trying
to possess things yeah like age of like
eighteen months or whatever you know
there or younger even they're just like
this is a daring thing I want this is
mine I want to control that thing so
it's so inherent something's in some
part of our nature it's at the same time
I kid absolutely has that and also wants
to start a store where everything's free
I'm like well talk about the economics
later but I love that I love it's like
if you can't afford it it's like for
homeless people like how are you gonna
know if they're homeless it's like
they'll have all their possessions with
them I was like that's actually pretty
smart
but people leave stuff places but that's
alright alright I love your heart if you
want to look after everyone and you want
to win by looking out for everyone that
is that that's the manometric at the end
of the day and that's what I said that's
was that was the arc or that I adjusted
to each according to their need or from
each according to their ability to each
according to their ability to serve the
greater whole right I don't think it's
perfect but erect it represents this
point if something in there or the word
you know need ought to be addressed more
in so it's just it's just an interesting
twist but it really is the key I think
to me that people really are glad to see
people have access to more resources and
become what we would consider wealthy in
fact they've helped make the world a
better place like if they have stood up
and said said something or done
something and provided something to the
economy and everybody's like that is
such an amazing thing New York you're
inherently glorified and people want to
see
I've become wealthy but just so that
would be one of your children and your
grandchildren become so wealthy that
they become the elite class that rules
the planet know which is so in the game
we're all not necessarily transition to
game be world but are there Elon Musk's
and Bill Gates and what is their
difference between somebody who's just
mediocre gets their ubi
and what's the difference between them
and somebody with like a disability who
can't contribute in the same way that
would have that the same metrics and all
their continuing their highest point but
they're not contributing at the level
that societies there might not be a
society to say and this is what's
equivalent what's not but there still is
a metric saying you're not contributing
as much there is this Elon Musk and Bill
Gates who have all these amazing ideas
let's like even if no corruptions
involved they're just an individual with
frado's distribution they are that the
top two let's assume that still needs me
llamas the top inventors right they're
gonna create hundreds and thousands of
things in their lifetime how are they
incentivized and why is I and what is
the disparity yeah we keep talking that
parade oh I think wasn't parade at this
point 80/20 you know things always fall
into an 80/20 I go I don't know if Bray
knows also 80/20 I just heard Jordan
Peterson talk about the square root does
half of it and yeah the 80/20 rule works
for me in my brain twenty percent of
people to 80 percent of the results it's
even oh yeah so if Pareto if Pareto's
theory is true here in that there is
kind of this twenty percent of us is
going to be kind of the rulers of the
eighty percent okay that's they like to
mean it sounds fairly reasonable my
rulers good thank you thank you for the
correction I met leaders they are
they're kind of leading twenty percent
will be lead the eighty percent and it's
a very natural selection where the
eighty percent is glad to have the
twenty percent leading right perhaps
that's that's a natural balance for for
humanity and I think that that's what
Pareto would theorize on that then of
course we have something more like you
know 0.000000 one percent that's very
very strongly ruling that easily
do they get a little bit of more meat at
the dinner table like the best hunter I
think generally um like I said before
people seem to be glad for certain of us
to have access to more resources which
is greater well right it's like hey
thank you for making the world a better
place for all of us yeah we're glad to
see you be able to enjoy what it is if
you have four yachts no I'm in no Camry
with that not as long as anyone starving
but if you're a Elon Musk and you get
first access to resources that you're
able to then invent with yeah I want the
top inventors having access to that so
they can come up with the top inventions
but I don't know who the top inventor is
that lets the brain or distribution
giving everyone some access right it is
so company like you've shown that
through a feedback loop you do provide
something good for society
we're like thank you get blasted like
their first their first successful
venture whatever for Elon was paid out
for Bill Gates it was Microsoft DOS
right
and so yeah you've provided this great
value thank you and so it's impossible
for it not to go to your head Wow what a
great value creator I am for when you
get first natural reward you get that
first natural feedback mechanism says
wow thank you here's millions and
millions of dollars that's a know that
you have done something that the world
is saying yes the universe is saying yes
you've done a good job at providing
something that we want it's impossible
for that should not go to your head to
some extent I think right wow what a
great you know provider I am for the
world especially the masculine part of
us so what happens next is the question
this is where I think like having one
one cycle of that is generally healthy
I'll always I think it's what happens
next when but even know even that cycle
because in game B I'm not talking what
transition a game B but in game B I come
up with a new app that like helps
everybody eat well okay first of all
wasn't just me it was me and a group of
people and so now we've created that app
if we own it and then there's a
competitor then that's rival risk
behavior as soon as you have a large
payout its rival risky
because it's like wait well do I own it
for all of time if somebody improves it
who not like it's 100% mine and we get
the money feedback somebody comes and
improves it how much should they improve
it we're no longer doing it we're living
on a beach somewhere someone else is
taking it and generating it like who get
who takes the risk first of all this
very little risk I think in game be
right you have ubi you're not gonna
starve
it doesn't matter if your venture goes
under so the risk isn't there so I don't
know if the reward should be there like
why should anyone have millions of
dollars to me and this is just my bias
baby the reward is that you're the
Pareto distribution reward is you're the
best engineer so yes you should have the
best engineer and you shouldn't have a
yacht
you shouldn't have who like the best
food the best everything because you're
the best engineer you should have some
access to resources to engineer because
you're the best engineer right but so
are you saying yes you do you want them
to have some to feel a sense of reward
you just don't know they want me to feel
a sense of reward I just don't want it
to be monetary external reward worried
that's gonna skew the right so again
it's like it's the symmetric so it's
like all we're doing is if we have
metrics you know when you started your
collective you identified your mission
metrics currencies your mission is good
for the world right move those
assumptions in place now when you're
good at what you do the mission metrics
currencies are taken as massive
skyrocket like millions and millions of
units of the that metric moved through
the system and have accumulated in your
wallet right for like terms that make
sense now
i we can have all new terms for all
these things later but so that touch
yeah that doesn't that like the the fine
line is are you going to do more good
stuff now with the greater capacity you
have to be creative right like the in
theory met those metrics ought to be
something that it that gives you even
more capability to be powerful in the
way you could offer something now yeah I
think there's a lot of other things
beside in game B besides you get million
millions of dollars or currency whatever
lately you have millions of times more
money than another human being it's like
you're not a million times more worthy
we don't even know what they're free our
distribution is
yeah friends you're healthy I think the
healthy thing here is that so yeah it's
it's it's an opportunity now where you
have earned greater trust to take it
even longer loop cycle if you want
before we get a feedback mechanism but
essentially having lots of capital or
having access to capital is lengthens
the ability you have to do an intense
in-depth offering that has a longer
cycle before you have a feedback until
you've earned now greater trust so
that's the healthy web part right you've
done it you've done one cycle the world
rewards you once what you're offering
here's even more so now you can have a
longer cycle and get even deeper in your
thought and really offer something even
more complex perhaps I think that's
that's great but yeah but but to the
extent that now you're done forever you
don't actually have to offer anything
you can now it's about buying houses and
yachts and so you have ten empty houses
and a yacht that holds a thousand people
that you that you have a hundred on from
time to time and it just import the rest
of the time like these these are clearly
waste of resources right it's there's no
reason to have empty houses and a yacht
that barely gets used so so you know
this is where we talked about the
journey of you know in all this about
from individual ownership to collective
stewardship is really the key so making
it just more far more the norm in common
that there's a yacht that you are a part
owner of along with a thousand other
people that need to use the thing wants
to eat here and yeah it still might be
only that of those that have proven one
or more cycles of very successful
feedback mechanism that haven't that's
the state yacht easily you know or more
more you know but everybody is there you
have access to the yacht to in my
perfect world of game be and yeah I did
I answer the question yeah so just a lot
of the same questions I struggle with
like there's a lot of these
world-changing ideas that I love just
because I'm somewhat critical of pieces
of them doesn't mean I wouldn't
absolutely 100
we'll heartedly choose that over gaming
maybe it's like you don't need to be
perfect to be game B but like my mind
wants to like wait what about this what
about this and why not is yeah I think
these discussions is this is like
there's nothing wrong with competition
in my version of game B competition is
great you're competing to make the world
as good as you can for as money as many
beings and all life on it compete away
by all means um it's the survival risk
behavior within the competition that
makes it a problem yeah and that it
hurts all of us that we can see that
it's it's game dynamics game theory and
how it plays out so my question is so
like game a somewhat makes sense to me
understand the economics I understand
the finances and I understand Gabey I
understand somewhat of the a my version
rate of what it what it could look like
Oh so under together attack it's mainly
a drill Bentley and I Bentley and Adriel
both have competing projects aid riyals
is wiki election Bentley is this reason
score they're not actually really
competitive but like they're so let's
say one of them is a huge success right
one of them he takes off let's say it's
it's Bentley so I won't pick my brother
to say it's Bentley his recent score
takes off but part of the reason reason
score takes off is because Adriel was
sitting at that table giving him
feedback from wiki lecture wiki election
goes into bankruptcy it's never a thing
but recent scores there and it's worth
10 million Bentley being Bentley might
give something to Adriel for having sat
at that table but he also might not
right especially if it's collectively
owned or something like that so there's
again the risk involved right the
Bentley's putting his time and money
into it but so is Adriel and so they
both want risk in one is gonna happen to
be the winner under like there's a win
to society that we get reason right we
get sense making tools to the individual
they are helping each other in a non
rival risk way even we're dealing with
rivalry right it's like oh this feels
eat like that invokes my ego I want mine
to succeed I want like reason score to
be the thing I want wiki election to be
the thing like only
those emotions as they come up but
there's a real economics to it down the
line right my brother
in this scenario might not be able to
feed his family in ten years and
Bentley's a mega wealthy person like
where is the and then there's all the
all the ideas that go into it life to me
any idea that comes to me isn't actually
mine it's like collectively owned by the
universe I just happen to be the
individual it came through and if I'm
able to give great and the more everyone
is able to give to that pool without
worrying about what they're getting back
the bigger that pool of stuff is that we
all get to use and if I'm worried about
which piece is mine and how much can I
get and will I be able to live on a
yacht yeah you can live out of yacht if
that's your highest calling if you're
gonna use it 365 days of year you can
have a yacht look huge it will figure
that out if that's gonna be your
happiness yep um so in your speaking to
what protocols out love defines its
equity currency equity currency to boil
it down to I think it's relevant to the
term we use in game a but in game via
has a very clear meaning and released in
the protocol that love ontology has a
very clear meaning which is contra is a
recognition of contribution so equity
currencies are metrics for recognition
of contribution so the answer seems
simple right
if project a is successful then all
those who contributed towards the
success of project they ought to be
rewarded and if you contributed more you
should be rewarded more enough right
there's what I'm saying is there's that
like if aid if Bentley hired Adriel to
be part of reason score there's a clear
he put in X amount of hours but if it's
just no we're sitting at a table
brainstorming solutions to recent score
and Wikipedia and it's clearly you're
gonna benefit for my you're both sitting
there in a ways you can't quite put
metrics on right that are like well how
much did a drill contribute who knows
but something something was I don't
think my theories it's not hard to put
metrics on those things we just have to
be in the habit of doing it it's part of
vulnerable transparency to be clear
about these things and this is what
really a critical piece of what what
what I preach when I'm teaching protocol
that love this is super critical
important when there's contribution have
a metric to identify it and in if
there's not there's a new type of
contribution as and create the canoe
currency and
see how easy that is so what if I thinks
I know you have to go pretty soon but
one of my things about equity
specifically is that it's very different
for all of us right if I put $1,000 into
something that is a lot of money for me
versus Bill Gates who's like oh yeah
that's an African coffee oh here have
$1,000 right
it is contribution of all types and in
game the transition territory phase
contributing Federal Reserve notes or
government funny money we're recognizing
is a huge contribution like that won't
be someday because yeah we're creating
capital out of thin air that's what's
happening anyway we're just creating a
capital out of thin air like what's
under game a in the beginning to
transition mine and Bill Gates a
thousand is worth the same because it's
a thousand dollars and it's or it's a
risk to me right it's not a risk to him
at all and so he's just like when you're
rich and you're throwing money out to
see what sticks and whether you're
getting an investment you're okay but
there's not an investment it's a certain
percentage I'm putting all my eggs in
one basket right bit like there isn't an
option to spread out a thousand dollars
this is a risk I'm not a me is not doing
that in order to get a financial reward
someone the Bill Gates is and so I'm
there to take you donate like I want to
put thousand dollars I want this thing
to succeed it's less likely to succeed
with me as the investor honestly the
yeah okay well yeah so bunch of stuff
there for sure yeah yeah really need to
get when we win game B starts kicking
and there's that the the disparity
between access to resources is lowered
as well right in the transition area
phase and absolutely it's like one of
the critical things that protocol that
love also proposes a very clear
separation between equity and influence
remember equity is contribution and so
like the biggest contributor of
resources is not necessarily the one
that ought to have the biggest influence
is over how assets are steward in that
collective but that does not need to be
an inherent given is like it generally
were named a and it isn't always in-game
a we have the Meccan
you can start a corporation and create
multiple classes of stock and get voting
stock or here and equity stock over here
that's totally a thing but it's just not
common practice right it really isn't it
especially not at the startup phase of
the company equity and influence are
always inherently intertwined so the
therefore the person with the most money
at the table has the most influence that
based on your history what you've put in
and how it shows your your how good you
are at knowing finance how good you are
at knowing the scientific implication or
how much is it based on I tell you like
or other people think I'm ignoring that
right yeah it's it's again blurring that
line between the tellers and the Telly's
we're all telling each other with
feedback mechanisms internally how much
we want influence the we want the others
to have that's a healthy system so and
your passion and expertise ought to
people have people saying yes we want
you to have more influence we want you
have more influence so you so I you know
there is no again there's no mandated
way to do this but it's a conversation
we encourage that the protocol that love
and the process is attached to it
encourage people to be in these
conversations so what is formula for
contribution to the website like most
companies need a website so that's a
good one right what is so we can have a
website development equity currency give
it a w Dec so you have an intro currency
that you can just start to it's a meme
that you can use within your
organization and identify hey you can
trim through the website let's let's
assign you some equity currency come up
with formulas and standards for how to
assign that equity currency and in
theory the beauty of all this especially
in the beauty of having just one equity
currency that represents all of the
holdings of a collective like it
generally does in-game a corporation you
have many equity currencies that
recognize all the different varying
contributions in their own separate
buckets the separate buckets of value
and currency seeing the current of value
flow within the system so the beauty of
this is that if there is a fork someday
Forks like
so in other words a split a a the way
these things show up is you'll start
getting whatever your decision-making
methodology is the start feeling tension
around decisions you start noticing oh
there's we're close here like this is we
could go two different directions and
there's almost a split and we're not
getting solid consensus anymore and if
you see that consistently happening you
can guarantee if Forks coming this isn't
a bad thing right this should mean in
theory if you look at your mission as a
group that there's actually a slightly
different submission that is it that
it's starting to appear just take that
and create a new collective with that
mission and create a relationship
between the two collectives to make that
easy the equity currency contributions
it's good say okay well you've
contributed these things so why don't
you guys take the website to the new
because most of the people who want to
go to the new collective with the new
mission worked a website contributor so
you take the website and we're going to
give you what little equity currency we
have there so we'll give you that extra
currency in exchange you give us the
equity currency that you have on the
intellectual property for this process
we created or whatever it might be or
maybe it's the well we'll keep the
office the real estate we invested in
for our home office we'll take that you
take the website and all you're doing is
exchanging equity currencies literally
you're in a market exchange of it the
equity currencies to have a nice clean
fork with two separate missions now and
nobody has to know nobody there doesn't
have to be any winners or losers a fork
is just the most natural phenomenon and
creating the most effective you know an
efficient way for things to frack lies
in the ecosystem yeah no I like that I
was laughing because it's I think we
have different ideas on how to get to
gain be similar in tianhao day and like
I think we both are I'm like oh it's
okay if I disagree because it's gonna be
my way anyway like not not in a because
I'm gonna like overpower it's just like
oh collectively humans do this and I
don't know if it's true if but like that
in game B I don't think we have those
competing entities and you don't need to
figure that out so I think that like
there is a pool that we all just own
together because it's more efficient and
it's more but in order to ever get there
we have to go through a transition like
we are with the other tech where people
feel like they own their project because
you're not going to put your time and
energy into something if you feel like
you don't know
there comes a point where you feel safe
enough in the world feel safe enough
that you're like oh I don't I love the
idea of the 14 mission because it's not
necessarily like you're thinking about
it in-game a very understandable terms
of like right we need to legally own
this that needs to be like what works in
the world right now and so it needs to
have that it absolutely need but I think
eventually get to a point where we don't
have that yeah well we have the tragedy
of the commons issue to address right so
the more things we put into the Commons
like the tragedy is there's nobody
properly stewarding it anymore
the problem is also solves all the only
relevance to any of the things that
protocol that love proposes around the
stewardship of assets like if you need a
decision-making process to go you know
what movie you're gonna go see with your
friends I mean like you don't like it's
very informal like that can roll like
nobody's gonna be that upset if you
choose if they that's not really the
movie I wanted to see but okay I'll go
with you guys you know it's like it's
not but when you're talking about you
know a decision that's gonna affect like
the fruit production of the entire plant
it like there's a different thing so
it's this is all the all of the
processes are in place here in the
transparency is around the stewardship
of assets around the steward of the
Commons
everything's the Commons right that's
what the thing there is nothing that's
not the Commons that's the underlying
theory there you can pretend we haven't
individually owned but it but it is
always a temporal stewardship whatever
we call ownership is always some form of
temporal stewardship stewardship to me
stewardship is actually the I think the
only metric I'm okay equally an
ownership that like if you're stewarding
this stream if you're Stewart II miss
campground then yeah you effectively own
it and make decisions in a way that I'm
not going to just being a one-off person
going there go but there's a very big
difference between I put equity in in
game a world I put in a million dollars
and that was nothing to me
you know like versus that's not
stewardship that's not okay I care about
the purpose I care about the mission of
this because then you are gonna come up
to against headway of like we have a
different mission my you know I want to
feed the world
first chiefly as possible and you want
to feed the world that's nutritious as
pasta
those are two both important and you
know for key and realizing how can we
support each other's missions is I love
that idea and I just my issue is just
like once we get to a certain party game
B we don't need the patents and the
intellectual property and the contracts
as much as we do now right now we
absolutely need those things to get
there and then I think the humanity
based on the fact we do have this
cooperation in us and we like efficiency
eventually we get to a point where we
don't need that because it does cost us
resources to have that right so
ownership in protocol that love is some
combination of influence and equity
which can be represented with metrics in
both cases
so remember equity is not is
contribution one way to get equity is
money always like in the transition or
in the transitionary phase one way to
have equity is money by giving what we
can you know monetary types well but it
is supposed to recognize contribution so
some form of the fact that you actually
contributed and the fact that you or the
fact that you just have good ideas which
we want you to have influence when you
have good ideas and they want you do
contribute certainly on what you have
that can be recognized as equity
currency so ownership becomes just some
form of equity or or influence currency
over a particular set of assets that
makes you an owner and anybody can
become an owner in any asset that's the
object right and with that yeah I didn't
mean to wrap this one up Wow an hour and
20 minutes flew rate just does a great
conversation thank you so much and Shilo
wanted to talk to you so I'm going to
put you two in touch if you're okay with
that I think you and Kylie actually
would also really I feel like her proxy
amande also she has this thing about
stewardship and the Commons I think
although I don't think you guys would be
in alignment with your actual projects I
think talking to each other what your
projects would actually be you guys
there's something you guys would get out
of that cuz you guys have like it's
funny you and Shai will have the values
part and then you and Kylie have the
comments part about the comments and how
you deal with it and she has a cool way
that she wants us to
that going and like the transition part
is different I love all of game be is
coalesce uni but if it feels chaotic but
like different people are working on
different parts and eventually what it
comes together and and it doesn't matter
what the game B looks like it matters
that we're taking steps towards it
because eventually what what doesn't
serve us will fall away and as long as
we're owning our anti rival ristmas
we we get there and I think we all are
owning it ourselves as much as we
possibly can and it's showing right
we're talking to each other and offering
what we do have and freely like where's
mine where's my equity in love or later
love done protocol doubt love my wares I
have this conversation what is that
right like I don't know
we're doing our collective foundational
document now I'm actually getting into
some formal team making stuff so there
will be a path that I will be able to
answer that question very clearly soon
yeah awesome yeah and no I did it more
also I don't actually because my baby
doesn't have equity so I don't care
about anybody contribution and I'm
happened to call her because I think
that's a that works but it's an account
as a contribution yeah and I well I love
yes if we can figure out contribution
and that if everyone's contribution is
valued that everyone is valuable even if
we can't see their contribution
eventually and then it opens all right
thank you so much Raymond's I wanted to
ask you about your wake up our thing
that you mentioned in a call but I'll
see you next time that's you mentioned
how to wake up Arcadia thing I was like
that sounds interesting you just like
through dinner like I should know what
that is it's like what is that but okay
yeah