[Music]
so you are in the midst of a very
interesting series of lectures called
awakening from the meaning crisis yes
and something that struck me from the
very first one is that you started this
series talking about something called
flow could you explain a little bit what
what is flow and why is it important
sure so flow is a phenomena that was
made famous by the work of chick Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi in two books the book
optimal experience and then the
follow-up book entitled flow and then
he's had books and articles and his
students and so forth and so what flow
is it's called optimal experience
because it's optimal in two senses
people regard this as one of the best
experiences they can have in their life
in fact there seems to be important
relations between how often you enter
the flow state and how meaningful you
find your life right it's optimal in
that sense and also people view it as
optimal in that they're they're
performing at their best they're at
their most creative right they're doing
sort of the best and their actions two
observers seem the most graceful sort of
most filled with that you know extra
something that we regard as
aesthetically excellent right you know
when you see an athlete in the flow
state there's this act there's this
extra dimension of grace and efficacy to
their action and then from the inside
like if you're doing you're like if
you're sparring and as a martial artist
or you're playing jazz you you you you
you get this I mean this peak place
where I'm really at doing the best I can
so that that's what it sort of feels
like and you can see why people pursue
it in fact as I talked about in this
series it it's it makes sense of
otherwise absurd behavior like like rock
climbing because rock climbing like it's
it's like some sort of Greek
mythological torture you're told to go
up a rock face you hurt yourself you
might fall and you know damage yourself
and then once you get to the top you
just come back down and the reason
people pursue the rock climbing is
well we it's been studied it tends to
generate the flow state so that's the
the state and it's created by a set of
very important conditions it's a state
in which there's this very tight
relationship with doing the demands on
the environment think of the rock
climber again and your skills your
skills you sort of have to be stretching
your skills right to meet the demands of
the environment so you have to give it
everything and you have to be learning
as you're solving your problems you have
to be developing even as you're
functioning right and and so that needs
to be the case there needs to be very
clear feedback of information there
can't be a lot of ambiguity in this
situation like right and then there has
to be a tight coupling what I mean by
that is my actions and the response of
the environment have to be tightly
coupled to each other and then finally
error has to really matter like you know
it has to be it really matters to me it
has to so the rock climber can fall
right the jazz musician can suddenly
screw up and right the martial artist
gets hit in the face
so error has to matter under those
conditions people will get into the flow
State one other thing as an important
factor the cognitive side of this the
kind of training that is predictive of
being able to get in the flow state is
some kind of mindfulness training great
and I want to talk about mindfulness in
a moment but I'm curious about what flow
has to do when I'm in that state and I'm
kind of you know in flow which I think
most people have a sense of what that is
how does that relate to how I make a
meaning or how I experience meaning in
the world all right so I mean obviously
there's multiple interpretations about
this so while there's a consensus of the
description there isn't been as much
work done on the cognitive processes
because that's what you're referring to
when you're talking about meaning making
that are going on in this so I recently
published a chapter in the Oxford
Handbook of spontaneous thought with Leo
Ferraro and area
Hera Bennett and we we we we sort of
theorized as to what and we tried to
make an argument as to what we think is
actually going on so to
to give a sort of the gist of it many of
us have had an experience of insight
like you where and what we realize is oh
I've been miss framing this whole thing
incorrectly the reason why I can't get a
solution is the way I've been framing
this problem is incorrect what happens
is when you get that aha moment people a
couple this ski and Reber and others
have talked about it's like a spike in
fluency in your processing that's why
you get sort of that flash and things
are sort of vivid and we often represent
it with a light bulb going on over there
you get this sort of it's both a flash
of intelligibility you suddenly
understand and it's also the
phenomenological flash the world seems
brighter and people actually also enjoy
the insight experience right it's now
think about what the rock climber is
doing right the rock climber is lit it
gets into situations if it's a good rock
climb if it's challenging if it's
demanding right where they get blocked
they get locked there it literally in
passing and they they reframe and they
have to reframe not just how there's
think they have to literally restructure
their body right to get to the next
place and what happens is that insight
will prime and make make more likely the
next insight they need which will then
prime and make more likely the next
insight they need the jazz musician does
you know some innovation and then that
Prime's the next one that is needed
there Prime's the next ones that's
needed the martial artist does some new
unites you know stretches their skills
and does its innovation and then that
primes and so what you can think of the
flow experience like part of it is it's
like a cascades of insights there's an
aha moment bleeding into in our home
ahahahahaha right and it what's
different is like normally with an
insight problem you sort of stop and you
impasse what's happening in flow is it's
happening rapidly enough you don't
really impasse
you almost impasse and then you're
constantly restructuring it's like this
extended aha moment so that's why in
flow people have this tremendous sense
of deep understanding the connection
discovery and why it's so salient they
they talk about everything so vivid and
crystal clear and it's and it's so good
it's not like physical pleasure like you
know like the pleasure of eating
chocolate it
it's like the cognitive pleasure of the
aha moment and insight that's one aspect
there's another important aspect a lot
of your learning is done implicitly
there's experimental work about this
it's called implicit learning and of
course there's always there's
theoretical controversies about how
quite to interpret it but the basic idea
is you pick up on lots of patterns in
the environment that you that you don't
have sort of access to in working memory
you so you can't sort of introspect and
become aware of those patterns that
you're picking up so for example many of
your viewers I assume know how far to
stand away from another person nobody
able to explicitly taught you that right
and so what's happening in the flow
state is you're really training your
insight ability and you're really
training your intuition intuition
generating ability and you're doing this
in a highly integrated coordinated
manner and that feeds deeply into the
machinery by which you are able to solve
problems make sense sense intuitive
connections in your world around you so
that's why it would contribute greatly
to how meaningful you find your life so
that's very interesting and what really
struck me when you're talking about
those those three aspects that get us
into flow and into this kind of creative
mode where it seems easier to solve
problems is that they seem the opposite
of what we have for example on social
media we can't trust our information we
have fake news there's not really any
consequence for what we say or how we
behave and so I'm just wondering what
you make of that so I mean my co-author
Leo Ferraro talks about one of the
dangers of social media he has this term
he calls it confirmation porn
confirmation pornography because because
all of these constraints are removed our
cognition has all of these processes
that are indispensable to our adaptive
intelligence but those self-organizing
processes also make us deeply
susceptible to two biases now if you put
people into things like social media and
the kinds of constraints that you have
for example I'm getting good flow or the
kinds of constraints you need for good
reasoning or the kind of constraint you
need for good discourse are removed all
of those biases can now run
unchecked unmonitored unmanaged manner
so what leo means by confirmation port
one of the most pressing and powerful
biases we have is called the
confirmation bias we tend to only look
for evidence that confirms our beliefs
now in small-scale situations where
people are in you know tightly coupled
to their environment and actually acting
as checks and balances on each other
that's very effective but you take that
confirmation bias and put it into social
media you get the echo-chamber
right and you get this confirmation porn
where all people are doing is using
social media in a autodidactic fashion
to confirm whatever beliefs they already
have so that's what I think is going on
the next thing I wanted to talk about
and I'll go into it with a with the
famous quote from Timothy Leary of turn
on tune in drop out
so obviously psychedelics you know hit
the culture pretty in a pretty
significant way in the 1960s are now
going through a massive revival that
you've talked about them in your films
are psychedelics a psycho technology so
I wouldn't I mean there's a bit there's
a there's a possible equivocation and we
could be talking about the chemical
thing or we can be talking about the
experience surrounding it and and then I
would say we can create frameworks of
psycho technologies around the
experience such that we can write
structure that experience to engender
the kinds of transformations that are
conducive to the cultivation of wisdom
so I think to put it in a sentence we
can create sappy ntral frameworks of
psycho technologies around psychedelic
experiences that will afford the kind of
transformation people are seeing so let
me give you what I think is a hopeful
analogy many of people are aware that
part of what's driving this the
psychedelic Renaissance at least
academically scientifically there's a
lot of evidence about the efficacy of
psychedelic experience in like
alleviating treatment resistant
depression or addiction or helping
people to confront existential despair
people who are in terminal situations as
palliative means for them to get an
existential mode to face their imminent
death so people are aware of that what
people need to be aware up let's give
one really clear example the use of
psychedelics we're dealing with sort of
like post-traumatic stress disorder or
treatment-resistant depression
it's always the psychedelics in
conjunction with therapy the scientific
work is always a conjunction simply
taking the drug on its own it will not
you see what you're doing is you're your
we'll talk about this we can talk about
some of the underlying neurological and
cognitive processes in a minute if you
wish but basically what you're doing is
you're you're loosening up the
constraints on your control of this
situation and you're altering your
salience landscape now that can right
that can be that can sort of activate
processes of self-organization that lead
to self transcendence but it can also
activate processes of self-organization
that lead to deep self defense see sorry
deep self-deception you could massively
 yourself with these things -
very much like being in the echo chamber
inside you know social media so you need
to set up the proper Sapienza framework
so that those processes right are being
like the the kind of self-organization
that's being triggered is the
self-transcending kind of
self-organization not self-deceiving
kind of self-organization so the psycho
technologies that we set up around these
psychedelics which of course is what's
happening in therapy because therapy is
a prototypical set of psycho
technologies for trying to change
people's consciousness and cognition you
you want to set those up and if you look
into the spiritual traditions that's
always the case these psychedelics are
not used you know in entertainment
situations or recreational situations or
on a daily basis they're used within a
sacred context that is really designed
to frame them so to bring about the kind
of sappy an shal transformation I was
talking about yes no I've experienced
that firsthand I've seen as many people
more confused to their psychedelic use
then then less confused
and it strikes me you know you talk the
law about the impact of ancient Greece
on our worldview now and of course they
had the Eleusinian mysteries which was
kind of a big psycho drama that you know
that was probably as powerful as what
they took if they took anything and I'm
just wondering aside from the therapy
side of things I mean do you see people
taking psychedelics in a way that is
conducive to that have you seen any
evidence of that and you think still
more needs to be done
I do see evidence of that I mean there
is lots of people that are doing it
recreational entertainment just as sort
of a cognitive booster or enhancer or
something like that but I know of like
person-to-person and more of the
literature I've spoken at conferences
where I've talked about this and got a
lot of response so I don't have
scientific evidence on this there are
some people that are trying to gather
that but I have a lot of at least
suggested anecdotal evidence that many
people are trying to integral
integrate the pursuit of sort of I don't
know of rejuvenating a sense of
sacredness in their life with sets of
psycho technologies wrapped around the
psychedelic experiences and do you think
are you optimistic that this current
revolution in psychedelics could could
help us wake up more effectively from
the meaning crisis and get us into a to
kind of a new mode of thinking yeah I I
am more optimistic precisely because the
way it's not being academically framed
it's not being framed in the Timothy
Leary countercultural thing at least not
in that sense it's being a lot of it's
being framed therapeutically
existentially and even as I've said you
know Sapienza lis spiritually trying to
get this together the problem we face
with that and this is how the meaning
crisis interacts with this right is we
don't we don't have established wisdom
traditions and institutions in the West
anymore we've lost them so we know that
we know where to go for for knowledge
and information we go to history and
science for knowledge we go to the
internet for information and the media
but where to go for wisdom so what
happens is right people tend to pursue
this in a
autodidactic manner that they try to
cobble things together and the the the
the danger with that is autodidact ism
is also a venue in which you can really
fall prey to bullshitting yourself and
self-deception I mean a lot of famous
autodidact turned out to be really
really horrible people for exactly that
reason
so because we do not have vetted safe
networks of things like sort of I don't
know what like secular monasteries or
something where people can go where
there are traditions and in evolving
traditions I don't mean stagnant
evolving traditions and compete in
communities well that it practiced
scientifically studied sets of psycho
technologies integrated systematically
together people don't have that that's
what because of the meaning crisis that
means they there is this great danger of
the attempt to Wed the sacredness with
the psychedelic experience is falling
prey to a lot of autodidactic for lack
of a better word corruption and so I
would hope that all of the things that I
see moving towards addressing the
meaning crisis would and as we're
starting with David not just
theoretically but practically
engineering communities and institutions
and sets of psycho technologies properly
vetted and managed with you know
appropriate connections to the
scientific world right but that we would
be able as we're doing this alleviation
of the meeting crisis we that need to
create the psycho technologies will
integrate with movements that are
occurring because there are these
movements I'm going to be talking to a
personal podcast next week who's set up
some secular monasteries
there's attempts to try and capture what
the Scandinavian countries did with you
know with the movement of creating the
self cultivation and centers and so
there's there's there's things happening
I'm hoping these two things will join so
that we will get places
so I think it's mark Hayden who talks
about the idea we should create
certification programs for psychedelics
like we do for any other potentially
dangerous things like driving a car and
you should have to there should be
established institutions educational
facilities places where you can go and
train receive critical and informative
feedback and then use the psychedelics
within that context I'm hoping we can
build towards that I guess one of the
big questions in science versus
spirituality but when I call it that
because I understand a part of your work
is to kind of bridge and it relates
actually as well to psychedelics in some
way I helped organize a big conference
called breakin convention psychedelics
conference and one of the main tensions
there is between people who have these
peak experiences and their deep feeling
is that they have tapped into a wider
consciousness that is beyond them a kind
of consciousness that is everywhere and
then there's more materialist people who
say no this is all just being generated
in your brain so that seems to be a big
crux point and I've heard it described
as the hard and soft problem of
consciousness you know what what is
consciousness so be interesting just to
hear your thoughts on can that be
reconciled does it need to be for for
this kind of blending
I mean consciousness is really hard I I
do it I am doing work on it you know
working being with answers and Tana
Richard whoo and you know and what what
I want to say is I think I would argue
that one of the important things
consciousness is doing why we seem to
need consciousness for ill-defined novel
problems right challenging problems in
that way is because consciousness is
doing this kind of higher order
relevance realization and part of what
consciousness does is give me this
perspective on knowing of a salience
landscape that makes all this meaning
making possible and that's why altered
states of consciousness it can also
reveal aspects of the environment that
are not normally revealed like if you
look at one one quick digression this
actually goes back to the drug issue in
some ways my friend and colleague
brilliant man Mark Lewis
says you know when we're talking about
drug addiction don't focus on the on the
drug the material thing and a like a
disease model but the drug enters you he
says instead what you should think about
is you you you you the drug triggers a
state which sort of lowers that process
of Co identification a little bit of
your cognitive flexibility goes away so
the options available to you in the
world narrow a bit now because they
narrow that tends to like traumatize
your cognition and it starts to become
more rigid it narrows and you see what
happens here you get this cycle this
vicious feedback loop and he calls it
reciprocal narrowing and when I was
talking to mark about this I said well
that reciprocal narrowing could go the
other way a reciprocal realization like
in when Plato talks about this and
coming out of the cave and all of that
and he said oh yeah you're right that
that makes sense right and so I think we
have to understand something understand
a way of bridging this by understanding
that that dynamic connectivity is what
we are actually wanting to talk about
here's how I would put this we should
stop thinking of these experiences as
are they're a subjective property of our
cognition or an objective property of
the physical world
these are trans Jack t'v properties
about our connectedness and these are
real relations notice the adjective
these are real relations that afford
reciprocal narrowing if if we're doing
it wrong or afford reciprocal
realization and I think what's happening
it because I do a lot of work on these
higher states of consciousness is people
are actually wanting to describe
reciprocal realization they feel like
they're getting to the depths of
themselves and the depths of reality at
the same time and they are right I agree
with them that the standard grammar of
subjectivity and objectivity cannot
capture that trans gentleman's
realization if we think about these
processes and we think about the real
relations the dynamical systems we can
craft a language that will bridge
between you know the hardline
Objectivist and the hardline
subjectivist about this so that's how I
will respond I think there is an
important way in which we can create a
new vocabulary about transductive 'ti
dynamical copenhague reciprocal
reciprocal realization that will be and
I try to do this in some of my talks on
higher states of consciousness I have
some on YouTube on exactly this and I'll
talk about it in the video series as
well that do just as both to the
phenomenology and the sense of
importance and depth that people are
feeling and to the scientific worldview
that you know the what you call the
materialists are holding on to I think
it does justice to both this leads quite
nicely into what I wanted to talk about
next which is mindfulness because we
actually both share we both have a
practice but we also train people as
well one of the phrases I love in
mindfulness is don't believe everything
you think and so it seems that
mindfulness is can very much be a tool
for helping us wake up from these biases
and maybe I guess waking up from the
meaning crisis in general so I'd love to
hear hear your thoughts on that right so
what I would say is mindfulness are does
what we need to reformulate how I think
we're thinking about mindfulness and
think of it instead of as single
practice as an ecology of practices and
I would also say we need to integrate
mindfulness with other complementary
cyclic technologies like barren and
Stanovich his idea of active open
mindedness and I think getting sets of
psycho technologies that complement each
other in terms of their strengths and
weaknesses is is what we should actually
be pursuing let's talk about mindfulness
first though and then if you if you give
me a chance I'll come back and talk
about active open mindedness so the
thing about this and this is work I did
with Leo Ferraro published in 2016 the
thing about this is you have to be
careful when we're entering into this
discourse because there's two different
discourses we could have about
mindfulness there's the there's the
language we use in a setting in which
we're training mindfulness and I can use
all kind of lang
in that setting that's appropriate to
actually training this skill for you
right and this is analogous that I can
train your memory by doing what Sherlock
does right the the the the mental palace
right the method of loci and and that
really trains memory very well the
problem with the method of loci is it
gives you the idea that that's how
memories work that they're located and
stored as stable objects in stable
location and memory doesn't work like
that at all
like there's just that spatial metaphor
for memory is just completely misleading
so the language of training is very
effective but you should not translate
it uncritically into the language of
explaining right and so a lot of the
language of print training that we're
using in at least in the West is you
know pay attention to the present moment
focus on the here and now right sort of
concentrate and that's like I said
that's language I used to but I think if
we're trying to explain what mindfulness
is that's I think that that's not a not
good enough it's it's got to impoverish
the view of attention and it doesn't
really tell us what people are doing
cognitively because terms like here and
now are irredeemably vague what is here
this couch this room Toronto what's now
this moment this hour this day we've
tended to think of mindfulness just as
equated to being present a state of
being present that's achieved in
meditation I would argue that that's an
unfair representation of the ecology of
practices for example found within
Buddhism because for example you have a
whole set of psycho technologies in the
Eightfold Path and you have things like
right mindfulness and right
concentration which tells you that there
are wrong mindfulness and wrong
concentration and what do I mean by that
in meditation you're doing this stepping
back and looking at your breaking any
inappropriate framings you have right
and that could help afford insight but
you need another thing to to actually
really optimize for insight you need our
me not to break an inappropriate afraid
you need how you need how you need to
know how to make a new and more
penetrative deeper frame that picks up
on those real patterns in reality and
that's what I would argue contemplative
practices
and the word you're the words yourself
themselves point to it meditation is
like moving towards the center and so
when we talk about finding your Center a
lot in meditation contemplation the word
contemplation is the word temple in it
that you know temple is where you looked
in the sky originally you look deep into
the depths of reality contemplate AO is
the Latin for the Greek theoria which
will we get the word theory from because
the theory originally means to look try
to look and see the deeper patterns in
reality and so what you have in Buddhism
is you have meditative practices like
for pasta to help you break
inappropriate framing and you have
contemplative practices like meta that
help you make new appropriate framing
and that and having them dynamically
trained together really optimizes and
affords your insight and your capacities
for insight we know this from work done
at the University of Toronto by Colin to
young Joe Flanders in and Jordan
Peterson and they sort of acknowledged
it was inspired by me so that that
capacity for insight is also directly
related to your capacity for picking up
on self-deception right so it has to do
with sort of a particular experimental
methodology so I won't get into that so
mindfulness really enhances your insight
but one more thing before I turn to
another topic the level at which like
what I'm doing Metta right I'm trying to
pick up on and I'm contemplating right
I'm trying to pick up on the process of
Co identification I'm trying to become
aware of something that's normally
higher up happening intuitively and
automatically I'm trying to become aware
of the identities I'm assuming and the
identities deciding right now I'm a
scientist and you are an interviewer
right in this room which is normally my
partner's living room is you know it's
an arena for an interview like i dint
objects are being assigned identities
I'm that process of Co identification is
happening all the time and I want to
bring that into my awareness month by my
contemplative practices I want to see
those patterns so what I can do
I can develop this capacity for insight
by doing contemplation and meditation
and then I can take it not just a level
of intellectual insight but down to a
modal level the existential level the
levels by which we are creating these
patterns of identities for ourselves and
on others in the world and I can get
insight at that level by which
identities are being formed and that is
that's what I think the vast sana which
means insight is in the past not like
insight at that level of the process of
identity formation and so that's it's
not just insight into your sort of daily
life which mindfulness will give you
more creative write help you make better
sense reduce your self-deception but it
can also take you down to this very deep
fundamental level at which we're making
the relationships between the agency and
the arena of things so that all of our
actions are meaningful to us so I think
that's what how mindfulness can really
address that but like I say and though
and there's increasing evidence that
mindfulness helps to reduce certain
kinds of biasing I think that whole set
of psycho technologies that ecology
needs to be integrated with other sets
of psycho technologies like active open
mindedness for example fantastic John
rebecky thank you so much thank you so
much I really enjoyed this a lot
[Music]
you