howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
ruts show com
that's Jim ruts show com today's guest
Zach Stein writer educator and futurist
he's working to bring a greater sense of
sanity and justice to education hey Jim
it's gonna be back hey it's great to
have you back Zach for this part three
of Zach's time Zach has a doctorate in
educational neuroscience human
development and philosophy and the
philosophy of education that is at
Harvard he's the co-founder of electic
a-- a nonprofit dedicated to the
research base justice oriented reform of
large-scale standardized testing in k-12
higher ed and business we're gonna
continue working through Zach's very
interesting book education in a time
between worlds this is part three of us
working through that book and for those
who want to get some contacts you might
want to go back and listen to Part one
and Part two that we're gonna try to
keep the conversation such that it makes
some sense for those who haven't and as
always any resources we discuss there'll
be links to on the episode page at Jim
rutt show dot-com so let's start with
talking a little bit about technology
and education we talked about it a fair
amount in the first two episodes but a
lot of it was sort of conceptual and
almost full of Safa chol I wonder if you
could get down to some specific examples
of how technology is used in in
education or could be used in education
maybe an example or two about
not-so-good use and would be really
interesting is some examples or at least
possibilities of good productive use of
technology and education totally yeah
it's it's important because we've
actually accelerated the trend towards
kind of digitally delivered education
probably by five to ten years just as a
result of the pandemic kind of closing
down of the schools and so a couple
examples right so when you think of
educational technology a few things come
to mind right one is computers and
laptops in every child's hand all right
the other is resources like Khan Academy
or YouTube which are incredible actually
from a variety of perspectives so
there's this notion that if you simply
put a laptop in every kid's hand and
show them basically how to use Khan
Academy well and step back it'll all
just basically work out and what's
interesting when you look at that
scenario is that it's not a bad idea
it's not wrong it's just not a
comprehensive approach that could be
used to handle every child it could be
useful for a small number of children in
a certain amount of kind of like well
constrained contexts but in general an
informational environment like YouTube
in informational environments not an
educational environment I'm an
educational environment is structured in
an extremely specific way and involves
this dynamic of joint attention and
teacherly Authority which we've
discussed in the previous episodes and
so the way to think about this is that
in YouTube's probably the best example
because if you simply place a kid in
front of a YouTube YouTube will capture
the kid and basically suggest the next
video for the kid to watch based on what
the kid has watched and so everybody can
knows this as a helga rhythm so the
question of educational in terms of
curriculum it's all about sequencing
like what's the sequence of videos that
the kid watches on YouTube why is he
watching this sequence of videos as
opposed to say some other the answer is
that if you just think simply place the
kid in front of YouTube the sequence of
videos will be given
not an incentive to capture attention to
sell advertisements I wish it was more
complicated than that but it's not so of
all the possible sequences that the kid
could have let's say beginning of video
about some historical topic like the
American Revolution right there's any
number of actually really rigorous kind
of very informative and nuanced
sequences that the kid could watch from
the simple introductory to the more
complex of the focus on a specific
historical incident than some specific
historical characters right like in the
revolution so those sequences exist
within YouTube but they need to be
curated by educators not by algorithms
that are mining attention for profit and
so this is just to say that left alone
YouTube is not an educational technology
but with the right structure and a lot
of discipline around screen usage you
can curate resources in some of these
types of environments to craft really
rich sequences of exposure to a variety
of media coming from places that you
know even five five let alone ten years
ago which just simply wouldn't have been
available generally
and that's the kind of amazing thing at
this moment is that it's so much of it -
they're so much of what we need for
completely decentralized and
technologically robust and completely
individualized education for every child
alive is just sitting there at our
fingertips but the intermediaries the
content delivery systems the kind of
media and form in which these things are
held and presented obscures that
possibility greatly so that's a kind of
example of like the negative side and
the positive side I already was
mentioning which is that if you create a
container in which educational
technology is used and these containers
are relationships right that are
characterized by
actual legitimate teacherly Authority
and for more on that you can see I think
it's episode one right and that we spoke
about teacher Li Authority at length but
the idea here is that you know
technology is a tool and you can have a
relationship with a piece of technology
but it's different than the relationship
you have with a teacher right like I
have a relationship with a hammer
I've relationship with my car but I
would never confuse that relationship
with a relationship I have with my wife
or my you know dissertation adviser and
so that's an important thing is that you
have to position the technology in a
conversation between teacher and student
as opposed to basically having the
technology be the center of attention so
that means you're repurposing things
like YouTube and repurposing things like
Khan Academy and human repurposing
things like Wikipedia and all of the
articles available for free through
things like JSTOR now and so what you
get there is basically a empowerment of
the teacher as curator but this also
requires a lot of discipline and so
again there's a tendency to confuse
looking at a screen watching content
with something like education or
educational technology so that's a
little bit on specifics because it's
actually not solving specific technical
problems in the field of educational
technology it's solving the kind of
human machine interface problem what is
that problem actually in the field of
educational technology it's much more
complex than student looks at screen it
ends up having to be this dynamic of
teach really Authority in which the
educational technology is is placed so a
YouTube rabbit hole right catalyzed by a
kind of extractive algorithmic sequence
through a set of videos that captures
the kid attention it's extremely
different than one or two videos placed
before the kid followed with
conversation amongst himself teacher
another kid and maybe the conversation
takes place on video conference maybe
not
so I'm actually kind of like taking a
perspective of dialing back the
ambitiousness of what people would like
to achieve with a digital and
repositioning
the situation between the human the
machine and and nature so I'll pause
there
yeah that's that very clear actually as
I'm thinking it through listening to you
talk as we talked about in the last
episode I'm an online product
development guy at heart product manager
if I ever had to actually have an honest
job that's probably what I'd have to do
and I'm thinking about it doesn't sound
all that hard you imagine an interface
where the teacher can set a curriculum
for an individual student personalized
that's essentially a series of exposures
to well curated by the teacher for the
student probably starting with a
template for a kid of that age and let's
say it's the unit on the American
Revolution it's as you say within a
container think of it it's a web
application that the kid goes and looks
at a couple things and gets engaged
perhaps in a forum discussion with their
classmates with the teacher monitoring
and maybe jumping in where necessary
then the piece you didn't mention and I
know this is of great interest of yours
professionally is typically the teacher
early role also includes some assessment
right did the kid actually watch the
video and did they extract something at
least semi-reasonable from it so you
know let's say there's a good video on
the Federalist Papers right it's roll
the content in it who the personalities
were etc and then at the end there could
be a little quiz that checks to see that
the kid actually did watch the video and
took away some at least you know
plausible perspective from it and that
could you know be a resource that exists
out in the world as well and to be
reused the teacher could modify it
perhaps a little bit but could start
with a you know well crafted assessment
for that video you know thinking of a
system of that sort doesn't seem very
hard at all I mean frankly I don't know
a damn thing about the current state of
play educational technology do such
things exist today to allow a teacher to
create a custom set of online
experiences with you know discussion
Intermezzo and assessment etc absolutely
Jim and that's actually like it's a
growth market in the educational
technology space are these very complex
kind of like curriculum housing content
delivery systems that also have ways of
man
student assessment administration
student assessment scoring grading so
there's a lot of these I'm not gonna
like come speak to specific ones cuz
it's I don't know actually the current
state but I do know that the vision you
laid out is one that was hit upon very
early by for example Khan Academy who
has a system of basic kind of tests and
quizzes that follow sequences of
mathematic videos and other things like
that and so you know it's also worth
noting that those same curriculum
housing and content delivery systems
that track student grading and
assessment and etc many of them are
wedded to actually very complex
psychometric and user data backends
right so it's not even that we want to
assess kids it's that we want to
completely surveil them and the use of
technology the school mandated computer
use gets tracked down to the mouse-click
same mins same thing happens in
corporate environments and you're
starting to hear some of this because
everyone's working from home now but you
know it's capable to have more or less
almost total transparency through to
someone's keyboard usage Mouse usage how
long are they staying on different
videos things of that nature so one
thing we need to look at when we're
looking at what you're speaking about
these types of kind of like apps that
kind of like captured the entirety of
the educational experience supposedly is
that they are yes subject to over Metro
fication and like big data saturation
and it's kind of like one of these
things that tech does in general is that
every affordance that might be I come I
will be used any importance of the
technology that could be used like the
surveillance of students there'll be a
push to do that so yeah it's just worth
noting that there's a flipside to all of
these profound possibilities within
education as a result of this digital
and that flipside is that we run the
risk of actually creating a more kind of
invasive and unjust but digitally
enhanced educational system right that
we in a sense you know don't make the
right decision at this turning point in
history of education and educational
technology because this is as big a
transition as a transition that followed
from the printing press which I spoke
about before right which convenience was
involved in like how do we restructure
schools now that the availability of
books is almost you know trivial can by
comparison to the hand copied
manuscripts that were used in the
monastic education systems so that
profoundly changed the face of society
and the possibilities within education
you know the text book became possible
which John Amos Comenius really was one
of the key players in seeing that if you
could precisely mass-produce through the
use of the printing press something like
a very powerful textbook then you could
use that to organize a whole complex new
kind of schooling system and so
similarly the digital is as fundamental
a transformation in the technological
underpinnings of education as the
printing press but so far I don't think
we've fully realized the possibility of
the digital in the education space and
that's some of what my book is about
it's like redirecting the social
imagination away from thinking that the
digital futures for education are kind
of like we've got them already or
similar to what we've already seen and I
was I'm incorrect like we this is act
we've kind of had a false start here
with the nature of the digital meds
applies across a whole bunch of realms
in the internet and so I think yeah and
the near future we may see people
pivoting away from the screen based
delivery system kind of like didactic
videos and quizzes administered by
skineri and learning
Fox's model and actually moved to the
model of no human teacherly authority is
and always will be the key around which
educational configurations kind of pivot
and so technology needs to slot into
that better and richer conversation and
interaction between teacher and student
rather than technology running
interference between the richer
conversation between teacher and student
which is what's happening now and that
would also require curating the rest of
the information environment that
especially young people but all people
are exposed to which is I spoke to this
the last time you spoke I think you know
that's kind of one of the main effects
now in socialization beyond what the
school would like to do and even what
you'd like to do around the dinner table
there's what's happening for those six
hours a day when they had a lesson
staring at the screen so there's a need
to think about educational technology
not just about those technologies used
in school or used in formal educational
contexts but to realize that a lot of
this technology is actually educational
technology except we're using it as if
it's technology just to make money
and so we're miss educating
systematically because we don't realize
this thing we're messing around with
actually educational technology Facebook
for example Twitter for example even
Wikipedia so yeah I think there's
there's a lot of kind of failure of
imagination in the space of digital
education yeah so I'll pause there
there's it's almost an endless
conversation and I'm specifically
eliminating speaking about specific
platforms or apps or things of that
nature because I prefer to work at this
level of kind of like design principle
thinking rather than get down into the
specifics
yeah it sounds like that you know one
could describe what's being done is
essentially just grinding finer on the
same old shitty model right we now have
a sausage factory that's more fully
automated ah we bought an IBM 360 and
hook it up to our sausage factory in
1967 right without changing the metaphor
and without changing the intent you know
as I'm listening to you speak very
eloquently but again putting my online
product dude hat on I go you know it
wouldn't be that hard to build something
like that I mean it's not trivial it's
you know 20 man years of work maybe a
hundred man years of work something in
that range but even it's a hundred man
years of work that's you know call it
twenty million dollars not a lot of
money on the scale of things you know it
seemed like a useful thing for somebody
to do is to get yourself and some other
experts on the future of Education to
specify in a little bit more detail what
you think is the right way to go get
some consultation from teachers of both
the formal and the new variety ie you
know parents serving as teachers
Community Leaders serving his teachers
and actually build something and you
know build it open source so that it's
free to everybody and that everyone can
inspect and make sure that it's not
capturing fine grain dopamine
button-pushing kinds of stuff for either
exploitative or surveillance type
purposes you know you know on the scale
of things it's a very doable project I
agree I mean the thing to remember that
is the project is actually not just a
technological project because it's also
one about reconfiguring teacherly
authority right so you can you can build
a technology but the one I'm specifying
requires skillful teaching too and
context in which teach early authority
are you know held and possible as
opposed to context where teach early
authority is questioned
yeah I see that it's being a specific
part of the design right to build the
Hawks for teacherly Authority deeply
into it and I can see where that would
actually come in the product flow and
just you know getting sort of
whiteboarding it in my head as we talk
which is something I do all the time
unfortunately but yeah so yeah design it
with that intent from the beginning
course that still has the problem of
then teaching people how to teach in
this new paradigm and it's probably not
sending them to the Harvard School of
Education to learn how to teach but you
know again that's a different problem
for a different day but one that would
also have to be addressed to make this
really be the foundation for a new level
of teaching the last comment I wanted to
make was you talked about we think about
all of our online networks at some level
as teaching tools Facebook Twitter etc
it's gonna point out that people used to
say the same thing about television
right damn television should be used for
educational purposes not for the Three
Stooges and I can still remember when I
was about in third or fourth grade and
all the parents of all teachers were
horrified that fourth-grade boys
favorite idea of a good time after
school is to sit and watch with his
buddies sit in somebody's basement watch
The Three Stooges right of course there
was supposedly educational TV on the
public channel but the stuff sucked
nobody watched it etc and it kind of
became a dead end except for a little
bit of successful early childhood stuff
like what's the one with the Muppets
what the hell was that thing called
Sesame Street a little quiz otic to
think that Facebook and Twitter are
gonna really become educational
platforms as opposed to whatever the
hell they are oh no I think they've
become the TV of our era and it's you
know it's funny when you look at the
history of Education appropriately it
ends up being in part of history of
Technology so this guy Lawrence Kremen
who wrote this three-volume history of
American education just called American
education won a Pulitzer Prize or
something like that an amazing book he
looks at television the birth of
television and you know looking at the
rhetoric around TV as it was rolling out
and it kind of democratized way across
America the rhetoric or
and it was that it was the thing that
will would accomplish democracy through
education and kind of the the you know
the mass delivery of high-level
information and and culture and so when
I was reading that you could have
actually like just taken out the word TV
and put in the word the Internet and it
would have been almost exactly identical
rhetoric today well not so much today
but more like in the late 90s before
everything kind of changed a little bit
and so you had this sense that the
internet was the thing that would
accomplish democracy through the kind of
dispersal of high-quality information
across the board but what happened in
television is the same thing that
happened incidentally what the internet
was that advertising intervened and was
like well you're not just gonna give
this stuff away right you want to use
this to make money somehow and so the
whole notion that you know brought to
you by our sponsors right which began
with radio but then amplified up and
through television so it's again it's
you don't want to ever reduce one trend
in technology why it went one way to
want console factor but the case in both
the internet and television was that the
potential educational use was seen
immediately and then all of a sudden did
not materialize in the way we thought it
would and in fact then the arguments
became that this is making a stupider
the thing that we thought was going to
liberate us visa V new educational
frontiers actually ended up somehow
closing off access to education now
we're stupider because of the television
internet so that's interesting it is it
again in both cases yes you're right
it's particularly on the internet I was
even as I mentioned before on other
episodes I don't remember I mentioned in
the first two episode or not I was
involved in building some of the very
earliest consumer online services back
in 1980 company called the source where
we had most of what's on the web today
literally we had news wires we had chat
we had bulletin boards we had email we
had home shopping and I was actually
quite remarkable but because of the cost
of the technology at the time it cost
$100 initiation fee and $10 an hour
right and go
to help pay that well the reason tens of
thousands hundreds of thousands of
people spent that kind of money because
there was no other way to do it if you
wanted to participate in the earliest
days of the online world that's what it
cost and at that time we were quite sure
that we were doing you know work for
goodness towards citizenship by just as
you said you know damn we had a copy of
the Constitution online we had access to
all the bills in Congress we actually
went to considerable difficulty to
gather that data actually through a
third party and put it on our platform
and because of the fact that we're
charging a fairly hefty fee we paid
those information providers actual
royalties and it seemed like we're doing
the right thing and of course because
people were paying serious money from a
design perspective it was not our job to
hold people online forever because
they'd quit they'd get a bill for 800
bucks and you know if they don't quit
their wife pulls the plug on them right
and that used to happen from time to
time people got addicted to the games
and so we specifically engineered the
platform to get you the most valuable
for the least amount of time possible so
you could get what you wanted and get
the hell off and so their interests and
our interests were aligned at some level
well when you get to the world of
advertising it's quite the opposite the
game becomes very perverse the game is
to reel you in and keep you sitting
there drooling for as long as possible
irrespective of whether you're getting
any benefit or not and so as I have said
before if I were a dictator god damn it
I would just flat-out law online
advertising period because online
advertising is way more pernicious even
than TV advertising which is bad enough
and the reason for that is because of
what you've alluded to in passing and
then in more detail in an earlier
episode is because they track every
micro behavior and then they even better
people don't know this they also blend
it with demographic data they bought
from people like axiom which has all
your magazine subscriptions when you
vote you have a hunting license or not
what car you own etc and their micro
manipulating you at an unbelievably low
level I frankly think it's goddamn
immoral and that if the citizenry really
thought long and hard about
they just flat-out law online
advertising don't live and you have to
see advertising as a form of education I
mean that's you know it's like again
back to convenience he said you have to
see society sub specie educationists
right like so you see all social
phenomenon under the kind of sign of
education and advertising is education
it's actually one of the main
educational forces within our current
civilization which is one of the reasons
we're in a self terminating civilization
yeah so the eyes of the business of
convincing you that status comes through
possessions or positional goods right
yeah it's in the business of teaching
you basically about things about
products and teaching you about
lifestyles teaching you about value and
about the nature of relationships and
what's normal what's healthy what's
unhealthy it's teaching you about what
is diseased and what's not a disease you
know I mean it's a remarkable a number
of things that that advertising actually
teaches and there's a hidden curriculum
advertising deeper which is the layer
that you're getting at which is that
it's teaching you something about who
you are what the identity is and you
know at a certain point with television
advertisement became a an important
effect in adolescent identity formation
but when everyone had in the palm of
their hand an endless stream of
customized advertisements then I believe
that we started to see advertising step
into more fundamentally dysregulated
identity formation that at any point
prior and some of what we're seeing now
in the adolescence kind of mental health
crisis is that it's that the main effect
of their educational experience has in
fact not been in schools from teachers
or mom and dad but it has been something
like this total saturation of their
informational environment by
advertisements or proxies of
advertisements which is to say things
that the advertisements work
parasitically around
and things that are indistinguishable
from real life and advertising so get
that that's happening right that there
are in the world of social media and
actual and real in the real world
almost guerrilla hidden advertisements
it's thought of by you know brilliant
advertising executives that blur the
distinction
yeah product placements famous right and
these goddamn influencers right with
their product placements it's just
corrupt goddamn it anyway let's go on to
our next topic we could probably both
vent about the evils of online
advertising for three hours but that's
gone to the next item which is you have
a chapter in your book on spiritual
teachers and the postmodern marketplace
for religious education as I mentioned
in passing but I'll hit again in this
episode when I was in elementary school
kid in the first half of the 1960s we
still had to say the Lord's Prayer
everyday at the start of school in the
public schools and being at the time a
good Catholic not anymore
you know us good Catholics would not say
the last verse which was the goddamn
Protestant version but it was still you
know state mandated that you say the
Lord's Prayer if you went fifty miles
further south and Leo where we were
right on the north/south border line
there was mandatory Bible study and not
as literature as part of the public
school curriculum and I must say I still
have a very strong suspicion of the
mixing of religion and education and
continue to believe that the
Enlightenment separation of church and
state was one of the great achievements
of the human race and I love to point
out the people I do believe this is the
purest enlightenment document that came
from the 18th century which is the
Virginia statute for religious freedom
which was first proposed like 1779 was
finally passed in 1786 the co-authors
were madison and jefferson you know one
the author of the Declaration of
Independence Jefferson and the other the
principal author they're not the sole
author of the US Constitution James
Madison and
was a remarkable document and not only
did it include religious freedom for
various denominations at Protestant
Christians Allah John Locke but it
explicitly called out religious freedom
for Jews Muslims and Hindus and its
course interesting that Jefferson was a
deist and Madison was an outright
atheist and yet this became the law of
the land in the biggest and richest
state in what would become the United
States so I still put my car down pretty
strongly for that Enlightenment view now
in your book you say that the decline of
religious hypothesis has not panned out
leading some to suggest that we have
entered a post secular era religion is a
key node in the emerging transnational
constellations that will radically shape
the future of global civilization so I'd
love to get your thought on where
religion appropriately fits in education
absolutely and that's a great that's a
great framing because I yeah off the bat
would agree that one of the great steps
forward in terms of Western civilization
was this move that ushered in modernity
of separating church and state
completely agree what's interesting that
you know some of the ethos for that and
you mentioned Jefferson was a deist
and you think about how many of that
generation the revolutionary generation
were deep into the Masonic Order and
involved in certain forms of deism and
other forms of actual over mysticism and
you look at the move from the
Renaissance the Enlightenment right
which I discuss last time which was a
period filled with this sentiment that
would result eventually in the
separation of church and state but it
was a religious sentiment the move to
create modernity arose from a certain
kind of transformation in the nature of
religiosity itself which included you
know those atheists who were you know
more religious than the most religious
in their atheism in terms of its
radicalism and its ability to get them
out of their given social account
kind of give themselves over to
transcendental signifiers you might say
so there was a submerging move not to
squash religion but actually to let many
religions flourish this is the sentiment
it's not the sentiments at OU right now
we're going to separate church and state
so that by the time we get to year 2000
all religions will have disappeared and
everyone will be an atheist and believe
in scientific materialism that wasn't
the sentiment of the founding fathers it
was in fact that we need to allow
religion to be an open an exploratory
frontier of human experience not
constrained by dogma and certainly not
captured by political interest and vice
versa that politics and governance the
the things that allow the land and the
people to be safe and to have meaning
we can't port that in from some specific
religion and confuse political
sovereignty with you know the places
where religious authority are sovereign
like in the realms of morality for
example so it gets interesting I think
when you revisit the conversation now in
the context where we're late postmodern
early meta modern right when we still
beat this kind of dead horse of
pre-modern religion and this is that
emergence of the post secular age right
which is a book that Charles Taylor
wrote and then Hamas has written a lot
about this Hamas in his later years
returned to reading kirkegaard and
reflecting on this question of what is
the role of religion now in the public
sphere when all the sociologists thought
it was going to burn out and that
modernity would basically eat religion
up and spit out some kind of pure
nationalism and efficiency oriented like
economic philosophy but instead it
didn't we've seen actually a resurgence
of certain forms of religion religiosity
and it remains the case globally
the vast vast majority of humans who
live now and who have ever lived would
describe themselves as believers or
members in a religion and yes if the
question then becomes alright separation
of church and state is in the interest
not of squashing religion but in the
interest of allowing religion to
actually be an independence kind of area
of human interest and you've seen that
in America you know America has
pioneered the religion of no religion
right hmm especially with the human
potential movement in the sixties and
and so you're looking at two ways to
think about the question you know one is
that well there's no place for religion
at all in education education is just
about science all right and just about
facts but now you've just made science
or religion so there's a way that we
need to think about the curriculum of
educational configurations as about
capacitating individuals to consider the
questions of religion and to consider
the questions of science rather than the
educational configurations being the
delivery of certain scientific truths of
the delivery of certain religious
beliefs this is a key distinction it's
deeper than the question of is religion
in school or not because it's as a level
of epistemological orientation of the
curriculum and so you can do the thing
we compare the worst forms of religion
to the best forms of science right where
it's like stupid religious people look
how smart the scientists are but you can
also do the thing where you compare the
worst forms of science right captured by
industry interest and simplified causal
mechanisms and really Bad's manipulative
statistics and after genic harm not like
the worst kind of science you compare
the worst science to the best most
sophisticated religious worldviews right
and then you come at how you silly
simplistic scientists there's of course
a bigger story and so either of those
approaches are wrong right but that's
what you see in the so-called science
religion debate which is not really a
debate it's mostly
I'm gonna get doing this but it's you
know and this is again when you when
you're talking about religion in schools
now in the United States you're often
even given the question like someone's
asking the question they're asking it
from the presumption of as you began
with like you know the worst of religion
compared to kind of the best of what's
in a rational and scientific I'm saying
that's a little unfair that in fact were
we to begin to reimagine having
religious discussions within educational
context in a broad scale it would
precisely have to be the most
sophisticated religious views you know
just like if we were gonna bring science
in the schools we wouldn't bring in
science from the 1890s right we'd bring
in the best in science we could so we'd
want to bring in the best most
sophisticated articulate religious and
Theological and metaphysical forms of
conversation and it's just worth noting
that as someone who studies human
development and looks at the way the
mind changes and transforms of the
course of the lifespan you see that
religious questions about ultimate
concern this is Paul Tillich's phrase to
think about what's the subject matter of
religion it's the things of ultimate
concern that these are perennial
questions emerging within the human mind
and especially at certain ages
adolescents for example and so the need
to have a place to resolve those forms
and address those forms of kind of
inevitable inevitable questioning that's
I think of responsibility as part of
intergenerational transmission and so
you know there's I think a need and this
is what I speak to in my book a need to
rekindle those spaces where we can
discuss what is of ultimate concern that
we can have incredibly reasonable
articulate complex nuanced
scientifically informed conversations
about those things that are revolting
and concerned right because if we don't
do that then we'll only get irrational
fundamentalistic it's kind of simple
discussions about things of ultimate
concern right because it says if
speaking about those things at all is
like spooky and the scientists aren't
allowed to talk about them or if they do
they need to explain them away or do
some hand waving and at the very least
say the religions had nothing to do with
explaining a good answer and that
theoretical physics can or something
like that right so we need to actually
resuscitate and revive and as habermas
says explore the untapped semantic
potentials that are still latent within
religious language and he believed that
those untapped semantic potentials still
laid within religious language that they
provided resources precisely quote to
protect vulnerable forms of community
life and so when you think about that
it's interesting like you know death and
dying classically the province of
religion for better and for worse right
so much death and dying goes on in
hospitals now so much death and dying is
hidden so much of death and dying is not
for discussion for display and so this
has become a vulnerable form of
community life that we make any sense
together about death dying
and so that would be an example where
it's like yeah what what do we say to
kids about death you know like mm oh
then if a kid's watching the television
and he sees people talk about war and he
knows that there's nuclear weapons let's
say he's a 10 year old or 13 year old
and he's smart and he's like hey what
happens when we all blow ourselves up
and everything's over
right and now the kids just mentioned
the apocalypse at the dinner table and
so these conversations
and cultures need to have the resources
to enculturate the next generation into
reasonable ways of responding to these
inevitable kind of developmental
thresholds of sense making as part of
human development jug we want
adolescents to grapple with the full
complexity of their experience right and
that includes deep exploration of Who am
I what is the universe right what is the
ultimate goal of being a human of all of
this we're doing all this collaboration
we're doing why are we doing it so yeah
so that's a pause there I've been just
talking yeah let me hop in a little bit
right first some push back a little bit
people listen to the show know that a
push back on religion a fair amount and
so I'm gonna do that first I'm not sure
I buy that
comparing science and religion as sort
of two different peas in the same pod is
very meaningful and the reason for that
is that science is a bright line in
history it strikes me in that it
actually has built into its own
operating system a self-corrective
mechanism you know you talk about bad
science and yes there's been plenty of
bad science you know perhaps most
famously lai cinco ism in Russia or
Stalin just decided he didn't like the
Darwinian style of evolution because it
somehow contradicted some Marxist idea
and he mandated the Lamarckian idea that
you know if you pull on a mouse's tail
the offspring will have longer tails or
some such and he had a sink of fat
named Y Cinco in charge of that so but
over time the inter subjective
verification of science
ratchets away bad science and ratchets
up good science and religion is nothing
like that I mean that's you know why
when I had we talk about adolescence is
quite entering perhaps the most
important day of my life was when I was
11 years old I was always a sucker for a
good complicated story right it's one of
the reasons I've read Lord of the Rings
39 times and I was a good doobie young
Catholic and read the Bible probably
more than the priest thought was healthy
for me and really thought it was quite a
easing the intricate tales of the Old
Testament the much simpler stories but
bigger moral messages of the New
Testament you know I thought they were
kind of cool but as I started learning
more about science at age 9 and 10 and
by time I was 10 I'd read every book on
science in the school library and half
the books in the county library
I started thinking you know something
wrong with this stuff I then went and
did some research on Islam then called
Muslims and then Hinduism and read to
encyclopedia articles on each one and
then I had an epiphany literally almost
our religious experience
the light came on screaming religion is
a human construct developed to control
people and it just was like the curtains
parted in front of my eyes and to this
day I hold to that though I will say I
have a more nuanced view which is
initially the religious inspiration of
religious thinkers may not have been
purposely to control people frankly I
think a fair number of them were people
with serious mental illnesses but over
time they inevitably got captured by
people who use those systems to control
people quite explicitly and because
there is no inner subjective
verification on religion the ability to
mold them for pernicious purposes that
are not subject to amendment is
extraordinarily large in fact my
daughter who's a very good strong
atheist stronger than me actually likes
to relate a story that she had when she
was 14 she was debating her best friend
who was a Pentecostal about religion so
our daughter says well what about the
fossils of the dinosaurs don't they
clearly show that the world's more than
6,000 years old and this was the
ultimate religious style answer oh they
were put there to test our faith mmm you
know perfect right you know you hear use
a factual attempt to refute some part of
that particular sex doctrine which was
young earth oh yeah well yeah there's
fossils but they were put there to test
our faith and so a world of stuff that
people make up ie religion
that's not subject to any sort of
systematic inner subjective verification
to strikes me as a damn bad idea
and with respect to it seems cooked in
to our human nature it is true that
today some large percentage over 90% I'm
sure of all humans adhered religion
however in the most advanced parts of
the world that's not true you go to
northern Europe in particular Great
Britain Netherlands and the Scandinavian
countries and less than half of the
people believe in any explicit religion
and in the United States by far the
fastest growing religion is the religion
of none I think it's 30 40 % of
Millennials now check the nun box when
asked so I'm much less convinced that we
need to have this unverifiable system of
stories that people made up as part of
our operating system of the future and
when we get to ultimate concerns and God
I'll say this is just my personal view
and hell I could be wrong right my own
take on them is that those questions are
very premature we know way too little
about the universe yet to be thinking we
have any standing at all to think about
the ultimate concerns I mean we don't
know about do we live in a multiverse or
not what's the actual nature of quantum
mechanics we don't know you know what
were the early stages of the universe
like we have some details but there's a
couple of big old question marks there
and even the standard models of physics
have gaping holes in them too of what
you're called dark energy and dark
matter which are just statements about
we don't understand what's going on here
right and let alone things like origin
of life whether life is unique to the
earth or as ubiquitous in the universe
there's so much that we don't know about
the universe that we live in that it
strikes me as grossly premature to
speculate oh but you can speculate I
love to speculate hey give me a couple
of shots of good Scott's and I can spin
horseshit stories til the cows come home
about the meaning of life and why the
universe is here but the reality is we
have no real standing to say anything
firm about ultimate can
earns it may well be that the universe
has nothing to do with us right or it
may turn out that human life in
particular is absolutely key to the
unfolding in the universe it's certainly
possible that we are the only life in
the universe or the only life that's
achieved self consciousness in which
case we may have a very very important
role to play but we don't know so is it
intelligent to spend as much energy and
angst and just plain old material effort
on worrying about these ultimate
concerns and aren't they a distraction
from perhaps the more important road
which is to figure out for ourselves
what is the right way to organize
ourselves as a society and ask people to
provide a good life and to move humanity
forward so it has as many good options
as possible yeah I mean it's interesting
you did exactly what I said people do
which shouldn't be done which is you
compare the least generous possible
definition of what religion is and the
worst possible examples of religious
discourse to the most sophisticated
versions of science and you know the
examples you gave of course are terrible
terrible things happen with religion
obviously and biblical literalism as you
described it new earthers who won't look
at any of the paleontology into logical
record I mean that's like your
stereotypical lowest hanging fruit when
wanting to say things that are kind of
insulting to religious people because
there's this whole field of theology
right which like for example Martin
Luther King got a PhD in studying under
Paul Tillich and then you look at the
wisdom traditions across Buddhism and
Tibetan Buddhism and the dynamics of
discursive progress in the discussion of
religious and theological and ethical
doctrine across a variety of religious
traditions right
and so Juilliard day showed on four
example very interesting character who
was a paleontologist and so I think
there's a there's a tendency to
stereotype and misunderstand religion
and confuse it with its worst
instantiations
and it's understandable because some of
them are so appalling especially to you
know modern people but simply
understanding religion as something
that's a made-up story used to
control people I'm gonna have to tell
you that sounds like a very simple
understanding of something that's been a
rich rich part of human culture since
there's been human culture and that this
science that you loved actually was a
refinement of sentiments that began
within religious context that had to do
with a commitment to truth and a
commitment to community trust in a
variety of things that were actually at
the backbone of modernity so yes I would
say to really have a conversation here
we need to get a sense of sincere
grappling with the inter subjective
components of religious discourse which
Ken Wilber speaks do quite a bit
characterizing progress within religious
traditions look just like there's been
progress within ethical traditions and
progress within scientific traditions
and that there are different levels of
religious discourse at religious
engagement different degrees of
maturation within religious
practitioners in terms of the their
ability to work with religion as a set
of practices and beliefs that is always
evolving and growing so yeah I think so
there's that there's kind of like okay
you know this would be me reminding the
scientist that oh yeah isn't hasn't
science actually become the thing that
controls more people's lives that and
the other control system ever built by
humans oh yeah it hasn't science become
able to
massive and damaging Wars and etc etc
right and so it's like we could do that
so but instead what I want to think
about is what you said about the idea
that the founding of religions actually
was had by people with who had
psychological problems and and so this
gets down to brass tacks here because
it's about the nature of religious
experience and this is what I mean by
grappling with questions of ultimate
concern what's the nature of religious
experience by the way we can talk about
all the famous founding scientists who
were crazy but that's another
conversation all right so it's like to
say that the beginning of a tradition is
problematized because the founder is
crazy it's like that's uh it's also a
problem the so yesterday the 50 grand
phone again back to Ken Wilber
there's a way of actually entering the
discourse again which has been going on
for many like thousands of years in some
cases entering the discourse of
religious practitioners and getting a
sense of what are the validity claims
raised within the context of religious
practice and discourse right there's a
technical question right just like
scientists raise claims of truth
facticity etc you know the nature of the
validity claims raised within religious
practice and discourse so in until we
can have a sense of what that looks like
and what a legitimate valid sense of
religiosity and religious experience is
as compared to a illegitimate irrational
poorly held religious experience or
sense of religiosity all right and so
just like in science you can make a
distinction between oh there's good
signs and bad science right what you
were doing in religious worlds in the
worlds of emerging spirituality right
you can make a comparable distinction
you can sort the good from the bad in
these domains and so that's the first
step is figuring out how do we do that
just like with science right how do we
figure out what's good and bad science
there's a way to tell the difference and
just like in religious communities of
practice and discourse there's a way to
tell the difference between those that
are pathological and those that are
actually healthy and you know in again
protecting vulnerable forms of community
life from encroachment by the control
system of science right the meta you
remember we talked about the
medicalization of academic
underperformance can also talk about the
medicalization of death and so that's an
example where how do we preserve the
remnants of the life world from
colonization by the largest control
apparatus ever built witches built by
science one way to do that is actually
leverage this whole other lineage of
human thought and cooperation and I'm
not saying we are all going to the worst
parts of religion ever I'm saying we
actually have to find the best refine it
and actually turn it into something that
is a growing and vibrant part of the
culture instead of something that feels
like a pre-modern remnant that's holding
on and so yeah so there's first need to
even get into the science religion thing
and even think about what it would mean
to move religious and metaphysical and
spiritual conversations into some kind
of reasonable space within the education
field we need to slow down and when
we're thinking about well what is
religion and what is science and come
with the best of both of them instead of
the best of one and the worst of the
other and again the spirituality people
and religious people do the same thing
dismissing science entirely right moving
into some weird post truth discourse
that makes it so that there are no such
thing as even physical bodies and crap
like that right so there's there's nutty
stuff and there's no denying it but I
think to have a as dismissive of view of
it as you did I feel like it makes the
conversation a non-starter
you know it makes it so that it's like
oh yeah Jim must not have ever spent
much time at
reading really sophisticated religious
texts let's say in Tibetan Buddhism or
understanding the you know developments
of contemplative prayer by Father Thomas
Merton or something like that let alone
done years of religious practice or
years of meditative work that would
actually be what would be needed to
weigh in on these validity claims being
made by religious Adams there's another
Ken Wilber point that it's like the
scientist is like hey look there's an
amoeba there and you're like I'm not
gonna look through your microscope but
there is one there okay well I'm glad
you're making it up because I'm I
refused to look through the microscope
and similarly with you know the most
advanced forms of religious practice and
discourse there are injunctions which
tend to be meditative or contemplative
injunctions which need to be undertaken
over time and usually with guidance
which then put forth disclosures just
like you're looking through the
microscope discloses something wouldn't
have otherwise seen and then interest
objective verification of the disclosure
of the contemplatively rien swith the
guy who's supervising you and that's
important to get now that's not Church
going down in Alabama right that's in
the rarefied domains of monasticism and
the halls of you know academic religious
studies and things of that nature but
that is the most refined strand of
religiosity and it still exists and it's
actually larger and more sophisticated
now that it's been in many other
civilizational epochs some of the post
secular age hasn't just been a
resurgence of fundamentalism it's been a
new and sophisticated eclecticism so the
demographics you present are actually
misleading you know yes the Millennials
don't assign themselves to particular
religions but they're also not signing
up as atheists they're saying basically
like my worldview is complicated like
I'm taking a little bit of this a little
bit of that and Verve a ki speaks to
this quite well you know that
the kind of like nun category of
religious affiliation actually signals
in many people world views were if you
were to hear them describe would
actually sound like religious worldviews
so that's just worth noting and and to
your point about well we don't know
anything therefore we shouldn't even be
thinking about topics of ultimate
concern you just weighed in right there
with what you said about a topic ball to
make concern right and most of the
things you mentioned we didn't know were
things done in the physical universe
events within the physical universe that
we're not aware of but there's a lot
that we do know or maybe we don't right
so I know I love my wife I just know it
all right and I know that love is
valuable I just know it and so the
question of like well actually Zak we
don't know if that love is valuable
you're just a meat machine designed by
completely indifferent but mechanical
and causal processes of a
self-organizing kind of like complex
universe and it may be that your love
for your wife is completely meaningless
hmm you're definitely not going to build
a civilization on that idea right you
could probably build a civilization on
the idea that love is meaningful and so
there's this question of again when we
talk about what we don't know and we
talk about matters of ultimate concern
I'm not really super it's not even super
clear to me that like dark matter is a
topic of ultimate concern that seems to
me to be an artifact of contemporary
physics and it could end up being it
poorly conceived set of basic axiomatic
things within physics for all we know so
it's like that's not what I mean I'm
talking about actually is the love for
my wife valuable right like is Mother
Teresa better than Hitler
right on most days probably but but
there are some days when that's not true
apparently she was quite a bitch when
she wanted to be right yeah obviously if
we back ourselves into an ideological
Cornette where we're like yeah she's
better than Hitler but not ultimately
because ultimately were just mechanical
meat machines with notes like oops like
there's certain
of anthropologically deep-seated
cognitive processes which allow for the
life world to function this is where
Habermas ended up going and why he
returned to considerations of religion
and so there's a certain form that
scientific argumentation can take where
it begins to undermine through its own
theorizing the conditions for the
possibility of action orienting self
understanding at the level of the
individual person which is to say if I
argue through neuroscience that you
actually don't make choices and they're
not responsible for your behavior that
you're a purely causal system and like
you're gonna tell your kid that at the
dinner table like yeah well I can't
really punish you for going out last
night because you're actually not
responsible for behavior because you're
just a completely causally determined
meat machine that evolved through
evolution and a meaningless universe so
I guess you're not grounded like what
are the conditions for the possibility
of actually morally binding human
relationships right and at what point
does the premium put by science on cap
on counter intuitive explanations of
human experience end up so confusing
human experience that we end up being
self terminating kind of culture yeah
the crazy reductionist view oh yeah you
know in some level of thinking you can
argue that you are a causal machine is
just not useful right turns out not to
be useful
I had Jessica flack on the show not too
long ago from the Santa Fe Institute she
did a great job of describing how
freewill is real but it operates at a
much higher level of emergence than is
even visible to the ultra reductionist
level and was pretty convincing about it
but frankly from my perspective even
more to the point whether we have free
will or not in any given particular
scientific lens is relatively immaterial
what is important is that to build a
society that works we have to act as if
at least we have free will we know that
right that nihilism is the road to
nothingness
solipsism is no better
for the opposite reason and that you
know my touch word is always is it
useful and it's interesting you
mentioned Verve a key right you know a
verb a key is a self stated atheist and
his perspective is what we really need
is the religion that is not a religion
and this is you know this gets back to
this concept that we're talking around
here that it provides a binding energy
for us as a society it's something we
all agree to treasure right and to live
by these concepts irrespective of
whether they are grounded in any
ultimate concern for instance the fact
that you love your wife I guarantee your
marriage is a lot better because you
love your wife and more to the point
that you believe your love your wife and
that from time to time you even express
that radical thought then if you did the
opposite so that it is useful whether
that's in any way tied up with ultimate
concerns I have no idea you know I don't
even know how one would tie that level
of essentially useful sociological
anthropological behavior to something as
potentially distant as the ultimate
concerns of why the universe exists and
what our point and it is I would point
back to there is clearly a need for
something that religion in the past has
fulfilled but it's not at all clear to
me that it's what we need going forward
in Verbeck is actually a very articulate
spokesman for that perspective I should
also add of course that I'm not actually
as bad at philistine as I sometimes come
across on this topic you know I have
read a fair amount of Buddhism went
through my Alan Watts phase at one point
read other thinkers on the topic read a
reasonable translation at time is
Aquinas once and I'm currently this
might shock some people reading Ken
Wilber is a brief history of everything
and have reached out to Ken to have him
on the show it should be fun nice good
yeah read a sociable God too which is my
favorite came over book where he talks
about these distinctions between
legitimate and illegitimate religious
spiritual experiences and
yeah I mean it's interesting so my no I
mean my mom was traumatized by Catholic
school you know and it's kind of like I
think there are generational dynamics
here as well
the post-war American Christianity
seemed to be particularly traumatizing
and drove a lot of people I think in two
forms of scientism and materialism that
may not have actually become so drastic
had they had different contexts of
socialization in which to think about
these kind of deeper questions you know
and it's like yeah again we would end up
getting into a philosophical debate here
but the idea that love for my wife is
useful mmm that's phenomenologically
doesn't doesn't land well right that in
fact if Megan believes that I love her
simply because it makes our mean we
fight less maybe that's what you mean by
effective marriage and so we're again
we're like postponing the question of
what the good is so it's like a love is
useful for the marriage but you know
that we've made we've undercut the
actual meaning of love which is that I
give it freely for its own sake right
that I'm not instrumentalizing it and
using you through displays of love to
make the marriage go efficiently but
even then it's like well what makes a
good marriage just one where we don't
fight like I don't so there's this sense
of like mmm much deeper than that we can
again we could spend two hours talking
about how we are animals who have
regulatory systems of you know oxytocin
and other neuromodulators and something
like love is imprinted in our neural
makeup that causes when we feel like
we're loved oxytocin to be released and
that those are binding energies that
help a relationship survive ups and
downs you know so there's a you know
like we could go out for out an hour at
least on that topic alone but let's get
out here we'll agree that at least at
this point we have a somewhat different
perspective on this because I do want to
get to some of your other interesting
ideas
about religion which is that we in the
West in this post secular world as you
started to say have now a whole lot of
things that are religion or spiritual
and in fact you described it as the
postmodern spiritual marketplace talk a
little bit about this marketplace and in
particular you go on it quite eloquently
about the role that teacher li authority
can serve in this marketplace both for
good and maybe not so good right and
this is the crux of the matter really
with your concerns about religion you
know like with the Protestant
Reformation you had a fragmentation of
what used to be completely centralized
dictate of religious teacher the
authority from the Pope right and so you
get the Protestant kind of revolt
against a particular form of what
religions going to look like and then
you get all of these emergent Christian
groups right and a whole bunch of things
follow from that fast-forward to the
after the end of World War two you have
a country in which that basic ethos of
let a bunch of different religious
flowers bloom decentralized religious
teacher lee authority and make it so
that basically any farm boy who's got a
Bible he can start thumping can start a
church right and you get the beginnings
of what is now this new-age spiritual
marketplace after the civil war there
were several great awakenings
one even before that with Jonathan
Edwards starting in Northampton I think
I can't remember the exact dates but
there were two Great Awakening us in
early American history and then after
World War two you get another kind of
Great Awakening but it had to do with an
influx of non-christian religious 'ti
into mainstream America
understand it was America that was
already fragmented in terms of the way
to understood teach really Authority in
general and beginning to fragment all
forms of authority because it basically
you know the McLuhan desk shift into
these forms of mass media that were
occurring at the same time and so began
the sixties move through the eighties
and now we're seeing in our in the past
two decades of flowering I think that's
almost unprecedented of new religious
movements and forms of this kind of
synthesized and eclectic religious
belief and practices where you get some
individual from New York City who is a
doing Buddhist meditation but doing
Hindu yoga who celebrates Christmas with
their parents and then claims to not
belong to any religion but you reach the
your entre book and beliefs and Aliens
right so like okay like that's an imp
that's interesting like pretty common
actually I think I know that guy right
right so yeah so you have this radical
eclecticism in the United States for a
long time that regards to what counts as
a legitimate religious teaching and then
you throw into that in opening a
basically an educational market place
for religious teachings and teachers and
religious practices and that thing
blooms and blossoms and so now you can
if you wanted to and had a ton of money
you could spend all your time consuming
one form of spiritual practice or
religious ceremony or teaching or
another I mean there's just so much and
so New Age doesn't even capture it
because a lot of this stuff is actually
legit you know religious lineage holders
like from Tibetan Buddhism or gurus and
Hinduism they you know monks who lead
contemplative prayer retreats in the
Berkshires I mean there's just so much
that's possible and so well when you see
a marketplace like this in any
marketplace it was like well what the
hell is quality control
right how do we regulate the goods for
sale on this marketplace right because
this is potentially dangerous stuff like
this is stuff that you start Colts worth
and by the way more more and more
cultures for hanging up these days and
that's part of the dynamic of this kind
of marketplace of religious ideas so I
asked a basic question when I was
working in the integral scene with
Wilbur and Gaffney and others and it was
like yeah how would we exercise quality
control in this spiritual marketplace
and it ends up being an interesting
question because it you have to put your
finger directly on the question that you
were already raising when you were
critiquing religion so much it's it's
that well what the hell how do they
already make that argument that's a
terrible argument or on whose authority
do you say that all right and what about
the authority of science visa vie your
so-called authority from the Bible so it
ends up being this basic how we do
dishes with the consumption of religious
goods you know you propose one really
useful criteria of quality control in
the marketplace of religious ideas are
these ideas useful at all right do they
help us do the things we need to do as
people right or are these ideas actually
not useful distracting extractive right
they're obviously just done to make a
buck or to confuse us enough of them we
can be manipulated and etc so I love
your criteria of usefulness but there
are other ones I speak to it you know
someone at length in the book pulling
upon Ken's work and the work of other
people who have thought long and hard
about you know the way again communities
of religious discourse and practice have
worked for millennia and then thinking
about the transformations that set in
with modernity and looking at the
emerging kind of non institutionalized
religious forms that are innovating with
religious discourse on practice just
look across all three of those because
all three of those exist and you have to
think about the dynamics of teacherly
Authority in the context of
religious engagements and spiritual
engagements and so that's that's some of
the way I frame it so I'm not gonna get
into the details but you know it's you
take a broad brushstroke and you start
seeing just how much is out there and
some of the stuff is that's hopper moss
called it when he reviewed the scene
briefly you know California and
neo-pagan claptrap many colleges I don't
know what that would have been in the
original German good phrase and then
some of it is actually distillation of
thousands of years of wisdom that would
have been impossible to have found let's
say ten years ago 20 years ago such as
Jeff to get it's like for the first time
in history all of the teachings from all
of the major religions are available to
the vast majority of people who were
interested enough to find them it wasn't
the case this is actually one of the
things Kamini as was arguing for back in
the day it's like you know we need to
get with the printing press and
translate all this stuff from the other
religions and get everyone up to speed
on everyone else's religion for the sake
of creating some kind of future in which
there was like a religion of no religion
right which is to say the most
sophisticated branches of all the
religions have always said my religion
is just a construct right when you get
up into the upper echelon of the the
most articulate mystics and the people
who are most revered in you know the
theological and kind of metaphysical
discussions in these religious
communities of practice and discourse
you end up getting folks who all appeal
to a trans lineage or trans
denominational someone like universality
of religiosity beyond their own
tradition this has been talked about
it's the perennial philosophy for
example by a toast Huxley but it's been
confirmed you know more or less
repeatedly also in the cognitive
developmental research that looks at the
development of religious forms of
thinking faith reasoning was called by
the great psychologist and student of
Lawrence Kohlberg's James Fowler who
wrote this book stages of faith and so
there's also good empirical evidence to
show that
yeah we can separate different levels of
sophistication in religious experience
and discourse and we can show that those
people everyone would agree the most
sophisticated and thinking about
religion there tend to move up into a
trans lineage and symbolic way of
talking about the ultimate unity of all
religions so that's just interesting to
kind of throw in the mix there which is
that you know just like you can distill
science so you know into some kind of
very universal process which can be
applied to biology and physics and even
certain realms in psychology and it's
like a universal underlying structure or
way of doing justification of legitimacy
of validity claims so with religion
there ends up being some deeper
structure and this is what were vague is
trying to get at some deeper structure
that allows us to discuss and redeem
validity claims in the domain of
religion which again is a domain of
those things that are of ultimate
concern well we got let's you know again
we can talk about this one for two hours
but there's one last topic I'd really
like to get to well actually before we
do that I'm gonna steal three minutes
from our last topic you did write about
one I guess he's religious I'm not a
hundred sure that actually struck me is
worth digging into somebody named Mark
Gaffney and his unique self theory at
least as you described it it actually
sounded like it might be useful could
you give us a minute or two keeping in
mind that we really do want to get to
our thirteen miracles about Mark Gaffney
and his unique self theory totally yeah
I've been working with Mark for years
and he's worked with ken and myself and
you know marks a complicated and
important figure within the contemporary
spiritual marketplace he had in Israel
for a time a large religious community
and for a time the long ago the most
popular show on Israeli TV and he's also
subject to political scandal and smear
and so there's a lot of controversy
about his character myself like Clint
Foose and Ken and a few other people
have stuck by mark despite that which is
to say that the integrity of mark's
thinking and character shines through
and especially in this concept like
unique self theory and so the basic idea
here is that you know if you if you look
at the core of what's taught in variety
of religious traditions you get this
move and this is true in the
monotheistic let's call it that way and
Christianity Judaism you also it's also
true and Buddhism and Hinduism where
there's there's something like self with
a little s right which is like Zack with
all this petty neurotic concerns but
sometimes if you do a lot of meditation
or tragedy occurs or something else kind
of breaks the little Zack out of his
comfort there's an actual revelation in
one's own experience which say if
phenomenologically it's just there an
experience of like whoa self with a
capital S that there is a consciousness
that's larger than little zack which is
kind of weaves zack into the fabric of
everything and so this is a kind of
experience you might have on a
meditation retreat or sometimes people
get it doing a lot of drugs where
there's a sense of like whoa my previous
experience of self was completely
limited and tiny I am actually something
more like all things that's self
capitalist this is your classic sense of
what enlightenment is right that's that
notion the classic like neo and the
matrix like whoa like and he's seeing
all of the code of everything in his
inter a relation with everything and
that gets all one now the problem is
that that's not a useful idea from your
perspective like it's a relieving idea
right which is to say that it is sotiria
logically potent it relieves the self
from its suffering and brings the self
up into a much larger frame so that Zack
would be relieved of fear of death Zach
could be relieved of fear of
separateness a whole bunch of things are
overcome by the realization of the
so-called true self capital T capital
Essen this is what you hear in a lot of
Buddhism and a lot of new-age discussion
and a lot of discussions from about
Avanti Vedanta and
other religious traditions that
emphasize leaving the personal behind
and moving to the impersonal big-ass
unique self theory proposes that there's
actually another turn this is a fully
non dual way of thinking about religious
experience which is that yeah but even
after you've had that experience of true
self you are still within a unique
position and context with unique
proclivities and potentialities and
relationships so that it's not that all
differences are kind of like eclipse in
the glory of oneness now that's a
temporary state experience on the other
side of that there's a return to
individuation on the other side of ego
and this is what Maslow sometimes
sometimes called the self transcending
right so you see the small Zac you
transcend the small Zac and touch the
big self and then you return to the
uniqueness of who you are where you are
when you are now here uniquely just this
right so that's the non dual realization
where enlightenment doesn't become
something you can only do on the cushion
with your eyes closed then in fact it's
a commitment to consistently act from
the place that is uniquely yours act
from but beyond your particular
attachments to little Zach alright so
it's it's a way of thinking differently
about what is being offered from some of
these meditative traditions which can be
misread as a retreat from the world into
the big s right the big self everyone
kind of like relieve themselves of
responsibility and disappear into kind
of like a amorphous oneness with all
right and that's the kind of
stereotypical view of many
traditions and what unique self theory
says is that and that's you haven't gone
fully through and you've ended up kind
of like checking out when what you need
to do is check back in but without the
commitment to you going concern so
unique so theory would undermine all of
those forms of teaching that focus on
spirituality and religiosity as being
about the homogenous asian of identity
and experience towards a single ideal of
the better human or the enlightened
human or the wise one right so it's like
according to unique self theory you
could never have something like a guru
and the traditional Hindu sense because
you know when you're worshiping a guru
in the traditional Hindu sense you are
trying to become identical with what the
Guru is identical to already right which
is to say you're trying to find the true
self though only one there's only one
true self you're trying to find that
through the vehicle of the Guru mm-hmm
but that may be have worked in like a
pre-modern society but in a meta pattern
society there's a need to actually have
this realization of the potency of each
unique individual this is kind of the
burden of our time in a way and so yeah
actualizing uniqueness requires
dissident a'f eyeing from the simple
frontal personality which is actually
not unique that's the thing that's
captured by advertising it's been now
modernized by the schools that's been a
modernized by traditional religious
teachings so there's a certain kind of
radical core to the unique self teaching
that brings certain forms of spiritual
and religious practice out of the realm
of escapism and into the realm of
something like a seer chick activism
right seer chick being a term that means
basically like the actions of God mm-hmm
that my hands are fans of God uniquely
positioned here as
to the experience of God being one in
which now I don't have to do anything
with my hands cuz I'm saved it's the
opposite it's the experience of being
whoa I have these hands these are the
only ones that can do this unique thing
that's mine to do yeah good stuff I you
know I liked it and then I put it on my
list after I read some Wilber I'm gonna
go read mark Gaffney and what was really
interesting is I was reading an end even
more so as you were saying it is it's
not far at all from my view on what's
going on with religion and why at the
end of the day most religions with their
most advanced practitioners are saying
pretty much the same thing mine is a
cognitive neuro
argument which goes as follows is that
the brain is a series of networks and
cycles and rhythms but it falls into
some stereotypical attractor networks
basic configurations that vary in real
time which is how our consciousness is
modulated and how our unconscious is
modulated behind the scenes but they
fall into some broad classes so the two
most well-known are the so called task
mode Network for instance if you are
doing a very a detailed task is the pure
example the task mode network
particularly the first time you do it
take for example when you were eight
years old and you changed the tire on
your bicycle when you got a flat tire
fix the flat disassembled the gears took
the rear wheel off pulled the tire off
the rim past that you probably had your
father show you how to do it or your
older brother and put it back together
again
that's classic task mode network the
other very well-known big network is
called the default mode network and
that's where you're daydreaming this
sort of spacing out will also say it's
the network that you fall into in the
earlier or later stages of meditation
but there's another network which I call
the mystical experience network you know
we talked about having mystical
experiences I've had plenty of them all
right
I've done my share acid and other
hallucinogens some of which you've never
heard outright and so I've been to the
mystical Network I can also do a really
cool thing which freaks people out but I
enjoy it which is I can produce a
the 30-second egodeath states easily
just do it on demand fact I did it on a
zoom call with five other people
actually on Monday and they're going
holy and I was literally gone for
25 seconds so they tell me at least and
I believe that that is a specific but
hard to reach a tractor that is of a
qualitative equivalence to the task mode
attractor and the default mode attractor
and that a powerful personality and this
is where I kind of resonated with mark
Gaffney a personality that it's complete
has access to all three modes you know
they have access to the mystical
experience mode the default mode for
just sort of musing and cogitating and
has task mode when it's time to do
something and that that's why at the end
of the day all the religions look alike
because they're essentially roads to
make it easier for at least the adepts
to put themselves in the configuration
of the mystical experience
neural basin of Attraction hmm totally I
love that theory you know and so it's
like you're not an atheist because like
what because what's the value of the
mystical Network like what's the value
of what's revealed within your mystical
Network right because that's the real
question about the legitimacy of teach
really Authority based upon access to
the mystical network and the religion
said that the mystical network reveals
something at least as real as what the
other networks reveal you just can't
pretend that what's revealed in the
mystical network can then be actualized
or understood in terms set by the other
networks right so it's like you see in
the mystical network something like this
incredibly precise geometrical temple of
light right now does that mean you need
to actually build that thing in the
desert to secure your immortality right
this is what the unions would call
literalization and the answer is no
right there's a way to relate to the
knowledge revealed in the mystical net
work but you can't make that knowledge
kind of strictly isomorphic with the
forms of knowledge that it reveals from
the other networks and so this becomes
about and this is why it's good you're
reading Wilbur because he talks about
this at length you know what are the
different varieties of religious
experience right to use William James
who would also agree with you or is it
useful right he ultimately says well God
is the most useful concept we have
that's why it's true but he also did the
first really good I think rich social
science research on religion which is
that remains one of the most famous
books taught and religious we're in
religion departments which is the
varieties for those experience you know
I think principles of psychology was
published in 1819 so I think varieties
of religious experience was right around
the turn of the century and he just
simply interviewed people who had
consistent access to your mystical
Network and just got them to tell their
stories of their experience and what
that experience did how it shaped the
rest of their lives and the basic
finding was that and Maslow found the
same thing with the people who had
consistent access to the self
transcendent form of identity which was
that those people who can consistently
have these kinds of experience where
they kind of plug into the mystical
matrix they consistently had lives that
were uniquely dedicated to to good ends
and this was James's final kind of
verdict was that you know some forms of
religion end up being tyrannical but the
forms of religion that are based upon
giving people direct access to the
mystical system those ones actually
provide people with lives that are more
meaningful it's kind of socially
beneficial compassionate full of joy and
things of that nature it's be reasonable
to make yeah so that was it was good to
kind of bring it back to that cuz now
here I think we're finding some some
agreement yeah yeah I wouldn't I
wouldn't call it religion I would just
call it cognitive neuroscience but maybe
the two meet somewhere deep enough and
must it's possible well I'm open-minded
I am an empiricist all right when I find
the evidence and I'm looking forward to
learning more about I've read about 40%
of ken Wilbur's book and I love about is
how amazingly clear it is I mean
you know so many books on these kinds of
topics are full of what I call
hocus-pocus right but Wilbur is clearly
attempting to be as clear as
possible which is actually great so you
can actually assess what he's trying to
say without having to decode it but
let's move on finally to the last topic
which we've been trying to get to for
the last three episodes and I think it's
important to spend at least 20 minutes
on we have that too much time which is
that you've acknowledged in the book and
also through these three episodes that
to some degree the kind of education
that you see as necessary for what comes
next for Humanity for this next big big
step at least as big as the transition
from feudalism to modernism is
essentially impossible to actually bring
into existence in our current world for
a whole bunch of reasons or at least
would be hard to bring my own version of
that it would be hard to bring it in on
a mass scale in the current world I'm
hopeful that it can be brought into
existence among some self-selecting
people who essentially build their own
bubble social operating system inside
the other operating system I think we
call game B and that within people
living a true game B life even though
they're still embedded in game a they
ought to be able to build a context in
which ideas like your educational ideas
are possible but probably not possible
for the masses and you acknowledge that
and what you say is what's needed
r-13 social miracles which remarkably
close to some of the things that we've
talked about in our game B world and
other people talked about in other areas
of what I'd call the good attractor what
comes next in terms of the evolution of
the social operating system for Humanity
so if we could spend just a couple of
minutes on each one of your thirteen
social miracles is that does that work
for you that works great sure yeah I
don't know about Zack doing a couple
minutes on anything that boy likes to
talk I think the best thing to do is
actually to to read them all at once and
then go through so that people get to
full Gestalt because really it's not
about one in isolation from the rest
that they all come together and it kind
of constellation all
unity is part of this kind of thought
experiment basically so yeah I think the
best procedure if you were to read all
thirteen and then I can speak about the
nature of the social miracles in general
and then get into particular ones that
you find most interesting all right
let's do it
number one debt Jubilee for students and
nations number two basic income
guarantee number three integral
decentralized social safety net number
for democratic governments workplaces
and schools
number five public regulation of
investment and Finance sectors number
six legal and economic systems that
value the biosphere for its own sake
number seven renewable and inexhaustible
energy number eight riah portion of the
land agriculture and geography number
nine total planetary demilitarization
number ten mutual respect between major
religions of the world number eleven
absence of oppression based on race
gender sexual orientation etc number
twelve universal de alien ization and re
humanization and number thirteen science
and technology in the interest of the
human god damn where do I sign up for
that the future Jim let's build it
together we got to build this sucker
right yeah this is uh this is what has
been called by people like Roy Bhaskar
you know concrete utopian theorizing and
these came to me actually you know it
took a while for all of them to finally
congeal into the thirteen but the way
they're the way they're put in the book
is like you know what are the conditions
for the possibility of a actually humane
educational system
right because everyone asked me usually
like you know what school chefs have
Mike into what's the best what's the
best school you know and the answer ends
up being well the school's not the main
effect first of all the whole social
system surrounding the school ends up
determining what takes place in the
school if what the kid got from the
school is gonna be useful afterwards and
there's a whole bunch of things that
make the school actually not the focus
of attention when thinking about the
educational potentials within a society
so this is about actually thinking of
all of society again sub specie
education us which means thinking about
all of the reforms you could make
including reforms to the finance
industries and reforms to health care
and reforms to geography and other
things all of those reforms actually
have an impact on the process of
intergenerational transmission that
everything we're doing has education at
stake and if we if we want to basically
respect the possibility of the human as
revealed let's say by the most
sophisticated communities of practice in
discourse and religion right like the
true potential of the human if we want
to find a way to get that through like
to get that reliably in an educational
configuration then we're gonna actually
have to reconfigure society itself and
so what I was trying to do with 13
social miracles was just actually the
list off those things that are need to
be part of what we're concerned about if
we're really concerned about educating
the next generation and these are also
kind of structures and systems that are
sometimes seem to be far from education
but that actually get right up in
intimate with educational experience and
the the basic income is one of the
greatest examples of that where you know
so long as schools are preparing you for
the wage labor market then schooling can
only be so much right that right now we
there's a basic confusion and has been
for a long time
of schooling as job training that the
goal of the school is to basically get
you into position to be entering the
wage labor market at a certain level now
what that means is that we're
drastically limiting those things that
people pursue within schools because the
overarching concern of schooling is the
eventual entry into the labor market but
imagine labor markets shifted
drastically like because there was a
bunch of automation right or because
there was a pandemic that destroyed all
of the service industries at once and
only a small percentage of them could
reboot so you end up looking at a much
smaller labor market and a much larger
group of people who could understand
themselves outside of the context of
wage labor and this is um this is you
know it's not historically unprecedented
because before the capitalist world
system emerged at the end of the long
sixteenth century
the category of wage labor didn't really
exist nearly as much if at all and if
you look back into other you know more
ancient civilizations you know this
notion of the wage laborer is a specific
thing and it's going to become less
dominant it already is people are
predicting it so now imagine in a school
system that runs where the main
overarching concern of the school system
is actually not preparing you to get a
job but preparing you to make good on
something like your basic income right
and but yeah that only works if you've
at the simultaneously if you've also
performed the finance sector right
because the basic income guarantee could
actually make it so that these people
are then preyed upon by the finance
sector or the whole thing couldn't work
because of the needs of what's happening
in the national bonds of international
banking so you have to reform the whole
entire monetary system actually do the
basic income guarantee and the nature of
banking needs to change an age of
currency needs to change or else that
won't work but then you also have to
make the energy renewable because if you
release a whole bunch of and
in terms of money into people and
empower a bunch of economic agents with
better schooling and the basic income
then you could just drive consumerism
and you know like a whole bunch of other
dynamics that would tax the energy grid
to the point of escalating are already
self terminating mode with energy so you
need different energy and that's of
course related to the ecological
question right so you so the whole point
is that there's this constellation of
interrelated huge systemic things that
at the end of the day boil right down to
that kid in the chair in the school and
so the social miracle is is not an
attempt to say hey I figured out how to
do each one of these it's not that and
it's not even saying like this 13 is the
set that is necessary and sufficient for
civilization to work for the next 15
thousand years like not that it's a
thought experiment and it's saying if
you really want to think about education
this is the level at which you need to
exercise your imagination you know that
the first place we had uniforms and
standardized tests was the military that
the military industrial complex was the
main impetus behind some of the largest
educational reform policies within the
United States following Sputnik right
the SAT the science technology
engineering and math a whole bunch of
those things the growth of places like
UC Berkeley and elsewhere that's
military industrial money directly
influencing educational institutions
right so if we don't demilitarized then
even the best you bi not UB is the
that's the wrong phrase but basic and
gum healthcare all that's there but now
the things churning for the interests of
military mmm oops that's another self
terminating bad educational situation so
you end up having to deal with even at
that level of the military and once
you've done that then you have to start
thinking about the organization of the
land itself the basic identity of place
and the emergence of something like a
new way of thinking about urbanization
and
journalism so I'm weaving together all
the 13 social miracles in Canada a
single conversation and of course the
first ones the debt Jubilee and this
one's actually on people's minds now
which is what's interesting because and
this is true for a lot of the things in
the book itself which is that when I was
writing at these things were kind of
edgy and kind of like whoa okay and then
the pandemic hit and then a whole bunch
of the stuff that's in the book actually
became more relevant more timely as a
result of the drastic speed-up of a
bunch of trends and so the debt Jubilee
seems to me to be almost a necessity at
this point in terms of the economic
situation that the debt and specifically
the debt of individuals there's a whole
other conversation about debt Jubilees
for institutions and countries but if
you just look at student loan debt alone
student loan debt is part of that
intergenerational warfare we were
talking about because it's it's
crippling generation and it's
demonstrably predatory so this is an
example where if you were to have a non
debt based system of higher education it
would change the possibilities for what
happens in colleges and universities and
I think we already discussed the
education commodity proposition that
have that undermines the dynamics of
teacher the authority but this is what's
taking place on college campuses because
these kids are taking out mortgages to
sit in the classroom for four years and
so they are consumers rather than
learners so there's a whole bunch of
things within the social miracles that
are in isolation a bad idea like a basic
income is a bad idea if you do it that's
it if you just cut people a bunch of
checks and don't change anything else
about society like that's actually a
terrible idea right and you can say that
about many of these things you can't
for example demilitarize in one part of
the world if you don't demilitarize
everywhere like if America was like oh
we're all putting our guns down then
we'd be invaded and destroyed right so
there's a there's a and there's a
careful kind of sequencing of thinking
about
changing systems at this scope and it's
not even something that can be thought
it was like a political platform or any
kind of logistical thing I'm suggesting
here again thought experiments and then
you know one they hadn't mentioned but
which is worth mentioning the unity of
religion we've already discussed how
essential that actually is as a fulcrum
in the planetary culture that even if we
solve these other problems with getting
the currency right and getting the
income right and now we've got a
universal healthcare that actually works
and isn't centralized and over
bureaucratized
captured by profit-seeking science if we
have all that but the religion still
don't get along and we've still got like
backward fundamentalists reactionary
religious violence that we've also
failed and so we need to foster
coherence in the depths of human culture
as well as bring efficiency and
reasonableness to the infrastructures
and economic systems you know and the
final one the thirteenth one which is
about science in the interest of kind of
human flourishing and exploration you
know this is the only place in the book
that I think that I talked about outer
space but in fact for a lot of the book
in part because I had so much science
fiction as a kid you know a lot of the
book I'm thinking about like what would
be an educational system that could
actually get humans to be a species that
was involved with more than just the
earth right like there's this
possibility that we flee the earth
because it's dying right like Elon Musk
we like bug out to Mars and it's as if
that's the only motive we could have is
just survival but I'm imagining a
civilizational kind of architecture in
which no it's actually from the excess
of our curiosity and accomplishment that
we quote/unquote take to the stars right
because if we take to the stars out of
fear if we take to the stars out of
profit seeking and enslavement and how
like Jesus you know that's not gonna
last so yes some of what the thirteen
social miracles are getting at should
feel like some science fiction concrete
utopia because that's in fact what it is
it's saying where's the future I was
promised
I remember Jordan Hall told me once when
he was invited to the Aspen Institute he
wore a t-shirt and said oh no where's
the future house promised our the the
other version of that where the hell's
my flying car all I got zoom right
that's what I'm saying
and so and Graber writes about this the
Utopia of rules he writes about you know
these particular trajectories of
technological development that we're on
our being so parochially tied to profit
maximization and so corrosive of the
kind of nobler if messier elements of
human culture that have long been along
been the real resources of innovation
and so those are that's kind of me
moving through all the miracles and a
gestalt which is I think of a better way
to hold them because when you when you
look at one like basic income we could
do a whole podcast just on that you
could do a whole podcast series on that
like and I say in the book you know each
of the social miracles I could take a
book to write about it you know the debt
Jubilee so much involved there the
ancient history of the Jubilee is
fascinating David Graeber gets into that
and his wonderful book on debt and then
the actual financial apparatuses and
mechanisms that could allow for this
kind of massive financial rearrangement
and there's so much to discuss there
same with the unity of religions and the
new forms of urbanization and
regionalism and agriculture so by no
means am i covering that stuff
comprehensively what I'm trying to do in
a way similar to what Ken Wilber does is
just put a bunch of things next to one
another in very clear language so that
something like an AHA occurs
we're the social imagination is now
sparked in a new way so that's the
ultimate goal of the social miracles now
if some of them are near-term realizable
is actual political or technological
goals that's another story and I'm not
getting into that but I do think some of
them are and I do think there's probably
a sequence to them and it's looking like
the debt Jubilee and the basic income
thing is going to happen sooner rather
than later and for better or for worse
because remember you roll a couple of
these out apps and the other ones you
can actually end up with a worse
situation so yeah so that's a little bit
of a gestalt of the whole thing that's
great that's great that did a good job
they're painting it let me just react a
little bit I think you know again
they're they're really interesting and
mostly to the good I would add a 14th
one and this is one we talk about a lot
in our game be work and that would be to
somehow eliminate bad faith discourse
from our shared memes space one of the
things that is just seemingly so wrong
in our world you know advertising is one
aspect of it the crazy that goes on
in social media is another that somehow
there are no appropriate consequences or
social norms against the spreading of
bad faith discourse particularly if it
furthers either an economic or political
agenda and that in a good society that
would just be wrong I love that one I
love that one's something about fixing
digital information only colleges and
not just digital but all information I
mean think about a perverted text books
in the state of Texas right any kind of
bad faith discourse where people are
putting information out into the shared
meme space for purposes of manipulating
other people with things they know not
to be true or at least should know not
to be true so that's that second talking
about the Jubilee I'm a huge believer in
that in fact people interested in it
might be interested in looking at some
work the people who later created game B
did back at 2012 we put together an
experimental political party called the
Emancipation Party and you can read our
platform at a man
the patient party org the party's long
since been disbanded but we left our
platform up and what was number one on
it and the thing we go into the greatest
depth a debt Jubilee both public and
private everything wipe them all clean
we also put out basic income we called
it citizenship wage even before the name
ubi came around we talked about safety
net so he's talked about democratic
governance and we specifically talked
about radical reform of the investment
financial sector so that your first five
social miracles we lay out in some
considerable detail how you do it and
why so people might find that
interesting at emancipation party dot
org then the last thing I'm gonna react
to and then maybe we can you can say
have a last word and we can then we can
wrap it up as I was very taken to heart
by your discussion about going out into
the universe and how going out into the
universe as a lifeboat strategy is you
know about one of the worst attractors I
can possibly imagine right a few rich
 are gonna you know head off to an
asteroid turns out Mars is probably not
the answer I'm an asteroids probably
better whatever case you know a few
million people managed to get a lifeboat
off or everybody else I mean that's
goddamn that's mortal sin in my book
actually on the flip side as you allude
to I think we both read probably more
science fiction than we should have when
we were of the impressionable age should
have been working on our algebra but man
did it have a big influence on me and
when people ask me what is the purpose
of human existence at this exact moment
the answer I give is as far as I know
and again I don't claim that know
anything about ultimate issues but in
terms of right now I say that very
reasonable purpose for Humanity is to
bring the universe to life if we look at
our you know the emergence of the
universe from the Big Bang first we had
matter and energy which popped around
for a long long time then as far as we
know life only exists on earth again
this is will be a little fork here but
on this fork let's assume life existed
on earth and then advanced life not that
long
only about 500 million years ago
multicellular life the development of
neurons soon thereafter and then general
intelligence something on the order of
50,000 maybe a hundred thousand years
ago and compare the amazing richness
that's occurred here in this sphere of
ours to looking out and this got-damn
huge universe of you know each galaxy
has around a hundred billion stars then
there's about a hundred billion galaxies
and as far as we know all of it still at
the pre life stage it's just matter
bouncing around in rather uninteresting
ways actually and suppose of our mission
is to take life out to the universe and
let it find its way in many many
different ways and explore all the
possibilities that life or not all but a
vast vast number of ways that life can
be in this gigantic gigantic universe so
that's the fork one and that's the
assumption that we are alone in the
universe which is quite possible the
other fork of course is that the
universe is full of intelligent life and
for various reasons they're hiding from
us or are just living in a way that make
it hard for us to detect the so-called
Fermi paradox you know which is well
there's all these intelligent beings in
the universe where the hell are they and
I would say that we should be agnostic
on that issue but move forward on the as
if we're alone trajectory until proven
otherwise and you know that's I think
very compatible with your view of
thinking about moving out into the
universe as a huge positive not as a
kind of a deprave lifeboat strategy
mm-hmm totally and moving out into the
universe only after we've gone fully
within to figure out what values and
cultural forms and commitments and you
know that human beings are actually
bringing to the universe you know
because I think the fascination with the
kind of explore exploration of the
material world and of course space
exploration is kind of the pinnacle of
what was already been an impulse with
human to explore that impulse can also
be turned within basically and so I'm
suggesting that both of those occur
simultaneously that the universal D
alienation and rehumanize ation occur
before we get off the planet because
otherwise we're bringing our
everywhere and it would be a terrible
idea for us to spread it around the
universe if we hadn't cleaned it up at
home first so there's that there's that
sentiment of like yeah let's figure out
how to make it work here before we start
worrying about what's out there and then
what we do go out and explore I mean
this and interestingly enough like some
sophisticated religious mystics who were
aware of modern science like sri
aurobindo first Sampath great Indian
mystic and sage he really believed that
this was the moment of Planet ization
when the humans went beyond just being
responsible for the earth and began to
be part of a larger play in the universe
that required us leaving the earth and
he believed that this was basically part
of what was revealed by the level of
responsibility and maturity that the
religious traditions were calling the ad
apps to write that in fact prefigured in
Christ and Buddha and others were the
kinds of cultural and personality
resources necessary to be a species that
could actually take on a kind of
interplanetary responsibility so that's
a kind of interesting the way to bring
this together into what I call sometimes
a religious transhumanism which is not a
humanism merely of a techno kind of
technologically optimistic future but
one in which you know high technology is
wedded to basically high consciousness
and high aspirational and kind of like
radical maturity insanity then it's a
much more reasonable thing to think that
humans could actually go and colonize
other worlds
right now we can barely survive on this
one and so it's looking like the
near-term space stuff ends up being
quite dicing it ends up being the
asteroid mining and the surveillance
satellites and the super expensive
billionaire day trips to outer space and
stuff like that
but yeah the only way to have one that's
I think sustainable in perpetuity is one
that comes with a kind of ethos that I'm
trying to get at which I think you're
trying to get at so yeah so there's
incredible potential futures for the
human and this again I think is part of
what is hidden within the semantic
potentials of what's revealed in the
mystical Network right that the world
we've known is only the one we're in now
that there's a radical transformation
and reconfiguration of the human that's
coming that's imminent that will make us
as different from modern man as modern
man is from cavemen right and so that
intuitions been articulated across a
bunch of religious traditions as the
apocalypse or you know the zombie on or
Shambala and etc etc and so you know the
utopian visions which picked up that
threat and then the concrete utopian
theorizing which gives us to the 13
social miracle to what we're trying to
do is find a way to to to collectively
you know bear this transition basically
and yeah I certainly wouldn't get on a
space Ark with a bunch of crazy
billionaires you know I like to say
because I work in this field of
existential risk and catastrophic risk
and civilization of collapse and stuff
it's like I like to say there is no
escape hatch no practical one the wall
if you don't solve the cultural problem
then every escape hatch actually brings
you deeper in because you escape that
Island with your guards but if you
haven't figured out how to actually deal
with people
outside of a system of currency where
enumeration is secured right just people
then there is no you actually gone
deeper in to a problematic situation
precisely about trying to escape
so yeah they the only way out is through
together I think that's a good place to
end it we've we've gone as far as we can
go right I think which is you know that
we have to you know retune what it means
to be human in the context of an
educational system that can replicate
those good values and refine them going
forward so that we can go out into the
universe and do good and not harm yeah
we come a long way this has been a
wonderful conversation Zack you know I
think this is one of the deepest and
most interesting series of talks I've
had on my show and I am pretty sure the
audience will like it thank you Jim it's
been a pleasure
really yes it really has been been an
education for me too
[Music]
production services and audio editing by
jerod Jane's consulting music by Tom