a lot of will you an option is that we
conquering words there are either dirty
words people tell us no you can't use
that word is so misunderstood bla bla
bla but I think reconquering words and
giving me a new meaning actually works
ok great
that's great and and your book is called
Cynthia ISM creating God in the internet
age
so creating God right if God is the name
of all our dreams combined in one point
if the name of that is the gourd point
then I'd love to retake the word God and
put it back into its historical setting
what was originally used which was was
you know a head of the patriarchal
removing is God like father Patrick
there and we have God is the other end
so you put God in the future which is
interesting I think because because God
is usually considered the creator of the
universe so in the past right
you're putting that's in the future well
not even then I mean even the Bible
doesn't claim that the Bible clothes
created order in chaos
nobody but the Bible God is the source
of everything
oh they mixing up God and Goddess if
anything is the source of anything that
would be godless that's a we come out of
the womb because to be the source of
everything we talk about the source tied
to the god cause of his usually goddess
for me this was very popular with New
Age people because they're like goddess
worshipers without being God worshipers
so I think you need both you need to
worship the or father and the remoter
you need the word or patriarch and the
or match our that's what we always
should do and we always do that's called
religion that our hope so he also retake
the word religion here so religion was
another dirty word and then we said no
no no no no no no really it is a
beautiful word go to city mala G
etymology a really guy a French Latin
medieval meaning what connects people
read what connects people it did say it
has to do with healing it has to be
connecting people together again as if
they were split up so and we want to be
connected we want to know their cause
when a flock animal we tribe
creatures who want the congregation the
most beautiful word to come out of the
Abrahamic religions congregation we
congregate we build something together
that's what the tribe does as I love the
Holy Spirit in Christianity I love
anything that regards the congregation
so in the congregation you generate the
holy spirit that's the beautiful sort of
idea that's what Jesus said Jesus he
says that well after I left whenever you
guys start together two or more of you
believe it or not including you and me
under right now but whenever there more
than two you together that's we're a
match that's God mm-hmm but that's what
the Holy Spirit is so she she can I
agree that we can save large parts of
Christianity we could potentially write
a third Testament if you write a third
Testament we have to leave Jesus Christ
on the cross died on the cross that was
the point
so father can go and die so father and
son are gone and then we leave it to the
community to be the community to be
divine okay I'm trying to understand
that because the father and son come
together you know and disappear and then
you have the holy spirit that's logical
idea here the point is father sound was
a brilliant idea because we know the
tribe is led by the patriarchy they pull
us okay
the pattern is the son he's a grown up
man we look up to him
all those boys look up to him they want
to be like him he's the chieftain in the
priest at the same time okay he's the
benevolent tyrant if you like so okay
built on the King Solomon character in
the Old Testament that's the idea of
Jesus Christ
the son okay his father is the guy we
don't see because to believe that we're
gonna follow him there has to be
direction towards a goal that's called
the promised round Moses lease Egypt he
takes the people well then he takes the
Hebrews to the promised land
okay the name of the promise time is God
that means the father figure as the
father of the father mm-hmm that's God
that's the father so father is where
we're heading son is who leads us in
spirit are we become
mm-hmm you could perfectly well you say
Bart's aesthetic is tribal mapping
theory or tribal anthropology based on
modern data science based on how human
beings function based on the tribe of
the 200-250 people
the congregation has a model based on
the tribe congregation basically is the
one thing that unites family and try it
into one thing okay that congregation
has to be on the moon now if we know
this if the sort of the mysticism is
gone if we know that we have to be on
the move and we know that we know Matic
you're not moving into the future it's
along the time axis removing these days
moving into the future for the
congregation to walk into the future we
still need this and of course we can
tell the story the way Jordan Peterson
does that there's a father that's the
point where we're heading the gaud point
this is son who leads us to go there the
combinational priest in chief Tana leads
us to go there and then we are issued
and then of course at the back of it all
we have the match art and the match art
in Christianity is Virgin Mary with the
Jesus child mm-hmm she becomes not only
the child Jesus because her son is the
son of God
that means if she's the mother to the
Son of God she's the ultimate metric
meaning Virgin Mary walks at the very
back pushes us all forward so then you
get the Christian version of the pastor
key master key trial nothing more mmm
okay that makes perfect sense
the beautiful stories worked really well
it could still work if people still live
in it but it's not it's not necessary to
do it that way in Shaba shixin my point
as sort of Christian or post Christian
post atheist is essentially that we can
create the store now knowing why we did
that store in the first place and that
it happens when we go from the first to
the second Testament the Bible but
happens in Jesus dies on the cross when
he dies so the cross the curtain in the
temple falls apart mm-hmm when it falls
apart that means the two different
sections of the inner sanctum of the
temple are unified meaning we as people
get to look into where the Mystics are
at looking into a God really is the God
really a story about our direction to
make us survive and thrive and live
whole and fool us okay so that what is
hidden becomes kind of
revealed something like that which is
problematic because we live increasingly
in a digital world today where
everything becomes transparent everybody
gets to know everything and that's
exactly why I'm telling people that's
important to create sacred spaces for
example confession booths for example
places where you you know where I could
control you work with ayahuasca you work
with modern spiritual practices but you
tithe you build the wall around and say
okay we turn off our smartphones we're
trying to fold the data flows so he can
talk freely in this space but at the end
of the day what's called mr. stirs which
is this is knowledge that's taking you
years to get it is taking you years to
understand and it's taking years to
understand this must not be spread
widely among people because they will
misunderstand it mm-hmm okay that's
dangerous if not it's that cannot be
understood gets out in the public it
would be completely misunderstood the
entire history of philosophy theology is
basically misunderstood today because
the reinterpret is being symbolic words
and names are being thrown around by
people who simply haven't studied they
don't know what they're talking about
that is a big mistake but that's
basically condition we live in at the
moment so if it's if the genies out of
the bottle
all it can do is to learn to know how
the genie works and tame the genie and
try to turn the genie to something works
our advantage is units yeah so there is
a very dangerous genie out of the bottle
at the moment and that seems to be clear
well my what I'm working towards is
basically to understand and if we're
giving way what the Enlightenment did
and started with the Frankfurt School in
the 1930s we started learning that being
enlightened
living in a world it becomes coldly
scientific killing a lot of spirituality
and killing even the human soul in the
process which we have to reinstate now
caused a lot of damage that's a perfect
sample of you know all the Lourdes was
out there okay
but if all the knowledge was out there
and the priests are now undressed and
religion no longer has the sacred space
and that sacred space it should have
existed has been completely corrupted by
the way my beautiful priests all kinds
of things okay we better let the air in
better let it all out better get the
genie completely out of the bottle
better even cross the bottom throw it
away so we then can deal with the genies
okay that's right but I think we need to
define new sacred spaces and I think any
private confession booth any any
environment that requires a code of
silence it should be celebrated and and
that we have to do that all over again
but the knowledge that is out already
available to people have now to be
explained means if it's out there you
can read them take a patio you can read
online but you don't understand okay you
need teachers to guide you through that
all a huge flow information all the data
to guide you to understand it and we
have to work very quickly in doing that
and go deeper mm-hmm okay well the
example I was thinking about in terms of
the genie being out of the bottle as you
know years ago I started doing these
Buddhist practice and and Vajrayana
tradition and I had to do all of these
sort of stage-by-stage
retreats and gradually grind it was a
gradual sort of learning process right
and and then you would then you would
get the initiation uh-huh and you would
go on to do other stuff and there be
another initiation and would go on and
on until the end theoretically and the
stuff that they would be trend
transmitting is now available everywhere
on the Internet yeah so so that's just
an example
yeah and that's causing a lot of havoc
we have to get used to have to get used
the fact that we're living increasingly
in a transparent world where everything
is being memorized no so I I'm not naive
about that in that way I can see the
Enlightenment project coming from the
West hitting the world over the last 100
years was a good thing in the sense that
okay it's all out there it's a lot
basically is while they misunderstood um
tragic limit understood mm-hmm meaning
we have to re understand the fundamental
axioms we have to re understand religion
where after we take the word God we have
to give it a new meaning that makes
sense to us now oh and I'm not post
atheist
in the sense that we can use the word
God symbolically or something like that
I'm not ironic at all about anything I
do not ronique
I'm not a nun running Christian like
Jordan Peters and I refuse to go ironic
about what I got against tyranny in this
sense no I am a big proponent of the
potential of tribal anthropology towards
understanding what it means to be human
and and to reinstate that today to
regain a confidence in the tribe because
if we don't have a confidence in the
tribe it cannot have a confidence in the
nation and if you don't have a
confidence in the nation we cannot have
a confidence in the Empire that the
Internet is going to force us to live up
okay so that's a good maybe segue into
talking about another taboo word we want
to injure this year and that is
communism the most taboo word perhaps in
the West and and the second most about
being capitalism which is interesting so
there you go so so you're pretty
critical about individualism and I guess
there's different oh wow you know we
talked about Peterson of course you're
in Peterson and he talks about into the
sovereignty of the individual and all
that is what is the primary thing to
link us to the community does it's not
it's not an Randian type of
individuality it's more about just
personal integrity being the first step
leading to you know taking
responsibility and all that so you know
which is kind of stuff he says over and
over again if you put guard as an old
man sitting on the cloud looking at us
but nobody else likes us any longer old
man liking our Instagram accounts or
whatever God's supposed to do well there
wasn't did God there that wasn't the
point with God to begin with that God's
dick
you can certainly play atheism on that
God right same thing here the individual
does not exist with individuals based on
the wrong assumption of what it means to
be
human when they decart cookies look
individual inside a gland in your brain
yeah smartly correct the atomistic
atomistic individual doesn't exist what
about the soul you mentioned the soul
earlier
does the soul exist or or soul is a word
we have for the emotional and
intellectual inside of a human being
whether it's conscious or not I think
the word consciousness again it's an
American passport Americans love to you
I'm eternal conscious all the time most
the time I'm not so I don't care about
consciousness I care about the human
soul with psyche as it's called in Greek
okay be psyche that that is your inner
world that that is one of the certain
exists that your brain makes up or you
know your body makes up this world
focusing on the brain and the nervous
orientating itself around the you know
in the world but we are deeply social
beings from from the day were born if
you leave a baby for that physical
contact it will die from oxytocin Lac
you know it's just it is I for not how
ignorant babies we incredibly social
we're not polar bears if I was writing
books for polar bears I would say you
can be an individual you can eat young
kids if polar bears are individuals with
humans are not it's just a fact of life
it's just sight booth right so the
question is rather why do Americans hang
on to individualism as strongly as they
do because cartesian is an ECM american
state religion it is the religion of
which America was built and that's why
you go to churches in America you
pretend you're other lead you pretend
you Lutheran Americans for Catholic
America and every damn American I meet
talk about individuality in the
sovereign individual but uh that is
surely in the religion in America okay
just say I'll just listen to Jordan
Peter Peterson talk and he says he's not
an individual in the and Randi it says
he's an individual in the Contin sense
that's what he said so that that's
that's maybe yeah
the Khan was Cartesian yeah I'm on
account perfected cartesianism so I
always couldn't read the carton read
can't be right
and they were great philosophers but
they created a religion called
individualism and that's tried to act to
miss him in physics we just also know
failed as we discovered physics doesn't
work according to atomistic principles
the particles are made up by us when we
cross with the fields ok and the nation
ok those three ideas the individual and
animism and nationalism are tied
together you can even touch capitalism
to them if you like to but but these are
the isn't them this is one ideology is
one ideology originally whether you call
it socialism or you call it liberalism
and conservatism doesn't matter
you put socialism as part of that same
ideology and that man I don't even call
cartesianism perfected by Counting it's
Mako called Cartesian counters Amol
counted that beautiful but if you like
Jordan Peterson stopped an amount comes
okay and you don't realize that there
was a revolution that happened only a
few years after combat starting with
handle then you have completely missed
out on the last two hundred years of
European philosophy mmm completely ok
nobody's a Content in Europe anymore it
doesn't exist why because the Hegelian
revolution kickstarter later became
nietzsche and freud and you these guys
to join MPD's loves this is Jordan does
get Hegel that connects count with the
other guys who's missing hanging all
philosophy because without understanding
here you'll need erectus you'd
understand how these guys think and why
they reach the conclusions they did and
how useful it is today
well our shake and I and both you say
for the past 50 years
we need a massive return to Hegel to
understand the current predicaments were
stuck with and that can set us free to
then going to dialogue with the East say
China and India to then create an
ideology yeah
Internet Protocol has already created
the Empire that's what we claimed in our
book the global Empire news US Empire is
already a fact is already here its
technological is not economical is
technological it already exists we are
now 7 billion confused bodies tied to
one thing that knows what it's doing
this genius come out of the bottle is
called the internet it's a whole we
better get used to it better understand
it better
sealed functions and we better
understand that most we done so far for
the last 20 years has been terrible
mistakes and children's diseases you
know influencers on Instagram bad idea
it's not gonna work it's not gonna just
another Ponzi scheme among all the other
Ponzi schemes the Internet's been for
the first 20 years and we're still gonna
have to learn for that to finish until
some people finally started figuring out
what digital really is and the one thing
it is is that it's an empire okay it's
an empire and we cannot even get along
inside our own nations America is about
to go move towards civil war okay China
is really risky to you know if Putin
dies in Russia Russia falls apart the
European Union is falling apart none of
these systems are stable they're all
built on nationalism not even
nationalism holds up today if you don't
even national servants are then what the
heck are we gonna build the next system
on we have a world chaos system we have
a great chaos we're exactly like you
were before the French Revolution 1789
this is all back to the mid 1700s again
the new forces aren't playing then
people learn how to read and write and
count and that created massive amounts
of energy then eventually exploded
because these new energies were
misunderstood by an elderly to a corrupt
with fat and didn't get what's happening
they were called the nobility the
monarchy and church at the time and they
were all blown up and blown apart
because of it the same thing is gonna
happen now with politicians with
academics and we traditional business
and finance okay they're all going to
blown up by the new force for digital
that means a new chaos will be written
will all value the order the case more
than anything meaning if the order does
not arrive on time then we look for any
order then we're gonna go for fake
furnaces tater chips authoritarianism on
a massive scale that's how we doin
beings react when God is not present
when there's only chaos when is over
gone no god we react by where the
is the direction where is the god point
we should move towards who leads is
there where's the father where so maybe
children do or something at that suppose
you know I was writing this article
about Greta it's like people are people
are getting kind of weird and cultish in
all kinds of
in there with a little girl was 16 years
old worshiping children and you know
acting yeah what does she know she knows
nothing no like I said the other day you
know they'd see Anderson saga about the
little child who exposes the Emperor for
being naked okay
the other day it's this time around is
so weird that it's time for the Emperor
to step forward and tell about it the
child is naked children are naked they
know nothing poor Greta she knows
nothing
yeah she's being idolized it's it's
scary it's really scary but okay let's
go back to the words you're gonna
reconquer okay we reconquered God will
conquer religion we own those words
again the beautiful words their way to
the abyss communism they anything the
communist is beautiful word I'm not a
socialist I'm a communist okay firstly
distinguish between those two things
because I think you are not a socialist
Karl Marx what's the communist Brandon
O'Neil another friend of ours UK follow
Brenda whatever you do read spike to
mind every day so none of the best news
sources out there you can get right now
love Brandon to death Brandon and his
team over at spike Amman are great
Brandon only like me he's what you call
it Marxist libertarian meaning he's a
communist but not a socialist okay
that's what Marx was - that's a commoner
- so important
okay so commune is the name for human
beings coming together it's of course
another name for the tribe for the
congregation we are it's our human
beings collaborating not competing
collaborating towards creating shared
value mmm okay the Soviet Union was not
communist Mao's China was not communist
hmm they were Stalinist Andrew soand you
know they they were restoring empires
they were not communists communism
hasn't happened okay the reason why
communist hasn't happened is something
marks weren't about he said if you tried
to create communism and reinstate from
the top when the time is not right for
it you will fail
yeah it's true that that the Marx
thought that communism would develop in
in the in more liberal democracies right
it's like yeah firstly need still a
communism into into an to a place that
the ground was not fertile as a yeah the
point is this communism can only be
developed when the time is right and
what mark celebrate is the proletarian
we called this guide the netic rat in
our books because the time has come for
the net craft now historically an ethic
rise the guy who rides on the digital
and then becomes the winner on digital
confusing right because we you think of
the proletariat is like the working poor
no where you talk about that red mark I
told you the genius out of the bomb
people guess what Mark said and they
don't even read the guys stupid stupid
stupid don't do that
go to the sources read the guys Karl
Marx loves the capitalists lost the fact
the capitalist can make a mark on the
war our little history and he says the
proletarian is simple the guy who does
it better than the capitalist and the
way the proletariat doesn't bet in the
capital's be seen because the capitalist
is a Cartesian Countian individual who
tries to compete with everybody else and
gets ahead by making the most money so
he hasn't tapped into the source and
power of the of the tribe yet exactly
meaning if you can use technology to
collaborate better rather than just
getting ahead of everybody else and
making more money okay if you try to use
collaboration in the best way possible
which is possible today because of the
machines that are arriving mm-hmm the
machines are gonna create the Communist
paradise if anything or at least they
should right that means you create the
alternate environment for collaborative
efforts between human beings mmm-hmm
that beats the out of capitalism
Marx never said we should go on a
revolution and kill the capitalists he
never said that no he said what we
should be talk about the dictatorship of
what dictatorship of the proletariat and
all that like what have we lived in for
the past hundred dedicate a shape of
capital hmm Marx there are only
dictatorships
the question is who dictates everything
is dictation everything is power
everything is good so all of these all
of these phrases and things that we
think about in terms of marks are
actually sort of it's not the opposite
of the democracy of the people that's
it's C idea they didn't mark show the
people hardly existed as a concept
indeed well when I hear dictatorship of
the proletariat I think of a lot of
people violently rising up to to kill
the people in power you know so what can
you read Marx please that's not what he
writes about yeah sorry I've read some
marks yes okay okay but Brandon is
written Erik so a lion with Marxist and
the pointy remarks is that marks you
have tear marks to compliment meet you
because you end up with Jordan Peterson
if you only read Nietzsche and skip
marks you end up as some kind of round
in anyway because we need should you get
the completion of the celebration of the
Cartesian
conscient individual Nietzsche cause you
don't have a you don't for the for the
commune for the common or offer no
system needs a steamed image of the
ultimate individual the ubermensch there
risk the cracks and holes in the sky who
creates its own values and steps out
into the world it becomes godlike okay
brilliant
great stuff okay I'm a Nietzschean
absolutely but next for Nietzsche you
need Marx because if they don't have
Marxist art from Marx today how the hell
are we gonna read history about how the
tribe can become heroic
mm-hmm they have right congregation from
Christianity the holy spirit is
acceptable Marx writes about and what
Marx says that if it's not in the
afterlife it's the current life which
actually was Christianity claims to
because the heroic congregation of Marx
also did say I'm playing devil's
advocate here he did say that religious
the opiate of the people and he didn't
mean religious need opiate abuse
everybody took up in 1834 it wasn't
abusive at the time nobody thought of is
abused
he meant religion is comforting for
people as a narrative story so they can
do what they're supposed to do he didn't
have a problem with religion Marx didn't
have a problem with religion
he didn't probably liberalism he had no
regrown is it greatest works it's not
there
he basically in parallel with Nietzsche
developed there all Hegelians they came
out of him in in parallel with Nietzsche
developed the idea of the heroic
community it's built on the Christian
congregation as ideal okay can we
distinguish the heroic community from
the identity tribe like in all of these
you know because we're I think we're
both we both with Peterson on on his
attack of identity politics and social
justice warriors in no way yes the only
problem join assassin named Russell yet
it's just like if anything she can
Peterson should go to the roots or
opposition they got a shared opposition
called social justice warriors today oh
they're everywhere
they only administrations of academics
and and they run all over the place in
politics at the moment in the terrible
okay social justice warriors are all
gross science I mean if you little bros
they're lock-ins
okay lock your assault claim we're all
born with the blank slate yeah do
anything with any human being we're all
the same or if we're all the same and we
just blank slates you can basically
reinforce any idea you want on the human
body and the human soul that's resolved
for you that's a social justice war you
think that's acceptable I don't care
what you say because the only count who
speaks and how many minutes did you get
of attention
does it childish whoever the wrong no
okay Peterson and she she should go to
the roots of where that comes from
if Peterson says he comes from Mars he
hasn't read Marx at all he hasn't
understood Marx he why would Marx even
write in that case because we saw did
that a hundred years before him the
problem is that Marx was completely
posts or so and the political left in
Europe was basically a civil war between
Marxists and Rosen's throughout the
nineteenth century and there's some
clever on our kisum kind of really
interesting as you report okay
eventually we arrived with the struggle
between Marxist and Russell's and when
Lenin makes the mistake of reinforcing
the Russian Revolution too early and not
waiting for the proletarian to step
forward but tried to tame Russian
peasants who put them in kosis and
making Lenin himself the only
proletarian as a terrible mixture
Nietzsche and Mars didn't work
it's called Leninism hmm and even Lennie
knew that even worse would come he
warned about Stalin and by the time
Stalin takes over then you get the
Soviet Union they get the massacres the
Ukrainians you get totalitarianism you
get the collectivism that was Stalinism
there's none of that can call Marx
please yeah so it's not much difference
between the two mm-hmm and yet I'm still
I'm still pushing you on this just a
little bit because in that when you look
at the countries that call themselves
communists the column says Marxist it
seems that they've created the biggest
hell's on earth what would you agree and
well okay Pol Pot in Cambodia did his
PhD at Sorbonne in France in the 1960s
on Raw so not Marx Mauser don't never
even read Marx okay
he read little fairy tale books about
old Chinese and person wanted to do one
of them Maoism is rasayan ISM definitely
and Pol Pot went to Cambodia and they're
all they're all uniting around something
to hate the easy route to get popularity
is to find something to hate the way
social justice worries do today we hate
the white heterosexual man now we're
unified because we have an abject and
can hate that unifies us Hitler did he
really do Russell
Stalin dealing with the kulaks of
Ukraine Russell Moore did it you know
what anybody wasn't with him basically
and Pol Pot basically started killing
anybody wore glasses intellectuals mmm
factory so daddy's room so anism
it's nothing to do with Marx sorry it
doesn't I think I think the time for
Marxism has come now and I want to unify
Christianity whatever got left of it and
understanding the dynamic of
their son and holy spirit why that was
Custer amber to Mary by the way see how
tribal that was white worked take the
best out of that so we can make that
work again maybe that could be a third
Testament if you like do you want to do
Christian theology that you would
definitely work on that third Testament
we just tribal anthropological
understanding personality no that leads
you on to communism because communism is
the same idea we're gonna go somewhere
and the name for the communing the Bible
is called the promised land communism is
the journey towards the promised land
now if you must let go in the wrong
direction when you do that and that's
exactly why Soviet Union was the wrong
direction
it wasn't the promised land Mao's China
was the wrong direction wasn't the
promised time so what's the right
direction what's the promised land my
answer to that is the east exactly our
most urgent need today and I start with
Sam and Chris a friend of mine everybody
reads Samak retreat one of the best
philosophers around at the moment
British philosopher resides in New York
he's got the honorary chair at the new
school professor there he's a brilliant
writer okay
but he's written books on the infinite
demand of the stranger and he builds on
to the best European thinkers to French
Jews will actually want his French
Algerian one is fearless but they were
called Derrida and live in us okay
you read Jacques Derrida and you read
Levin us those two philosophers talked
about the infinite demand of the
stranger meaning the biggest challenge
in our time is another custom I call
intertribal ism intertribal is easy
intra tribal meaning to love people
within your own tribe you're born to do
that like you're born to love the people
around you you you're born to love you
to under those cherished friends in your
life that's easy we at least keep on
doing that okay if you have a problem
with your family you're really so
you know stay with your family stay with
a tribe build from that so you can then
encounter strangers without wanting to
kill okay that's called into tribal and
what the priesthood has always done
throughout history he's trying to nudge
this one bit further towards loving is
change is even more excited than the
previous changes that we love we started
with the villages the river valleys
5,000 years ago
bloodiest part of human history was
5,000 years ago when we killed anybody
in the next village we had starvation
okay that had to stop so we built the
ritual places between the villages the
priest woke up these cigarettes and
declared basically the religion of one
day listen the religion of the next
village is actually the same religion
it's the same Patrick just so it's kind
of really early diplomacy or something
their interests shared interests so
religion the class these two villages
have a shared interest don't kill each
other
because if you both survive if we create
a more sustainable societies we don't
have to kill each other then we can all
prosper we have a shared interest a
shared goal a shared God a shared
direction that's what religion has to do
so then we could create periods of peace
by declaring more or fistic religions or
polycystic eliciting of the same thing
anyway two different levels
but-but-but-but we created these fistic
religions so that we could unify through
narrative by having a shared God mm-hmm
that's why these exercises are in the
Bible you know it's Moses in the promise
tournament and then it's exodus out of
Babylon toward zero Salam which is the
first rise of the nation states the rise
of the nation of Israel coming out of an
empire called the Persian Empire
so we should study Empire we should
start a nation because now we have to
move people from nation Empire and the
only one way of doing that and that name
is machine intelligence mm-hmm that's
what the machines are here hmm
they're our only hope we can create
communism through the machines but if
you don't try to create Commerce
entities what the hell are we going to
do not that capitalism offers you
anything because he doesn't Norfolk do
not impede is this American an injured
individuals and opportunity it offers
you absolutely nothing just offers you
the same consumer society
you've been awful for the past hundred
years
eat more and drink more consume more
work harder consume more it's just it's
just nonsense we're moving towards a
society with 100% psychiatric diagnosis
is that the
that's cream there's something wrong
here capitalism is a dead end
mm-hmm give the nurse in and Felix
Guattari wrote some brilliant books in
the 1970s following Chaka Khan one is
called anti order puts the other one is
called thousand photos and the subtitle
for the books is capitalism as
schizophrenia mm-hmm so they're arguing
the cameras and will lead to
schizophrenia well then I discovered in
the 1990s was that the internet helped
us to accept that the entire self is
schizophrenic medium no it's what a
schizophrenic it's a huge Cuckoo's Nest
seven billion people screaming at the
top of the lungs no one is listening to
anybody
I don't want I want to bring that up one
level and say that God is are actually
schizophrenic in that sense right that's
why the internet is God then God is
afraid not the contemporary internet we
need an exodus you pander you pointed it
out the Exodus we have to write about
and study and create a narrative for is
the exodus out of the current internet
chaos into an exodus - or the Internet
order hmm and that internet order is not
the Chinese Communist Party dream of as
a socrata ruled by one party that's the
nightmare but so sock racine if it
decentralized could definitely be that
so say you're a packer today working on
decentralized platforms and you know so
Socrates meaning themselves is
everywhere and the censors are gonna
register everything we do we gotta live
in a sort of mass behaviorist society
register everything we do knowing
everything about ourselves we can even
go and ask the machines what is the next
thought I'm gonna have in the machine
will tell us what would be our next stop
mmm
it's gonna happen soon right okay relax
okay if you pull this off we can save
the climate we can stay on the planet we
can probably create a sustainable system
we even can avoid the next ice age so we
can keep ten billion people on the
planet for the foreseeable future it is
sure not we don't know yet you're
probably gonna go in and you know start
fiddling around with our genes soon as
well it hopefully at least create
something better and more sustainable
than we are right now but this whole
move is to move towards communism yeah
so you're talking Geo
Engineering on a massive scale and yes
you also just mentioned you know
tampering with the DNA and you know
already happening and so so you can you
can see how that might and then your
your your your linking that to communism
you see how you see that those ideas
might make some people a bit hysterical
yes yeah which is why I'm saying you
need to go back and revisit 1945 a
reread history
we are so much to deal with never
dealt in 1945 Nick lund is a very
controversial philosopher but a genius
okay
he's only published fragments and a
couple of books so far but he's my
generation so Simon Chrissy Alexander
Brod Nicola
read all three okay we're very connected
Nicola like mrs. illusion and it's it's
in Shanghai in China he left the Western
to the east Lister with his family a
happy guy you know him last year sat
down with him and talk to him and Nick
Lang says the most important thing why
so controversial is that we never dump
1945 properly because we turned out of
Hitler into the ultimate evil like
metaphysical evil mmm-hmm then Hannah
Arendt tried to make us understand well
that's not actually true without to
begin with so it's not metaphysical okay
it's very concrete but by turning out of
Hitler into something very not nuanced
but Intel to medieval we allowed
ourselves to just say I'm not a clerk
and suddenly you were allowed on stage
right meaning we created enormous
mediocrity we live in a society of mass
mediocrity because we're not willing to
look at our own let's say inner Hitler
or our own darkest parts of our soul we
don't understand the world is conflicts
and things are nuanced and and Hitler
can be understood as a little boy
Pharaoh you should never had power in
the first place on the other hand you
wrote the books he wrote in the 1920s he
did everything in public and the Germans
long do you mean we have to be scared of
ourselves the German people were evil if
anybody was evil in 1938 okay German
culture has dealt a lot without this
government to the real depth of it the
rest of us have to do but noting trying
to find our shadow and get the evil out
of us no there is no evil there is no
good
there's just constructive and
destructive ideas you mean there's no
absolute photonic model of evil and no
absolute no needs and Marx never talked
about good and evil that's what they
brilliant Hegel doesn't talk about good
and evil good Neal was thrown out when
he threw out tomorrow conned out of
Western philosophy okay
point being you either have a short-term
plan
you tried to grab whatever you can grab
for your own good
that's American individualism for you
you might grab what it's good for your
nuclear family that's even more American
but that's how far you go anything else
you shoot them with the gun right okay
that's a very very narrow-minded
perspective
no wonder America has done more to
destroy the climate on this planet than
anybody else ever did okay so a
sustainable model is prioritizing
constructive mindset and I go to ancient
Persian philosophy or dudes or Astron
ISM because it's restin ism the ethics
is very simple straightforward
absolutely brilliant your two concepts
are shot and Rui Rui is to have a very
short-sighted destructive mentality
meaning I'll grab whatever I can grab it
or grab it now hmm okay then you kill
yourself or somebody kills you very soon
nothing's going to work you're not going
to have a civilization that way but that
essentially what American individual is
right the alternative to do is also we
just died okay I extend myself as far as
I possibly can to look at the long-term
effects meaning we're not dealing with
climate change really primates always
changed with dealing with avoiding the
next ice age 20,000 years ago okay so we
need to create climate controlling
technologies otherwise we're smoked
anyway so we might as well do that so
that is awesome an arse is a lady to
Tantra because Tantra is like a life
school coming out of India in Tibet the
meets with person China and Tantra
teaches you if you prolong things and
stay with something instead of taking
the reward instantly you'll get paid off
much better in the end that's basically
investment theory invest in the future
invest in your children investing of
grandchildren that is awesome and
personal philosophy and it's a brilliant
way of looking at the world so instead
of good and evil we should look at our
sons really and if you discuss out of
Hitler well he talked about the
thousand-year rice it was obvious he
would last the most 11 years and then
kill himself from the very beginning
nonsense it was nothing but a death cult
Plato mystic death cult
okay well we're talking about here is
called communism is the exact opposite
it's the ultimate good point into the
future the ultimate promised land we
have to get when if you don't get there
we're not going to survive it really is
a call for an exodus and that Exodus is
we need to leave things as they are now
and move all of society using technology
towards society what technology helps us
loving the stranger mm-hmm gonna be
incredibly hard for us to do we're gonna
do everything we can to protest so we
have to remind people causing no no
there's no way you gotta love the
stranger because we're all gonna be one
people on this planet seven or ten
billion of us and we need to make this
planet work because we don't have
anywhere else to go
there's nothing else to coldness and
rocks out there no life nothing else
this is only how we saw it 1958 saw the
picture of this planet with blue and
green will notice ever since is the only
thing we have so I like very much the
ethic of love the stranger I mean
there's probably on each side to that
which could be dangerous but at the same
time that seems to be the right ethic
isn't it I mean Chris has done great
work in this department gonna use him a
lot used him in the past before we wrote
synthesis and kriti wrote a book called
the faith of the faithless where
discussed pure faith as a concept
beautiful book on the book on passion
book of faith Alain Badiou is a French
thinker he's also written a lot about
the event just thinking a lot about
people who commit themselves to
something he writes about love as an act
of commitment okay true commitment not
like getting married and swearing or
anything but like I'm committed to an
idea I'm committed to my truth I'm
acting on the truth if you're the
Petersons had started Alain Badiou who
would have found an ally all along maybe
she can point him in that direction
okay so there's been a lot of thinking
coming out of where I would call
communist Europe for the past 50 years
for communism has been a bad word
because Stalin and Mao you know may be
dirty time to retake the word
Sheik is a communist I'm a communist we
take the word because the only gold
point we can have for civilization to
make this planet survive at least as
humans is communism
there is no other alternative that's
essentially what the Internet's trying
us to do is trying us to turn us into
communists and instead of as you notice
an internet that has to help it has to
be Newton if it has some hierarchy so
the hierarchies are ready now maturing
they're called nodes ok nodes are
hierarchy according to you nodes are
hierarchies within a communist like my
question is like how does hierarchy fit
within communism because you know we
would we would think the Communist
vision would be a non hierarchical
vision right no no I know you're gonna
say no but think of communism is is that
we flatten out inequality and Karl Marx
says there's nothing wrong with the
capitalist let's just beat him at his
own game and he says the proletariat has
been better in the capitalist creating
value if the proletarian through his
community does not create a higher value
for people the capitalist and his market
down as it doesn't at all the common is
who's worthless then his fame okay so
there has to be higher value because
we're tribal and we're now technologies
to make us even more tractable and can
extract value out of tribalism meaning
you can communities of teams who do
brilliant work together we call them
corporations congregation corporation ok
so that is with communism dose and of
course what I'm saying is I'm not gonna
force you to become a communist I'm just
gonna tell you that unless we become
communist we don't have anywhere to go
is the only order we can have in the
cows and that's the way to go forward
and of course come is will be offered
you want to join or not it want to be
part of this so do you want to shift and
consume and be up and go to see
your therapists five times a day and go
to gym every day and hate yourself
whatever you do now because the
existential extension malays we've
arrived at is exactly what capitalist
and would take us this would diverse and
whether it prophetically said fifty
years ago before the internet right and
said no no no no capitalism is only
going to lead to mass schizophrenia
mmm that daddy's kids it's a freeness a
word for internal kills if you want to
get order in your head have an order
instead of chaos hmm you've got to get a
direction to your own life no direction
according to hide it is to work towards
the moment when you die mmm when you
dice them um when everything that
happened before that moment gots its
value so you sort of throw yourself to
moment when you're gonna die
well you hopefully you become a whole
human being a little bit full life
there's nothing else for you to do and
then you throw us off back to the
current moment in everything in your
life at this very moment gets his value
because of it that is the same idea as
the communist idea the communist ideas
basically think of communism as the
world intense creativity constant
experimentation constant renewal again
person philosophy harmatuk renewal it's
not a plate or mystic fantasy that's a
perfect world because perfection is just
dead okay it's an imperfect world that
constantly renews itself that principle
goes how about talking personal
philosophy so that's the Communist ideal
I'm form like a Zoroastrian communist so
we we are if you have that common is
that deal in your mind suddenly
everything you do today politically
spiritually career-wise or issue wise
starts to make sense
it gets meaning mmhmm yeah so and if
you've tried to find meaning in the
individual you're you're you know you're
we tried that for 400 years to get over
it's a lonely excellent too lonely
exercise so you're it's newsletters all
the time we hate you we hate these
people we hate individuals today we
can't stand them any longer
we're tired of the narcissism retired of
the people who put things out that you
be like than to be sharing we tired of
that what a proper social dialogue on
how we gonna proceed what we're gonna do
next
and we'll listen to each other if we
take if we take knowledge to heart and
if people study hard we want to listen
to teachers now what doesn't do people
who started me the art explain just what
they found so we can make up our own
minds and we can know where to go to
study on our own it's back to the books
that's what it's all about now so it's
kind of like utopianism mixed with with
traditionalism
like it's like you have to have a
tradition right you have to you have to
be studying different traditions yes you
can't just religion Easter why don't we
just making you making it up as you
go on like that's that the darkness of
the Rastogi envision right it's like
like the child is already you're already
good just the way you are right where's
yeah that's that's kinda me
that's exactly why ro science tell the
kids to kill their parents that's
exactly a Chinese Cultural Revolution
there is nothing Marxist at all about
the Chinese culture evolution it screams
or so it is the ultimate or so nightmare
and it happened in China in the 1960s
okay if that happened in China what the
heck is that didn't got to do with
Marxism nothing mm-hmm so you rewrite
history and we have to rewrite it
starting with Stalin and Hitler yeah
they were very destructive both them
there were little boys who run with limp
arse and the brawny through hatred yes
but we don't understand ourselves that
we don't write that history properly in
detail because we cannot map our songs
otherwise the extreme danger and I see
is this sort of as you say infantile
ization rather than getting deep into
the into the tradition into the the
thought into the idea people are just
people are just attaching themselves to
any kind of whatever node it would be
like this negative tribalism well what
happened was that I say even tribalism
it's just his functionality social
functionality okay what happened was
that after the Second World War American
pop culture and television started
celebrating the teenager who's the 1950s
right yeah back then spread across the
world and people tried to be prolonged
teenagers like people try to stay
teenagers entire lives and never grow up
there's like dollars's we just like it
is to keep the sex drive keep you gentle
organs keep the grown-up body they keep
it beautiful forever never let it age
and never have to grow up and be full
grown up you'll be and didn't I ever
gonna die okay that's the American
teenage ideal it's all to it form of
consciousness back then spread and then
the internet came along the 1990s and of
course all these children and grown
bodies there are societies are full of
thought the intent was for them my turn
to be discovered it's my turn to walk up
on the stage it's my turn to be sexually
adored it's my turn together you know
and the youthful sexualized body was
idealized and wisdom disappeared
completely wisdom was out the window the
wisdom is not cool anymore we're all
doing youth they were all doing sex
stuff we're all like mad me we
 around with take tons of drugs and
all these libertine things okay yeah
that was the libertine things that were
meant to be shamanic only for the few
suddenly fell into the mainstream and
the result of that was an infantile I
society and this is the keyword and it's
a liberal is that we call it
infantilization that's exactly the state
of current society when you say that
Americans have an obesity epidemic no
there's no obesity epidemic in America
just tons of kids can't stop eating
because the children and they want to in
their mouth all the time it's just stop
eating an epidemic is over right they
can't because they're children each
other so we arrived with that and now
people think the internet is going to
promote this infantilization and all
they do is share pics I'm looking as
great as possible and then they put on
mechanisms on their smartphones to look
better than they actually look meaning
every damn picture people see is a false
picture we live in a complete sexualized
fairytale what it means to be you see
Joy's fairy tale yeah that's what put a
sexualized ferritin is the darkness has
taken its extreme
it's called Peter Pan syndrome mm-hmm
meaning you want to go into Dalton and
steel with you grants out which is of
course the grown-up genitals so you can
have a suit you want to steal that still
be child with everything else and you
build the welfare state above the
consumer society on everything like this
and capitalist and of course exploited
and this isn't capitalism this cabin is
the rice at a state of infantilized mask
its arena so you we're back to Marx
we're talking about exploitation right
we're just talking about exploitation
like pure exploitation its exploitation
of this youth right there's which is the
most sort of
society everybody believes they have to
exploit everything they run into instead
of employing it mean they don't
understand time travel just employees
they don't understand us our joy which
is again in quotation over exploitation
it's just like grab whatever you can
grab me grab it well that's the chance
attitude to life as a grownup I started
something I check out if somebody owns
this then I check out maybe
share it and somebody oh oh you own this
property what if I rent this property
from you and build something on it
something yeah why don't you do that we
do something together okay collaboration
collaboration collaboration meaning if
what means to be human is to be
collaborator not to competitor it means
to be grown up not a child
it means to be a fully grown-up not a
Donelson it means to be your grown-up
person taking responsibility for life
Jordans right about that progress right
about that what they don't talk about is
where this girl occurs is going to go
mm-hmm and you're saying it's gonna go
towards a more communist society perhaps
just on its own or more come on Society
no well it's gonna go towards nitocris
ii first meaning some people get it they
will get ahead of everybody else cuz
they get it they would create the
thriving communities that will then lead
that's why I go to Burning Man because
the place like burning man that's where
people go these days that's where the
cultural engineers of the future go
because the foreseeable future if you're
somewhere between Las Vegas and San
Francisco mentally you'll do okay in
America same thing everywhere else the
culture the engineer comes the therapy
is come now this it's like we try to
reorient what it means to be human and
get that right but we also need a
direction in that direction the name of
that erection is inter tribalism and
into tribalism is the hardest thing ever
and the priests have always known that
this was the hardest thing to do from
tribe to clan from clan to nation were
very very hard steps to take bloody
developments took hundreds of years for
thousands of years enormous amounts of
imagination and storytelling in there to
some things to finally get it right to
finally have fewer Wars and longer
periods of peace hmm we have to do that
all over again and I don't think we
cannot do it this time we cannot go from
nation to empire unless we take help
from the Machine
and I study iris Tata now I started
Alexander the Great's Empire I started a
Persian Empire
I started it loosely held Confederations
that worked or returned they were not
totalitarian and see how they worked and
why they worked we need to start in the
trade routes again we need to study who
did something similar previous in
history and succeeded on the smaller
scale can we do it now on a larger scale
with the help of the machines mm-hmm
great mmm so you and ivory taking God
and religion and the word communism and
we literally tonic before the sheep
Peterson debate intron everything else
trickles down from the ground energy
from the Exodus that's exactly what the
grand narratives are formed communist
utopia is not about perfection though
that's very very important oh that's so
important yeah starting point it's
called causality where do we come from
you have an end point the gold point
where are we going and it might take
thousands of years to get there are
millions of years to get them we have a
point we have a direction because every
direction we can make decisions about
everything we do today we can have a
functioning ethics in content presiding
because it comes through and trickles
down from the grand narrative that is
exactly why religion is so damn
important