welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
right hello everyone welcome to the
stoah I'm Raven I will be hosting this
event today and so welcome the Stowe is
a place where we go here and dialogue
about what matters most at the knife's
edge of this moment and today we have
Nora Bateson with us who is a complexity
thinker she's a filmmaker writer
educator and her work asked the
questions of how we can improve our
perception of the complexity we live
within and we're so excited to have you
today Nora and I'm just handed over to
you look at all these people this is so
fun
yeah it's it's good to be here and I
have to I have to admit that I'm I I'm
so curious what the unasked questions
will be so I was thinking what should i
what should I do anything to prepare for
this and then I was like these are the
unmasked question so how can you know
anyway so it's great to be here I'm I'm
in Stockholm this evening this is where
I live just outside Stockholm and here
we are good to be here wonderful so I'll
just let you know what we typically do
here at the stoah have is we have about
like 20 minutes of discussion from from
our from our guests and then we move
into a Q&A where I will moderate the Q&A
from the guests and then today we
actually have something exciting that
I'm offering afterwards for everybody
who wants to join it is like a
sense-making session so I'm gonna do 30
minutes and of course nori you know you
can stay if you want to but you don't
have to so everybody just to know that
after this you can stay in the zoom room
and we'll actually just have an open
dialogue about what Nora you're you
brought to the stoah today so yeah
that's the D okay so I can talk for 15
or 20 minutes about what what's on my
mind and mm-hmm okay
great
[Music]
I mean you know like all of us we've
been thinking quite a bit about the
pandemic and all the inter systemic
processes that are being revealed in
their fragility or in their antiquity
around this this shift and what the
virus has revealed you know from
politics to economy to our relationships
with our families to the more the more
ancient clocking of time which I think
has been really interesting of what day
is it
I heard someone referring Thursday last
week as blurs day that just sort of like
where are we how many weeks has it been
now and and that that shifting
relationship to time is really is really
very important because everything runs
through that certainly your own body and
health but also relationship to work
relationship to food relationship to
[Music]
your sexuality your all your your
relationships and your family and your
friends and your you know I'm thinking
what time is it that my 91 year old
mother is waking up in Washington State
and when are we going to do our daily
Skype call or or zoom call I'm thinking
about when the chickens need to be fed
I'm thinking about when the seedlings
are gonna sprout I'm thinking about
different modalities of time and even
being in these zoom sessions which I
know a lot of us are in altogether way
too many of right now time moves
differently in in this space
I had the the very strange experience of
teaching a course that I had never
taught before and it being an online
course and I actually had no idea how to
estimate how much time that was going to
take to teach this course online because
without all of the relational
Pro I mean I can't feel if your body I
can't feel you understanding me or
taking this in I can't steal your
grokking I can't hear your breath I
can't sense your nervousness I don't
know if you're reading your email or if
you're actually with me and so I started
off that course saying well you know I
think it's gonna be two three-hour
sessions but is it okay with everybody
if we actually keep that open because if
we're not done we may need to do more
well it turned out to be five because it
took that much longer to actually you
know saturate through the screen and I
mean you know right now on your screen
I'm what about a centimeter and a half
by three centimeters and if you think
about what kind of percentage of the
actual me that really is
and just how much information is missing
I often refer to that information as the
warm data so it took a lot longer than
it would have if we had been in person I
think that's interesting what's
happening with this relationship to time
and if our relationship to time changes
that changes relationships to everything
and if relationships to everything start
changing you start to get significant
change and the the thing about that is
that I'm not exactly sure where to go
looking for that change what to call it
how to identify it where to measure it
how to even register what that change is
because it seems like it's slipping out
of whatever context I go to find it in
so I think to myself I'm gonna pay
attention to how my relationship to food
and time is changing and then I start to
realize well in fact that relationship
is is contingent upon you know what kind
of activity I'm in physically you know
what's happening with the dog what's
happening with my kids what's what's
happening in the household whether or
not we've been out to the the big do the
big shop who's cooking there's a lot of
cooking going on
[Music]
so my diets changed and then I start to
notice that my diets changed but it's
it's not necessarily in the places where
I would go looking for it so that it
could make a very coherent explicit
direct list of changes in each one of
these parcels of my life they're there
their leapfrogging around each other so
what what what exactly is that change
where exactly is it I don't know but I
have the feeling that it's something
significant rhythm is such a core basis
of life and when the rhythm changes the
whole thing changes so I think that's I
think that's important
another thing that is on my mind right
now
that is connected to this and I was just
tweeting about it today is this idea of
not so much what's emerging but what's
submerging what's going down right now
into that unspoken territory what is it
that I'm starting to bring into my onion
worded non-verbal assumptions what's
happening in the metastasis that are
starting to get embodied that are not
voiced and and how are those what's it
what's submerging right now and and I'll
give you a little contrast to that
because I've had this really kind of
interesting and and I think in a way
important although I'm not sure why
experiences of doing these open zoom
sessions on Monday evenings at 6 o'clock
and you're all welcome to come on
education complexity in
intergenerational relationships and what
that looks like in terms of mutual
learning between generations around
complexity and systems and I opened this
free forum as a way of just kind of you
know I I don't know it kind of came out
of the periphery I just sort of thought
well you know everyone's home with their
kids and the coronavirus is complex and
we have to talk about complex stuff so
why don't we just open the space up to
think about how generations can together
explore the complexity and the systemics
of this and this is a personal plight
for me because because I was a kid who
grew up in a household in which it was
important to always be looking at the
inter dependency of life that that was
just how it was we did that and that was
breakfast and that was the fish tank and
that was a walk in the woods and that
was the reading of a story so there was
no separation ever between this process
of inquiry into the complexity of life
from the time I was tiny and so for me
that whole body of a beautiful
intellectual material was actually just
life it was a way of being and and then
I
we went to school and when I went to
school I had to learn to break the world
into pieces and that math was something
different and music was something
different than then literature was
something different than history and etc
and and then I was frustrated by that
and I could feel as a child I could just
feel the kind of the magic of life just
sucking out and I hated school so I I
just sort of thought okay let's let's
just do this I get very frustrated when
I hear people saying things like well
you know you have to be you know an
adult with this level of development to
actually comprehend complexity and most
of the time there's the at least
implication that that you've achieved
some level of academic proficiency to do
that and it just you know I I find that
intolerable because of course every
culture in the world has been dealing
with complexity forever at all ages so
I'm not sure you know certainly in terms
of the jargon if you want to talk about
the mathematics of redundancies and
couplings and you know some of the the
more jargon istic versions of thinking
about mapping complexity for example in
the way that that particular pista mala
ji creates that but bottom line and
breakfast is complex bottom line to be
in relationship in a family as a complex
process to walk across the room requires
an embodiment of complexity so how do we
begin to open that space of mutual
learning between generations
so I started this Monday after Monday
evening thing and I'll give you the link
and
[Music]
and this weird thing happened because I
had actually no idea how radical it was
going to be because in all the previous
iterations of me discussing education in
one form or another I've had to stay
tethered to the existing education
system in some way shape or form that it
was at a conference or I was working
with parents or you know there was some
reason in which I was having this
conversation and and I had to stay in
this in this connectivity to existing
system but in this zoom session suddenly
that was gone and I and it was so
surprising to me because I found myself
just like actually I mean actually just
talking about my real experience of
learning complexity as a little kid and
working with my own kids and and how
that has really happened how it really
happened and not in any way looking at
it through the lens of the school system
or what the school system could be or
how to adjust the school system or what
a curriculum of systems thinking would
look like her none of that it was just
free of that so what is submerging
right so that is that was a a cue to me
that something had actually shifted that
I wasn't aware had shifted that
somewhere there had been a moving of the
lands and of even the because it was a
collective - you know it's a group maybe
a little bigger than this group that
that were ready to engage with this
thing at a level that it was
unprecedented something's happening and
it's it's I think after being in the
kind of circles of change making for
actually just too long and and my
family's been working toward bringing
change for generations and I I'm just
not sure the change is where we're
looking I'm starting to increasingly
feel that one of the most important
aspects of responding to complexity is
recognizing that you can't get at it
directly that that thing you want to
change is only possible because of the
the many interdependencies that have
produced it and so if you try to change
the thing you're making an error
and it's a pretty significant error and
this is something that I you know
honestly I'm not sure that I would have
said this out loud to a group of people
like yourselves that I don't actually
know that have probably devoted your
life to change making write that that
there is room for something else to come
out now and I have no idea how to really
express where those boundaries have
moved but they moved
so what's submerging what's going down
in there why is it suddenly in our
conversation right here well what is it
that makes it okay it go further than
we've been before to say things you know
about the difficult ways in which
systemic you change in which change in
complex systems really takes place which
is not it's not gonna be on the
blackboard it's not going to be in the
YouTube video it's not gonna be on
medium right the changes that are really
taking place are taking place at a
frequency that none of those frequencies
can register and and and that's us and
it's somehow here like we're sharing it
now on Zoo but if you were to look at
the transcript of this talk you probably
wouldn't find it where is it it's
something that's emerging in the
relationships but it's not just my words
it's also your
and the history and the culture the
education system that we had to sit
through that sucked the magic out of
life and then maybe put some back in
the the changes that are emerging are
submerging so I just wanted to start
there because it's because it's
difficult and impossible to talk about
so let's talk about it you wanted
unasked questions let's go there so I'd
like to open it up now and just see I
think that was 20 minutes but let's see
let's see where it goes perfect
beautiful yeah so we're opening up to
all the questions from people in the
room if you would like to put your on
ask questions in the chat and then I
will call on you and you can have a
little bit of a dialogue with with Nora
and until then Nora I just have some
questions I've been really drawn in by
your question that I hear you say I've
heard you said on Jim Wright show I've
heard you say it on else all of these
kind of like you know logo centric kind
of like brains you're really interested
in systems you know and you always come
back to this question of who's taking
care of the babies and I think that this
question really gets into the kind of
you know the stickiness the gooeyness
like this inter place of between which I
would say this kind of liminal space
that we're in right now is also a kind
of between space that maybe it's kind of
allowing for the liminal spaces in in
the mundane lives that we live to come
to the floor since we have this larger
liminal space that we're in but that
question to me seems like it goes on
unasked and unanswered in most places
and I was wondering if you could link
those things in terms of
intergenerational knowledge and the
question why do you ask that question
and what what is asking that question
taught you okay so the the place where
that question comes from well it comes
from the basic question of what is it
what is continuing I mean what does it
mean to continue and in order to
continue the babies have to be fed and
in order for the babies to be fed
babies have to be fed in such a way that
they could feed their babies and that
the people who are helping to produce
all the processes it requires to see
babies can feed their babies and that
their babies can feed babies so there's
there's a lot of interdependency in that
notion of even just the most basic
continuance of the human species and if
you are into the sustainable development
goals you could actually just ask one
question how are we going to feed the
babies and it's actually every single
one of the UN sustainable development
goals runs through that question it's a
gender question it's a food question
it's a soil question it's an ocean
question it's a poverty question it's a
it's is education it's it's the whole
thing is right there so it shows that in
order for there to be continuance
there's gonna have to be pretty
substantial discontinuance
of all the things that are making it
prohibitive I mean what are the babies
being fed even in the most wealthy
households right and so taking care of
the babies besides that I have six kids
so as an aside you know I have two in my
house or so we've got six and they're
you know coming from different cultures
and all different ages and all kinds of
all kinds of craziness in that the other
thing is that that I grew up in a
household as I was saying before in
which there was an ongoing mutual
learning between the generations so my
father
some of you may be aware of his work but
he was one of the people who actually
started system sciences and that's an
understatement
but in our household there was always
learning and and that I mean it sounds
kind of romantic but the fact is it was
just what was so in some households you
know you have a kind of currency in the
household of who's right right
in our household there was a currency of
what did you learn can you express
something that you saw for the first
time or something you perceived that you
hadn't perceived before or even better
something you thought was one way that
turned out to be another it doesn't
matter what it was as little as we're as
big as profound or as banal it doesn't
matter but just that process of
constantly being curious and and looking
from another direction and my dad would
do this and he would actually articulate
things like I used to think about it
like this and now I see it's different
or isn't that interesting that you are
pointing that out I'm gonna give that
some thought and sure enough he'd come
back to me a day or two later and say
I've been thinking about what you said
and I've taken it very seriously and
these are the thoughts I have about what
you said what do you think about these
thoughts and this is when I was teeny
you know five six so there was a there
was not the concerned that he could you
know that I would disrespect him if he
were wrong on the contrary the idea was
more to the point that if he were able
to change his mind he would actually be
more trustworthy
which is well you know that's pretty
significant shift from the way most
households work so that that is
something that is not him and it's not
me at something happening in the between
the really in the relationships between
generations and what he's giving to me
in that moment is a world in which it's
possible to be in that kind of a
relationship all right it's not even
about what we learned or didn't learn
it's about the meta message of what
world are you living in and and that's
where the really profound piece of that
was for me and that's that for so for me
this question of taking care of the
babies and feeding the babies is also
about it's about a reveal of what it
takes to care about that and what kind
of a world that is to grow up in a world
in which the older generations want
there to be possibility for there to be
more generations is a whole set of meta
messages it's so much more important
than changing the policy right we can
change all the policy of all the SDGs
and we can do all the numbers and we can
make all the graphs but none of that is
anywhere close
shift in the relational thing in the
household in the family at breakfast in
the car on the walk right that's that's
where this really happens so and it
doesn't look like a conversation about
how to feed the babies it looks like it
looks like a conversation about carrying
what your kid is thinking about and
being willing to change your own mind
and being in that same kind of caring
curiosity with the creatures in the
forest floor
it's a it's a mobile learning sending
but you know the che word is respect
it's so much bigger than respect
it's interdependency it's it's being in
the inter debate that's where that feed
the babies take care of the babies thing
lives for me where everything used say
or do with within that intergenerational
relationship has consequences and
consequences of consequences of
consequences and so what what are we
putting what I was putting down and the
hard thing is that that there's been so
much there's been so much damage there's
been so much pain and it's it's um it's
a curious thing about evolution where we
share our pain when someone gets hurt
they very often hurt other people
because of their hurt right so there's
an evolutionary question in that about
what where does our where what can we
learn from that hurt and how do we move
into an interdependent way of looking at
it where is that hurt is that hurt
really yours or did it come out of the
economy did it come out of politics did
it come out of this intra systemic
madness that we've been living in for
the past several generations
yeah so that I just said a whole lot of
things in there that we could unpack for
a very long time but but nevertheless I
see that there's all this text coming up
on the side of my screen and I haven't
read any of it so give me just a second
unless you know in reading it and you'd
want to point it out to me yeah so what
I will do is I'll just filter through
all the questions and I'll call and Ryan
here's the first question in the chat
and he will just ask his question to you
so you don't have to worry about that
okay good
chattering what's going on over there
awesome yeah so Ryan if you would like
to ask your question go ahead and unmute
yourself yeah thank you thank you so
much it's such a pleasure to be here and
getting a chance to talk to you about
one of my role models Nora Bateson um so
my question is basically you know I've
been in a lot of these kind of like game
be systems change circles under
different attitudes towards how we
should orient ourselves towards politics
into the political and some people and
ones that are kind of like don't bother
with it at all the whole system is
screwed so just focus on going to the
local decentralized project and if
there's some collapses hopefully they'll
be in place to kind of offer and other
people are more of that accurate of yeah
but we we can't really ignore the
political and its implications and
impacting the larger system as a
convener connected entity so we should
focus on so I'm kind of curious how you
what kind of how do you think it would
be helpful to relate or orient ourselves
towards politics and also to calibrate
the impact of policy on catalyzing some
of the positive change we want to see in
the world such that you've talked about
now or in your book thank you that's a
great question I just want to run away
from it though but I won't
I won't I will sit here in the fire and
I will be with that question
the thing is I think we that that this
is a great question to come into from
that last piece that we were touching on
that we are so deep in the damage and
it's it's like I was explaining this to
a friend the other day it's like it's
like there's a teacup with a hundred tea
bags of confusion that have been
steeping for a hundred years and we
can't pull all that confusion apart from
itself all that damage and confusion is
really it's it's nice to separate it on
paper but it won't be separated it's
impossible to separate it so so
I've been struggling more in the past
few weeks and I have in my entire life
with the political questions and I I'm
saying that because I am living in a
country where there it's not my it's not
my culture okay and I actually cannot
read the political cues this has been a
very interesting position to be in
because it's made me hyper aware of how
these cues run so deep so what looks at
the surface like some sort of political
meme or political positioning or
platforming is is much more it's much
more submerged than I thought all right
and it's weird that this would come as a
surprise to me right but but the fact is
it's pretty significant and so what I
have had to really do is to look at the
relationship between politics and and
then also culture and then looking at
those through generations and then
coming up with another question
all right so the the seduction is to
look at the political framing and to
respond or react to what you see there
but that framing is is is deep steeped
you know a lot of other stuff and when
you start to go around and under and
into those interdependencies what you
come up with is a very different set of
questions and responses so
it's interesting to me in the viral
question where it is that this notion of
my health being mine came from
and how this has been I mean my my mom
used to talk about how when she was
raising my big brother
she was really taught not to coddle him
which in order to make him be able to
survive into this culture he needed to
be independent he needed to be
emotionally independent let him cry he
needs to learn how to be independent
don't help him with his homework he's
got to hit the wall himself
right he runs out of money don't bail
him out he'll just come back for more
right and and that
there's been
a lot of communication across the
generations through the generations
about how valuable this independence is
in in you know even my mom who's 91 she
lives in an apartment building for older
people because she doesn't want to be a
burden right so so when I start to look
at what the hell is happening in the
political world around the virus and
then I look at some of those pieces of
it I come up with some very different
questions which is not should it be the
law to wear masks should we be in
lockdown or not lockdown it turns out
those are the wrong questions actually
there's a completely different order of
questions which has to do with how do we
actually heal this relationship and
begin to pour love and care across
generations to rekindle to wake up to
bring the blood back to that
interdependency
so that it when I go in the store that
person next to me doesn't see me as just
another
another unit that I am actually a person
who could be connected to someone who's
immune deprived or who's in you know
who's I couldn't they don't know maybe
I'm a healthcare worker maybe I live
with somebody who's sick
but it isn't about hey I'm young I'm not
gonna get this it doesn't matter I'm
cool I don't want to be controlled right
I don't want to be controlled either and
so then there's this other set of
political questions that have to do with
Authority and militaristic control and
where technology's going and and again
what's under there how might we ask the
better question instead of just
responding to that as a as a as a you
know kind of sci-fi theme and for me
that question has to do more with where
is it that technology has no place
and and who are the people in the
technology world that I can have that
conversation with that we can begin to
open that space with I had nothing
against technology but there's some
places it shouldn't be
and and so it's great that technology
can do anything I don't want it to do
everything
so where's that space so does that help
so I'm in that political discussion but
I'm not
I'm not I'm trying not to fall asleep at
the wheel and just get caught in the the
impulse to make a direct response to
something that is actually completely
brewed in an interdependency of all
kinds of broken systems
so it's not that it's pointless because
it's all broken anyway it's that in
order to respond with any kind of
you
you
do you understand no about double binds
so a double blind is a double bind is a
great theory one of my dad's there is a
double blind is is when you get caught
in two contexts at the same time and you
can't do something and you can't not do
something and you can't talk about it so
you might have that experience of you
know that partner who tells you you
never tell me that you love me and if in
that moment you say oh what I do love
you
no you're just saying that so you can't
really get the credit for saying it and
if you don't say it then they're right
and if you say yeah but this is a trick
you're tricking me then that's really
this is really not the moment for that
comment in the same way so much of
what's happening in the political sphere
is a double blind we we need to change
the we need to address the ecological
issues okay but to address the
ecological issues is going to make it so
that a lot of people don't have jobs so
we have to supply jobs but if we supply
jobs and keep the economy going
it ruins the ecology if we either way
you turn we're in a double bind so one
of the things that
that you can do in a double bind is to
bring in another context so instead of
doing that thing where you have a
complex problem and you start to
simplify remember we've got time please
simplify don't do that
do the opposite thing bring in more
complexity and then you start to find
the overlaps you start to find the
places where the contexts make something
like a Millar a pattern over each other
and new unprecedented possibilities come
bubbling up so you're with that partner
you can't say you know you can't say I
do love you and you can't not say it but
you might say I grew up in a house where
there wasn't a lot of affection okay
boom you're going to another context
it's not about it's not about you or
them or right you go take it to it
another context and that context begins
to inform the others and so this is what
I was saying earlier when I was saying
that these things slip out of the
context you try to deal with them in
complexity and in living complex systems
that's always happening I'm that was too
long but I hope it was helpful thank you
so much that was really
thought-provoking and thanks for the
relationship in place too on top of that
it's all the same thing
oh yes okay Lorraine would you like to
and meet yourself and ask a question I
Thank You Nora I'm so over-the-top
excited to be able to talk with you and
so grateful and honored to be able to
ask this question so I've been actually
looking a lot at a change in innovation
in nature and just for a little bit of
context for you I work as a systemic
designer which feels a bit like an
oxymoron but there's a really
challenging thing and so I'm trying to
and change in innovation in nature and I
know that caterpillars have cells in
them that are called if imaginal cells
that are activated by the caterpillar
kind of digesting itself literally and
that those cells already have all of the
potential with those butterfly parts in
them and I'm wondering like as a
designer should I just step back and not
try to provoke the change like is this
our time for dormancy where we should
just wait for what is to come out like
is it already in us and maybe we're just
so not capable of sitting with it that
that we want to make it happen this is
my question like is this just the right
time and maybe it'll just emerge you
know this is a really beautiful question
because
it it's so
it's so tempting right to to dive into
these kind of questions around but
what's the action
what's the practicality how what's the
doing how do we do do do this what's the
doing and especially when lives are at
stake
and ecosystems are at stake it's
this question around action um which you
may not think this is what you were
asking about but it's really important
and one of the things that that I
finally have come to just admit is that
actually perception is action
it is and if depending on what is
perceived the horizon of potential
actions and responses is revealed right
so in the example of the Monday night
courses on education that was purely
imaginal cell material right I thought
that I was gonna do this thing I'm gonna
do this thing and before I knew it it
was something else entirely
and and I tribute that completely that
radical change was something that was in
my life the whole time and if I had said
oh the answers within and all I have to
do is just get still until I see it I
don't think I would have found it
for real so I it wasn't about being
still although being still is beautiful
it was about a particular set of
conditions that allowed that thing to
wake up and I didn't know what those
conditions were
I could not have predicted what those
conditions were but having found myself
in the middle of them
I didn't resist
so I could have come in with a script
and thought this is what I'm gonna do on
the first day this is what I'm gonna do
on the second day I got about thirty
seconds into the first one and we were
like we do off off the whole roadmap and
so it's I think it's that
the the preparation right of what it is
to respond to complexity is is really
what it what were what we're doing right
it's really about that you know like I
was saying this this just watching this
habit of needing to take what I find you
know so triggering and whatever
political rhetoric comes up and just
back and you just want to fight it and
tear it burn it right and then going
wait a second
that's not the thing that's just the
pimple on the end of the nose of the
thing and and so you know beginning that
but that's it that's a perception that's
a perception shift and that's where the
action is
so I don't know if that makes sense but
that's I definitely don't think it's
time for us to be thinking about what is
post Corona life going to be like having
said that we absolutely have to consider
what is post Corona life going to be
like so what's the difference between
those two things one of them is a rather
flat set of linear trajectories the
other one could be a really rich
dimension of detail
right when I if we were to look around
this zoom space right here and I were to
ask you how did each of you end up here
right there is a bazillion you know
someone you sat next to when a bus was
reading a book when you were in eighth
grade and then right you met this person
once and they and then you have this
teacher and then you got lost and you
had a breakdown and then you got sick
and you know like there's what are all
the stories that are here that brought
each of you to this room there is no
flat linear trajectory into that future
space so it's about it's about holding
em and intending tending the
relationships that grow to become the
conditions where those perceptions can
shift
but that's how I would do it that's my I
mean other people have other modalities
there's probably room for lots of
different ways but that's my more my
style thank you so much that was lovely
and Nora so I think that this would be a
beautiful way to kind of finish out Brad
would you like to ask your question yeah
thanks
hi either lovely to see you in person I
love your book the smaller arts
beautiful book and I also enjoy how you
speak about the different problems you
have a way of speaking in a in a rich
contextual circular but with some sense
of meaning being transmitted it's not
blocked so I can see why someone reads a
transcript of this conversation they
would lose out on what is the essence
that's being conveyed it brings me to
the point that how do we decide what is
the right question you ask and you
Illustrated some of that in one of the
questions that was asked to you where
you went through that process of
switching between and saying is this
even the right question you consider and
then you did some some let's call it
magic
I would love to listen to your thinking
process around what are the principles
that help you reframe your question what
is the right question because like you
said if it's a wrong question we aren't
we're just stuck in the wrong action
yeah there's this great Einstein quote
right about if he had an hour to answer
a question and his life depended on it
he would spend so to figure out a
problem right and as he would spend the
first 55 minutes coming up with the
question because that once he had the
question then he could actually deal
with it pretty quickly
okay so I
you
there are a lot of different contexts
that come into play in any particular
complex predicament or issue okay lots
of different contexts are there you know
we can look at this virus as a medical
problem we can look at it as an
intergenerational question would you
look at it as an economic question will
you look at it through the lens of the
ecology and the climate we can look at
it through the lens of of culture and
media and technology right all of those
are different contexts so I guess what I
always try to do is to bring in that
trends contextual approach but let me be
really clear here because if that could
appear at first that I would make a
little list okay media death it is about
technology Yetta Yetta Yetta politics
this this this this this inter
generations that that that that that
okay but that is not what I do what I am
interested in is the way in which these
things are in relationship to each other
how they melt into each other so I'm
looking for the melty places so the idea
of making nice clean lists of all the
systemics
to understand the system I find highly
unusual it gives you at least some
notion that there's multiple contexts
but it doesn't tell you anything about
the melty difficult relational processes
between them which is really where the
possibility is it's really where the
stuckness is it's where the damage is
it's where the healing is it's where the
learning is
that mutual learning it's you know I I
think Raven was talking about the
liminal space okay this is this is that
liminal realm
[Music]
so I guess I can only say that I just go
swimming in that melty inter steeping
trance contextual warm data space until
I find that I'm holding a question and I
don't know how to say except for that
you know when you know you know I mean
I'm sorry but that's as that's as clear
as I can be and then again there is a
lot of rigor there so if this is not a
non-rigorous issue here the whole
process of the warm data labs and and
all that work and warm data is really
about exactly your question I think you
would love that actually
yeah so because that's what it is and
and more often than not what you find is
that it's going to whatever the it thing
is it's gonna link into something very
very intimate and it will also link into
something very big so it's that
simultaneous zoom in and zoom out but
it's never flat it's that deep rich
detail of you know that feed the babies
question that is a really personal the
the most personal intimate relationship
and and the question is always for me it
always is about how do I bring where is
their vitality here is in these
relational processes that I'm looking at
where is the vitality
it's making vitality and what's D
vitalizing
and and sometimes that that's not a
binary
very often that's a paradox maybe most
of the time and then you're in that
double-blind place and around we go and
it's like I just kind of have to tumble
in it but again it's a lot of rigor and
all I can tell you is that
the kind of questions you come out with
are never the ones you thought you were
looking for so that really helps if you
think you're working on an ecological
project and that your questions have to
do with ecology and climate change and
you come out with questions that are
about ecology and climate change go back
when you start to come out with
questions that have to do with I don't
know I mean you know sexuality feeding
babies making art
then you then you're then you're
probably right because you're probably
at that point you're probably working
with multiple contextual processes
simultaneously that's probably more on
it but there's a user warning here which
is that once you have one of those
questions no one will understand what
the hell you're talking about ever again
so it won't fit on the K API you'll
never get a grant for it it's just that
it's just that you'll be in good company
[Laughter]
beautiful thank you that was a beautiful
poetic response with rigor appreciate it
mmm it's a great question wonderful and
we find ourselves at the top of the hour
Nora thank you so much for joining us
today and answering all these unasked
questions finding we're just like
finding questions everywhere we look it
seems I know there's some we didn't
touch I know yes well we would love to
have you again here at the stoah and I
also would like to invite everybody here
and yourself included to come back in I
think well maybe take like a five minute
break and then do the sense-making
session which will be more just like
open dialogue but do you have any final
words that you would like to use to
close this this experience hmm yeah I do
I do I am I just want to tend for a
moment
that space of
cynicism
and and I don't mean the good kind of
cynicism I mean the other kind because
it's it's very difficult right now to
[Music]
to not be carrying that and you know I
definitely have bouts of of falling
under the tide of feeling like oh my god
the change makers are out of their minds
they just want to change people that's
crazy oh my god the politicians that are
just it's out of control everyone's
insane oh my god the grant people are
useless they can't they can't give a
grant to anything that has anything to
do with anything real oh my god the
teachers and the education system the
health system the right and
[Music]
and then there's Monty Python and then
there's a little bit of art and then
there's some you know interaction with
my puppy or my kids or with you and
someone asks a question there's some
like there's some something there and I
guess what I really want to end with
today is is an invitation to invite
others to live in a world that's
beautiful
I think it's so important right now you
see how important I think it is it's for
that important that's how we feed the
babies thank you thank you so much thank
you yes and speaking of invitations I
would like to invite everyone to the
stoah sessions that we have coming up
today so Nora while I tell people about
what we're what fun things were got to
today we could you share the link to
your Monday night sessions okay yeah
just I'm not great with this so just be
patient I'll get it in there in a minute
okay okay sounds good
okay so what we have going on today we
have like a very very busy day later on
at 4 p.m. Eastern Time we have
relational exegesis the Guru papers with
Freya and that is a it's an event where
we're going to be reading together we're
gonna be reading out loud and writing
notes and processing this this piece of
work called the Guru papers so you don't
have to come prepared and I think it'll
be a really fun kind of experience and
working with different types of texts
and processes so that's an that's a fun
thing we'll be doing later on today we
also have radical honesty during a
pandemic with Brad Blanton and that's at
6 p.m. Eastern Time and concept
unfolding with Nicholas Benjamin and I
think Nicholas might actually be here
and if he is I would like to invite him
to unmute himself and tell us about his
event and maybe he's not actually I'm
not sure I'm looking actually I don't
think he is well he hasn't a fun kind of
sense making activity event that's
happening today so that's that and of
course you can check out all of our
events at the stoah dot CA put that in
the chat for you and we see the the
stoah as a gift gift to everyone while
we are navigating this complex liminal
space and if you feel inspired
give a gift to us you can visit us at
the gift economy the Stowe a dot C a so
and with that I thank you all okay there
we go
great the link