[Music]
hiya welcome to the second edition of
the red pill topic of this video is
going to be money I kind of see the
matrix as this giant many tentacles
octopus which has you know it reaches
into and orchestrate every aspect of our
lives
I'm started with money because in
today's world money is the primary
driving force behind pretty much
everything that we do and is the
dominant factor in pretty much every
decision which is made we've become so
used to using money to organize our
lives that we take it almost completely
for granted and tend not to question too
much exactly what it is and where it
comes from so there are three things
that I want to focus on in this video in
fact going to be two videos I'm going to
do I'm going to do a second one on the
con on today's actual monetary system
but today in this one I want to
concentrate on two things firstly the
origins of money where do its roots lie
exactly where it comes from and secondly
is it actually useful you know we tend
to think of money as being an efficient
way of organizing society moving capital
and labor and resources around the place
but I want to examine that question see
is it actually a useful thing for us the
third one which is going to be in a
second video otherwise this one's going
to be too long third one is going to be
on the actualities of our monetary
system precisely how our monetary system
functions and I think once you've
watched these two videos you will agree
with me that money is not at all how we
think that it's very much fundamental to
the matrix it is it controls in in all
sorts of ways and as I say I hope to
elucidate some of those so let's go
[Music]
there is a commonly held belief that
human societies early human societies
bartered extensively and money somehow
evolved out of that in order to
facilitate transactions and became a
universal medium in exchange no to avoid
the problem of how many chickens is my
donkey worth you know this this kind of
thing but actually this is not so I'd
like to draw your attention at this
point to a chap by the name of David
Graeber who writes extensively about
social anthropology and in his book
depth the first 5,000 years chapter 2 of
that is called the myth of bartering in
that he explains there is absolutely no
evidence whatsoever to support the
supposition that early human societies
bartered with each other extensively and
that in his book The Wealth of Nations
Adam Smith he described this scenario
where a baker and a butcher you have a
baker who's make very good butchers and
they meet the baker want to meet with
the butcher doesn't want any bread and
so the baker has to go through
potentially a very long series of
exchanges exchanging his bread for some
eggs and then the eggs for whatever
until he eventually gets to something
that the butcher will exchange because
me and that money evolved out of this
but he assumed this Adam Smith made this
assumption he said seemed like a logical
supposition to him but that's all it was
was a cepa's ition the implication of
this is that this quid pro quo exchange
based mentality is somehow a fundamental
part of human nature and that you know
even early disorganized societies barter
than that barter became more and more
complicated and therefore there was the
need for money what if that is not true
what if humans are not naturally
quid-pro-quo exchange-based but are
naturally collaborative beings happy to
just contribute to the collective
because they understand that that is for
the good of everyone the truth is that
money that money came into being as a
way of doing two things controlling a
standing army or being able to maintain
a standing on
and being able to manipulate your
populations labor to produce that which
you as the ruler of an empire one it is
my contention that as is in keeping with
the matrix that we have a false
perception of money that is not involved
naturally out out of out of a bartering
system in order to facilitate trade but
actually was invented if you like or
came into being as a way of controlling
one's empire and maintaining one's grip
on the population so let me think about
it soldiers produce nothing but they
still have to be housed they still have
to be fed they have to be equipped so
before they were paid armies soldiers
were also insofar as there were soldiers
soldiers were also farmers there were
tanners they were blacksmiths they were
bakers whatever and so they had real
value real use in society but having
large numbers of mostly young men
removed from the workforce of a society
obviously places an undue burden on
everybody else they have to work harder
and produce more just for the society as
a whole to have the same and so money
was the means by which soldiers were a
page to compensate them for the fact
that they were risking their lives but
that payment would mean nothing if they
weren't able to exchange those gold
coins as they were initially for goods
and services whores whatever when they
were not off when they were not busy
fighting wars similarly a population is
relatively easily controlled if the
ruling class by use of its soldiers
takes control of the things which are
essential to life the arable land the
water the energy production and then
restricts access to these things
population can no longer feed and water
and heat itself because the rulers
through their soldiers control access to
these things and so access to the
population is granted by the exchanging
of money for those essential goods and
services and
in order to obtain the money the
population now has to submit to whatever
tasks the ruling classes require of them
and they may not be things which are
particularly useful to the society as a
whole and are useful only to that ruling
class so integral to the concept of
money are also the concepts of property
of trade and above all of empire and the
truth about the origins of money is that
it started as a way of paying one's
armies because let's face it if you have
an army which is paid a full-time army
it has a massive advantage over an army
which is part-time and whose members are
actually needed by the society that
they've come from and back in the day
before they were standing armies if if a
pair of tribes did come into conflict
the most common way of resolving that
conflict if it wasn't able to be done
peacefully was for each trying to send
one champion and the conflict would be
resolved by the outcome of the fight
between those two people because they
couldn't spare the workforce for those
of you who don't want to spend hours and
hours of your life reading hundreds of
pages of David Graeber
on the screen now is a link to a
relatively short article which explains
the ideas about the myth of barter as
well and if you missed that I will try
to remember to put a link on the
district if I seem to be talking a lot
about soldiers and military and armies
and war and so on episode is supposed to
be about money well as because they are
so inextricably linked I'm going to blow
clip now of a section of one of my
Maloney's videos on the hidden secrets
of money the seven part series that he
did I highly recommend watching them
very informative really what's always
very likable guy they're about twenty
minutes half an hour long each and
there's a total of seven of them I just
picked a little clip here just to show
how history repeats itself and
to show how money is so closely linked
to military power and military might and
the ATA's star shone brightly for many
years so this begs the question what
went wrong how did such a great and
powerful civilization fall the answer
lies in the same pattern that we see
throughout history too much greed and
too much war it was when the Athenians
got involved in the Peloponnesian wars a
war with Sparta that their monetary
problems began first they lost access to
their gold and silver mines they were
also paying armies that were on foot and
they were miles and miles away from
Athens so as they pay their armies to
buy goods and services from the local
populations a deflation occurs in Athens
because they're sending all of their
coinage out of the city
then they started debasing their coinage
to pay for the war if you take in a
thousand coins in taxes and then you
melt those down those gold coins and you
mix 50% copper into your gold
now you can mint 2000 coins so if you
take in only a thousand coins but you
spend 2,000 coins what is that called
that is deficit spending Athens began to
do that during this war with Sparta they
also had these great Public Works which
were very expensive and they finished
the temple of Athena Nike during the
truce in the middle there was a six-year
truce in the middle of this 27 year war
so they didn't stop there great public
works and allow their market economy to
heal from the expense of this war as
they debased their coinage people would
take the new debased coins at face value
at first until there were a whole bunch
of those and there's something called
Gresham's law where people tend to save
to keep the thing that's rare and they
spend the thing that's common into
circulation first so all of the gold and
silver coins started to disappear from
circulation and become quite rare and it
was just these copper coins
suddenly it took a whole bunch of copper
coins to buy a gold or silver coin one
of those old gold or silver coins this
is the first time that gold or silver
ever had a price before that everything
was measured in a weight of gold and
silver so a large factor in Athens
downfall was the expense of war the
expansion of empire the debasement of
their currency the eventual inflation
that was caused
you know they mended these coins until
they became nothing but flecks of copper
this was actually the world's first
hyperinflation and what it did was it
financially debilitated Athens to the
point where in 404 BC they surrendered
to Sparta and eventually they became
nothing but a satellite of Rome the
thing that amazes me is how history just
keeps on repeating and repeating and
repeating and we never learn from all of
our stupid mistakes we just repeat the
same stupid mistakes over and over and
over again today we are doing the same
thing that the Athenians did that caused
the loss of their great culture we're
doing the same currency debasement we're
doing the same deficit spending and it's
for the same reasons it's for war and
it's for great public works and so to
summarize and this is the matrix
remember so nothing is as it seems to be
money did not come about as a
consequence of natural human activity
and the desire to trade with each other
rather it did three things number one it
enabled ever more sophisticated costly
and brutal Wars to be fought
it made possible the control of
populations by a very very very small
ruling class and thirdly and for me most
importantly it warps our minds into
thinking of ourselves as being in
competition with each other as being
commercial beings rather than being
collaborative cooperative communal
beings you know happy to simply give as
we can for the collective good
so what I'm going to do now is take a
look at whether money despite its
somewhat inauspicious beginnings does
actually function as a useful tool in
our society so on to part two if you ask
one of our modern BAE free-market
neoliberal economists where the money is
useful they will tell you it most
certainly is because it's the most
efficient way to move capital and
resources and labor that the desire to
accumulate wealth Spurs innovation and
creativity in the economy and that
competition in the market keeps prices
down and increases productivity that
these things are of benefit to everyone
but in my opinion these arguments don't
really stand up to scrutiny and in order
to explain the idea I'll come up with a
few scenarios the first two are same
same but different as they say in
Thailand imagine two drugs well several
drug companies here new disease aids is
it not a bad example
so the AIDS virus comes along and all
the major drug companies immediately
start pouring lots and lots of resources
into finding a treatment or a cure for
the disease one of them is going to win
this race right and they are going to
patent that drug and they're going to
make a fortune and all of the other drug
companies are invested all that time
money and paid all of their researchers
that becomes pretty much wasted effort
not to mention the fact that the next
drug that companies well it is going to
have to be more expensive because all
the manpower that they've invested
fruitlessly in the in the quest for the
AIDS kill in another scenario imagine
you have two inventors and they both
come up with the design for say a water
desalination device and both of those
people
paetynn their devices and they enter the
market and they're now in competition
with each other for a share of that
market in order to
wind share of that market they are going
to try and keep costs down not to keep
costs down they may use inferior
materials they may not pay their
workforce enough no doubt each inventor
sees merit in the other's design but
they can't incorporate anything too
similar to the other person's desire for
fear of being sued for patent
infringement in both of these scenarios
if instead of seeking profit what was
being sought was the best possible water
desalination device or as speedy a cure
as possible for AIDS then surely the
most sensible causes collaboration but
under a monetary system with profit is
the primary goal and remember these
companies have a legal responsibility to
maximize profits for their shareholders
so in a money based system where profit
trumps everything collaboration on
projects like this becomes almost
impossible
so in both of these cases by simply
collaborating and sharing ideas and
sharing expertise the best possible
solution could be arrived at in the
shortest possible time you wouldn't need
to produce you wouldn't need to package
it make it look pretty and they could be
built as after the best possible
materials and be built to last as long
be as reliable and as durable as
possible again in a money based system
the incentive to produce products which
fail after a period of time said that
they need to be repaired or replaced
are you giving you the chance to sell
spare parts or have a service network to
back your products up you know all of
these things are now incentivized under
a monetary system and making the best
possible goods out of the best possible
materials to last the longest possible
time is disincentivized and so under a
monetary system becomes very hard to
trust anybody's motives you know since I
mean know that doing what they can for
you or they're just trying to fleece
suit if your mechanic for example so to
you even you can build in your car is
this because your cam belt is about to
go or because the mechanic wants to make
a few quid out of you because you don't
know any better you know this is the
thing you never really know when money's
driving everything and of course the
human being is performing a task just
for money where they have no personal
investment in it they have no personal
stake in it and they have no love for
what they're doing then they're not
going to be doing the job very well
either they're going to do it they're
going to do the bare minimum they can to
collect their paycheck because that's
all they're doing the job for so you
know right now we have a situation where
if somebody wants to build a factory to
make a product of some kind they are
raising finance they're you know buying
the site they're paying builders to
build the buildings they're paying
fitters and engineers to come in and
tool the factory up they're training
their workers they're paying their
workers a wage and also that ultimately
they can profit from it as all about
them imagine instead a world that was
not controlled completely by money you
know right now we think that in order to
do that to build a factory you need
money right but you don't actually you
need the land you need the guys to come
and build
all these you need the materials you
need the machines you need trained
people to man the machines but you don't
actually need money you need those
things
so imagine well when money was not the
organizing principle and instead you
know somebody came up with an idea for a
product that they thought would benefit
large numbers of people I said listen
hey we need to build a factory this is
what we need people would contribute
because they could see the benefit to
themselves inserted to the to the
community at large so you don't actually
need money we've been completely
brainwashed by the whole concept of
money you know a wise man once said that
if you have to pay a man to do a job
then it probably wasn't worth doing in
the first place
this is bullshit on the subject of
bullshit if you enjoy a laugh type
George Carlin bullshit into the YouTube
window many studies have shown that
paying people for coming up with ideas
actually is counterproductive it
actually somehow disincentivizes it you
know ask any author that's been given a
hundred thousand pound advance on a
deadline and bentos a write a great book
how do they feel how creative and how
spontaneous do they feel far from
spurring innovation and creativity
actually a monetary system stifles it
because a lot of ideas have Peyton slaps
on them and so nobody else gets to see
them nobody else gets to refine and
improve them you know it really limits
the number of minds like work that can
work on any given problem and if not a
patent and a top-secret label the label
gets slapped on them and a lot of the
really really cool inventions we've
never even seen we don't know anything
about you know the military has gobbled
them up so they can start with cleverer
ways of killing people without risking
their own soldiers
consider another situation around the
world every year some 40% of the food
which is produced is destroyed and at
the same time we have hundreds of
thousands hundreds of millions of people
so no hundred thousand hundreds of
millions of people on or near starvation
so it would seem obvious to simply send
this surplus food overseas to try and
feed the starving of the world right but
under a monetary system you can't do
that
you start giving your products away for
free this lowers the market value of
your products and all of a sudden you
are making less money so you know it
seems like madness that we can't just
give us their food away but that's the
reason why because profits would suffer
and so rather than give up a few dollars
in profits millions and millions and
millions of people are allowed to start
so financial expediency outweighs human
life really
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
consider that step for a moment and
that's 30,000 children for estimate for
total number of people's a hundred
thousand people every single day die on
this planet due to lack of food and
preventable disease and lack of access
to clean water and this is not because
there is not enough food on this planet
that there's enough medicine on this
planet orders run up water on this
planet the simple fact is they don't
have enough money and that is why a
hundred thousand people a day on this
planet die that is what our monetary
system does to us
so in summary is the monetary system
efficient well no it's not not if 30
million people are dying unnecessary
preventable deaths every year as a
consequence of not having enough money
when people talk about the monetary
system being efficient what is efficient
that doing is impoverishing the majority
of people whilst enriching a very very
few people but I'll go into that in the
next video does it motivate well no not
really
artists musicians inventors scientists
these people don't create in response to
financial incentive the you know
creation is a process that comes from
within if one's motivation to go to work
is purely to earn money so that you can
buy the things that you need to live
well this is not motivation this is
coercion and does it spur innovation
well no it does the exact opposite of
that proprietary constraints and
selected financing from governance means
that the advancing of technology is
actually slowed down I mean can you
imagine if the whole concept of
proprietary information was removed and
everything was open-source and so
someone has an idea they put it out
there on the internet other people can
check it out try it out build a
prototype refine it adapt it to their
particular circumstances you know the
rate of advance of Technology would make
what we're doing right now look
snail-like in comparison and so that's
it for this edition I'm going to finish
with a little comedy clip just to
lighten the mood so I don't know about
you but I've found this to be really
quite depressing thinking about all of
this not that I don't think about it all
the time but if you think this was
depressing
wait until the next one when I explain
the particulars of how our modern-day
monetary system actually functions and
you will not believe it it is without a
doubt the most magnificent scam ever
perpetrated so I'll see you next time
thanks for watching I just worry you
know finances I got a little boy I'm
worried about his whole financial future
people are already giving me crap you
should have started saying for his
college three years ago Tom that's 30
grand a year minimum like 30 grand
all right well he's gonna be home
college then I'll be teaching him that
money is not important which isn't true
right money is really the most important
thing which is kind of it's because it's
just made up you know it's weird to me
yeah it's really by every definition
money is our god if you think about it
it's what we worship it's what we work
40 50 hours a week for it's what we want
more than anything it's what we think
will make us happy
we have altars built all over the world
and the form of banks that we bail out
I mean how works to be honest I don't
get a check anymore they just wire it to
my account I press some buttons that
spits it out to me I don't know that
works it's faith how many all have been
stood in front of the the altar of an
ATM machine and prayed a little bit dear
God please let there be a hundred
dollars in my trust it right I used to
not worry about it form a son I didn't
worry about it at all like national debt
I'd be like we owe trillions of dollars
really to who ourselves okay well if all
my self $100 well you know what screw it
we could let that slide but we don't owe
that money to ourselves national debts
are owed to the national banks right
like the Federal Reserve Bank and the
weird thing about the Fed is it's
actually a for-profit private company
that's weird to think that there's
people out there like Oprah and Bill
Gates that have a lot of money and then
there's this small group of people they
actually own the money twice their
product like what what a great business
model you development you own the money
yeah we just make it up out of nothing
and then we sell if you would interest
can I do that no if you do it it's
counterfeiting
very named Federal Reserve was a
deception to make the American people
think it was part of the government the
very people that are on the money were
against the Federal Reserve System
Jefferson was against it Jackson was
against it Lincoln was against it
Franklin was against it and they're on
the damn money it's an insult to their
legacies that's like putting Mother
Teresa's face on condoms and pass them
out a plan yeah the mother Teresa condom
I died a virgin so you don't have to I
just don't trust the banks I think
they're running things I think we live
in financial monarchies you know and
then here's the thing if you're with a
big bank especially in United States I
will no longer accept a check from you
right at a buddy my knowed me a hundred
dollars he writes me the check I go into
his bank to cash it I need the money I'm
like hey I need to cash this please and
she goes okay mr. Simmons we can cash
this for you but it's gonna cost you six
dollars since you don't have an account
here like well it he has an account here
and he owes me $100 not 94 you're
actually making him commit fraud right
now she's like well that's just our
system I need to get your fingerprint
I'm like my fingerprint you're the one
committing the crime
your ability to create money out of thin
air isn't business advantage enough you
got to steal our money six dollars at a
time let me ask you some if that check
for five dollars when I owe you a dollar
yes you would sir you're evil that's
what you are yeah you want my
fingerprint you need to dust my ankles
because that's where they are right now
as you read my assets
[Laughter]
yeah you're a banker I'm trying not to
go right to you my wife gives me crap
she's like Tom don't get mad at the
banks doesn't do any good right and
maybe she's right but it's hard not to
get mad at and when you read about him
Jesus was the most chill dude ever the
only time he ever used violence and his
entire ministry was on the damn money
changers at the temple you know evil you
gotta be to piss off Jesus yeah you got
to be a banker or a fig tree and that is
it
[Music]
Oh