welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
actually just one moment maybe I'm gonna
give you a co-host access if you can let
people in while I'm talking cool alright
check-ins mmm had a big sandwich
before this and then I had a cider so
I'm a little bit sluggish and a little
woozy and that is focused as I want to
be about five to ten percent nervous and
the rest is just stoic so welcome to the
store I am Peter limber the Stewart of
the stoah stoah as a place for us to go
here and dialogue about what matters
most at the knife's edge of this moment
and today we have Brent Cooper
Brent Cooper Mehta modern super star
slash controversial rock battler and so
brent is a political sociologist by
training mystic by nature rebel by
choice and his he is the executive
director of the abstract organization
and today he's having a section called
who is sensing the sense makers and I
have a sense that's gonna be a critique
of the the sense making about and I'm
very curious to see what he is going to
say and so how it's gonna work is Brent
is gonna talk for anywhere about 20 to
30 minutes I'm gonna share his thoughts
and then we're gonna pivot to Q&A so if
you have any questions in the chat box
just pop in the chat box if you don't
want to be recorded just indicate that
and then I'll read on your behalf and no
personal recordings of this by the way
so a few people are recording other
sessions and especially on gallery view
mode and there's consent issues there so
please no recording unsanctioned
recordings that being said I think I
said everything so let me give you
permission to unmute yourself Brent yeah
floors yours
Hey mm-hmm thank you um so yeah I don't
know exactly what I'm gonna say cuz part
of this is in reference to long articles
I've written that think that people
don't like to read and they like to
strawman mm-hmm
and also I noticed you know there's a
lot of uh friendly familiar faces here
so that's that's good I don't see any
enemies which I was secretly hoping a
little bit you know I want their
engagement mm-hmm
so I'm just gonna go off my notes here
and well we'll see how far I get I'm
looking forward to the Q&A mm-hmm it's
it's hard to know where to begin uh
because there's not enough time to cover
it all uh and there's also many angles
into this and in in prepping part of me
also realized you know in in
conversations with other people and
reflection that it doesn't matter what I
want to talk about necessarily like this
isn't just a forum for me to you know do
whatever I want
that would be my own platforms so things
I respect you know the the idea of the
stoah and this space and what we can
accomplish together and you know there's
also this expectation with that that you
know rather than just shit on everybody
which I would love to do they you know
if people want to be seduced right like
that's what this is about you don't want
truth bombs and debunks you're tired of
that you want to be seduced you want
sexiness you know and Peter's made this
clear in in letter number 43 I'm
basically a walking erection he says and
letter 38 it's time to seduce the
culture war you know so those are that's
that's a that's a that's a high bar
that's tough for me to live up to
because I don't feel particularly sexy
and maybe I don't want to be sexy or
maybe I can't be maybe I'm ugly and
maybe that is the point maybe to reveal
some of the bias against ugly
ugly truth so mmm that's that's what a
lot of my critiques are about and I want
to just kind of contextualize my
critiques it's like it's like 10 percent
of my my work is a whole you know it's
not it's not my main jam but you know a
lot of people do punditry and weight
into the culture were stuff and what I'm
trying to do in those critiques is take
a kind of at a perspective and also as
someone with kind of a foot in each you
know many feet in different camps if you
will right so since making the
meta-crisis uh socialism leftism you
know progressivism mm-hmm
so it's it's difficult to you know try
try to you know take that meta
perspective and and try to bring people
together especially when i personally
don't have the means or the demeanor or
the you know the kind of wherewithal to
keep up with it and so there's a sense
with you know this idea of critique like
is it's exhausting because you could
cheek one person let's say peterson cuz
you know it goes back to somebody like
him in a sense but the kashyyyk doesn't
work it doesn't land and it's not it's
not just my critique personally it's
like the entire kind of leftist
enterprise to debunk this man you know
just kind of empowers him so you know as
i kriti that and also people close to me
it's like it's like whack-a-mole
you know i get exhausted these problems
keep popping up and then it makes me
look like the bad guy and i feel like
i'm doing kind of intellectual triage
you know i have to run around and like
figure out who's the most hurt i was
damaged and and try to try to fix it and
I feel like the medic mediators are kind
of coming to the scene like okay we know
that everybody's hurt we're kind of kind
of listen to
everybody's pain all at the same time
and you know try to try to work it out
that way so there there's a basic
tension there so let me let me just
restart with what the title is who's
sensing the sense makers mm-hmm the
simple answer is nobody I don't see
anybody kind of being remotely
self-critical enough or engaging and in
the self learning about the topics that
really matter as it relates to social
theory and politics and praxis and you
know there's a lot of talk about
collective intelligence but no no actual
hooking up to kind of mass movements or
actual public intellectuals and you know
there's no there's no practice like
sense making in fairness by definition
is not about those things since making
by definition is a process of by which
people give meaning to their collective
experiences right so that's a lot of
what this is about it's been you know
going from the Wikipedia definition here
it's been defined as the ongoing
retrospective development of plausible
images and wrap that rationalize what
people are doing so by definition it's
not critical mmm it's it's kind of
feeling in the dark um you know and
taking taking cues from the culture war
and that's not the approach that I'm
taking so I end up in a different place
so just you know and and as many many of
you know but for whoever else doesn't
the the the sense making web so to speak
is like no stoah rubble wisdom the
emerge network integral theory
communities game be point alpha the
intellectual dark web of course mmm-hmm
and and the intellectual deep web if you
will as another kind of Jason space and
there's a lot of overlap between these
and from from where I come from from a
tradition of sociology there's a lot of
annum
ah city towards that and there's a lot
of a prior right rejection of that
there's a lot of like to put it to put
it as nicely as I can there's there's a
ton of ignorant around these topics I
mean people just don't don't know what
the what the source material is if you
if you hear certain books brought up
like say white fragility it's usually to
kind of strawman that that book or books
like it where you know the starting
point
authentic a good-faith representation of
the material it's a reaction it's
reactionary to it and so we see these
fallacies committed by everybody not
just the followers of these groups on
social media but the self-defined
leading sense makers themselves right
and just to kind of frame in the
simplest terms what you know what what
what the the kind of absurdity is is why
are the leading sense makers mostly men
who can't talk about feminism or at
least do it justice why are the leading
sense makers mostly white who can't talk
about race why are the leading sense
makers mostly psyche obsessed and they
can't talk about sociology and why are
most of them especially like integral
spaces and the intellectual dark web why
are they centrist reactionaries who
can't talk about politics so these are
simple questions on the face of it but
they're actually really complex
questions like it you know it's unpacked
throughout my critiques they're in
degrees and it would take a long time to
work through it today in terms of a kind
of lecture mm-hmm and so above all that
though it's like why and how given all
those things do these people place
themselves above the culture war as some
sort of cutting edge of critical
thinking and social change right that is
the biggest kind of hypocrisy to me on
the face of it but I make these
critiques from a good good-faith place
because I believe they can improve right
there's a lot of intelligence in these
communities but intelligence is distinct
from intellect right so what actual
intellectual work means it is not well
defined in these so called intellectual
spaces and it's certainly not well
executed you know each each of these
figures you know have like a lot of
right-wing followers they have a lot of
critics they criticize the left without
engaging sometimes there's debates which
are just about the spectacle
sometimes there's good-faith engagements
which by the kind of structural
definition you know structural context
cannot be functional cannot be
good-faith um and and you know that's
that's what the intellectual dark web
with this sense making space spaces
there's a lot more curation there's a
lot more defensive Mis and you know
protection of the image and you know
very slow intellectual progress like
very very very marginal critique right
and it's just not sufficient especially
when we come to you know back to
somebody like Peterson now to Peter's
credit you know he's had uh you know his
own journey and his own reasons for
taking it slow and he's had a couple
Peterson critics on like Michael Brooks
and Ben Burgess I've written a lot of
critical stuff about Peterson that also
could be its own its own show I mean
I'll just I'll just give one kind of
kind of side story in lieu of going down
and rabbit holes with that and that's it
you know Michael Brooks gave his IDW
talk Atlas Noah criticized Peterson a
lot and days later I'm in the e the
stoah talk on cynicism with Justin
Murphy and you know they're talking
about par he Jie and speaking truth to
power and and Peter says you know I
guess Peterson would be an example of
this because he's you know he's going
out there speaking his truth being bold
and you know we can we can um we can
give him a gold star for that there's a
little bit of that going on but but by
and large the the catalyst of Peterson's
fame is a lie and many things that keep
him going are blatant lies or
misrepresentations and I don't want to
call them lies but what do you call it
what do you call it when someone is
is wrong or being hyperbolic or just
sorting the truth you know III think I
think it treads into lie territory and
you know what launch Peterson was his
critique of Bill c16 you know from what
I've seen
Peterson's whole approach has been
debunked you know he's not a friend of
the trans community that doesn't mean
he's transphobic but it means like with
these issues of racism that he doesn't
know how to advocate for the the justice
for those communities and so so the meta
point here is like well if I'm correct
about that and I think I happen and many
other things Peterson's been wrong about
like saying white privilege is a Marxist
lie that is a reactionary lie hmm but
that aside if I'm right well why you
know why is he still so popular not only
with the average person but with all
these so-called intellectuals why do
they gravitate towards him why do they
focus on the positive stuff and ignore
the negative stuff and there's deep
complicated uncomfortable answers to
these questions and so this is why I'm
never gonna stop criticizing somebody
like Peterson because you know if he
really believes in in logos and you know
uh you know man-to-man combat or
whatever then then he you know he has to
face his critics and you know going into
a spectacle like facing jjak where he
got like just embarrassed is not
sufficient we feel like we still don't
have kind of closure on all of that
mm-hmm
anyways moving on um you know in a lot
of these spaces I think you know going
back to the intelligence thing there's
there's a lot of weaponized intelligence
right like so I criticize some people
for being you know not so bright or not
so good faith but that's not completely
fair because there's just a major
distinction that's missing here
I'll just read I'm gonna read from this
book anti-intellectualism in American
Life it's from 1964 and there's tons of
gems in here but I want to just focus on
that distinction between intelligence
and intellect intelligence works within
the framework of limited but clearly
stated goals and may be quick to shear
away questions of thought that do not
seem to help in reaching them finally it
is of such universal use that it can be
daily seen at work and admired alike by
simple or complex Minds right so this is
why we're all wowed by them intellect on
the other hand is the critical creative
and contemplative side of mind
whereas intelligence seeks to grasp
manipulate reorder adjust intellect
examines Ponder's wonders see arises
criticizes imagines intelligence will
see the immediate meaning in a situation
and evaluate it intellect evaluates
evaluations and looks for the meanings
of situations as a whole intelligence
can be praised as a quality in animals
intellect being a unique manifestation
of human dignity is both praised and
assailed as a quality in men when the
difference is so defined it becomes
easier to understand why we sometimes
say that the mind of admittedly
penetrating intelligence is relatively
unintellectual and why by the same token
we see among Mayans that are
unmistakably intellectual a considerable
range of intelligence and like this this
book is super important but I just want
to you know kind of make the point that
the intellectual dark web right I'm
making the claim that it's anti
intellectual but that doesn't mean that
they're not engaged with intellectual
things right that's the kind of paradox
at work here so there's a quote here
from earlier in the page so the leading
anti intellectuals are usually men
deeply engaged with ideas often
obsessively engaged
with this or that a worn or rejected
idea and that's the key because so many
of these ideas that that they take up
like Sam Harris with the bell curve and
charles murray it's been debunked
already in the past but you know the
public and the mass media you know it's
not quick to realize that right there's
there's a kind of pattern of history and
it goes back to socrates at least right
this is the kind of kind of the
tradition right is the kind of disparage
and exile and you know execute critical
thinkers that threaten the status quo so
we're often not hearing from the people
that we should be right the intellectual
dark web blows up and it's obviously
it's mostly mostly white men uh mostly
obsessed with old ideas right classical
liberalism and its various extents race
realism like with Colet and they're all
endorsed colette you know and you know
these these things become contentious
because of the culture war not because
there's some inherent truth in what
they're saying hmm so and there's also
well I wanted to say something quickly
about about Socrates I'll come back to
that just this idea of Western
civilization you know Michael Brooks's
has talked about this like it's largely
a myth right and it's it's perpetuated
mostly by the right but also the center
as as as a truth it's rarified right we
believe in it because you know it is
written but that's not that's not the
deeper reality so I have a sort of
degree of faith at least in the people
present in my allies that they can see
beyond that kind of facade of Western
civilization that keeps us trapped in
this culture war right because those
people the intellectual dark web that
are fighting at the hardest for the
interests it's really built on this kind
of myth right and if you're to undercut
that myth you know and Peterson's a
vehement defender of myths you know it
all kind of collapses and then there's
you know the aspect of the attentional
economy right the kind of in equal
access people have two platforms right
and and free speech and you know the
irony of the the IDW whining about free
speech while they're platformed in the
new york times and not only that if they
were real intellectuals if they were
critical they would be critical of the
york times of Barry Weiss who endure who
promoted them and of her politics right
there's there's a lot of like tacit
collusion between a lot of these people
with no politics or bad or bad politics
and the under the undercurrent here is
like you know cuz I fight I fight with a
lot of apolitical people too in the
emerge space like the truth is you
actually can't escape politics
everything is political at least its
political for somebody right all social
issues are political in politics is one
major lever to intervene on that so
about about Socrates like ancient
philosophy philosophy can be instructive
right but as a saying Western
civilization is a myth like ancient
Greece was not a modernist it was
cosmopolitan and it had shared or stolen
culture from Africa in the Middle East
it also had slaves so we shouldn't like
be overly admiring any of these
societies same thing with like classical
liberalism um and I took I took a
Classical Studies course and had a very
radical prom aid a big impression on me
he was half indigenous so he was always
at odds with the administration because
of discrimination issues and he was just
like very very radical you know and he
would use mainstream
books to to teach this stuff about
ancient Greece and ancient Rome but only
to show to demonstrate how garbage those
textbooks textbooks were right and this
isn't just a callous postmodern move to
dismiss it all right he actually had
like insights into kind of like you know
a sort of new paradigm and what we
should be doing like how ancient Rome is
like the US Empire today right and what
the actual lessons are so we're not just
repeating history over and over again um
so you know I think I mean we're way
past time to to hold up a mirror and
stress test these leaking sense makers
whether it's ourselves looking in the
mirror or holding each other accountable
and not just not just about the bad
ideas that people spread but like how we
treat each other like I'm castigated for
being you know prickly or whatever but
like I've been treated pretty poorly
right I've been treated like like
Socrates so that that's the irony here
like why do we keep murdering Socrates
in Socrates his name like when are we
collectively actually going to listen to
like whistleblowers and critical
theorists you know and and and mass
movements and you know actually engage
in political revolution even if it's
just like sitting back in your computer
and just like putting a tiny bit of
pressure in the right direction because
really maybe that's all we can do right
we're trying to move the needle but we
have to agree what direction we're
moving the needle in uh you know so I
don't view myself as a culture warrior I
come to the culture were saying like a
lot of it has been a waste of time for
the past years a lot of has been
avoidable like we could say on one hand
you know well this is where the people
are at you know they got it they got to
live out this stuff but the the leaders
whether they're legitimate or not have
some responsibility in hat they
to be accountable right so so the IDW
had opportunities to really do good and
they didn't in my view and then the
people who were adjacent to that were
involved with that kind of facilitated
whatever they wanted to do right and you
know and where is it today like you know
it's fragmented but but Eric and and and
Brett Weinstein are still like
aggressively whitewashing their own
image through through these various
platforms and not taking critique I you
know I don't engage much on Twitter but
I but I see every day that that they're
just you know saying nonsense like oh
I'm for black lives matter but I but I
can't say I can't agree to it because
you know it's not it's too s jwe for me
and it's like you know they're not
stress testing their own ideas they're
getting attacked a lot for sure but but
they're not listening and people aren't
listening to the critics right the
critics that I follow are like light
years ahead but they're you know
sometimes relatively small so you know
it comes back to like this this this
disposition towards critique like what
do we do with it how do we separate
critique from criticism and you know
valid concerns from just like you know
someone's projection or their own agenda
you asked me to let you know what the
half-hour mark sorre we're approaching
the half-hour mark sure yeah at the time
let me yeah I'd like to wrap up pretty
quickly here let me just say a few more
things I don't know let me let me be a
little critical of Peter because you
invited me to and I don't have a lot to
go on here cuz like my prep was spread
pretty wide but you know there's a
couple lines here that stood out to me
in a few of your articles about setting
yourself on fire epistemic cowboy number
39
self on fire you can only set yourself
on fire if you own each word you use now
I really try to do that in my in my
articles and so whatever extent I can
here today in speech um but but you know
another aspect of that is like like my
rap battle videos which were like tongue
and cheek is also kind of me citing
myself on fire at the same time like two
days after on May 29th I wrote an
article on self immolation right and so
that's this is I'm trying to like draw
contrast in the difference here between
like taking all this stuff lightly and
using these words playfully as you're
doing and you have this you have this
this theme and a couple other articles
right number 43
maybe that is hot or maybe what is hot
is publicly setting your life on fire
right again you're talking figuratively
number 61 women do not want to fuck a
man who cannot set his self on fire you
know now you know I get what you're
trying to say we're all trying to be
spectacular
draw attention um but you know I'm not
literally setting myself on fire but you
know I took really seriously the
self-immolation theme and it was you
know very timely because a year prior a
guy set himself on fire and walked on to
the White House lawn and you know
there's many cases like this and we
should we should pay attention to what
the deeper message is of this right we
should not be flattering our egos we
should not be back pounding ourselves
and each other about how sexy and
radical this sense-making stuff is
because it's not it's just to try to
help us along to make to find meaning in
the meta-crisis and my meaning is
solving the meta crisis so I want all of
you on board with that mission because I
think I'm already part of the kind of
the broader mass movement mm-hmm and I
want to invite these little you know
bubbles and enclaves to
to participate in that instead of fence
sitting and calling the shots from the
sidelines um so let me close to with
with you know Peters point in one of his
later articles 73's like my stoic
patience for uploading videos posting
events and shit like that is coming to
an end so you know I sympathize with his
exhaustion what's technically and my own
I'm fucking tired of all this bullshit
and you know of how hard we all have to
work to to get ahead and to get through
this you know we need to really
accelerate this process now is the time
as protests sweep the globe you know and
I'm gonna name one person cuz I can't
help myself
we should not be taking analysis from
Jordan Hall and I would be happy to talk
to him privately or publicly to sort
that out but you know he has these
phrases like you know simulated thinking
I can't I can't escape the fact that
that's what I see when I hear him talk
so we should all follow our own advice
better if we're gonna give that kind of
advice uh let's roll with with the cues
I think she print and thank you for
reading my journals and actually
numbering them so I can go back and edit
those lines out so if you have any
questions for Brent just write in the
chat box we have some good ones already
so I'll warm you up with a question
so Jared Jaynes Jason Snyder and myself
were as you know were fans of this
mimetic mediator term and the the
question I have for you is I guess what
is your sense on what that is that
potential project is because there's
still a new project and it has not works
not really been defined you ever come to
the mediation campfires and what do you
think it's negative and positive
potential is yeah a good question
mm-hmm I've been to a few camp fires and
I've had you know private conversations
with with both of you about it
my criticism has been more what it's
missing right because I'm starting from
my own meaning what mimetic mediation
should be but let me give you
some credit right because you guys have
like um skills right that you that you
worked on and that take practice and
that's part of what you're you're
developing so it's you know you know
diplomacy mediation itself conflict
resolution I have a lot of ideas of how
I'd like to take that further like how
do we experimentally build consensus you
know I I can't do that on my own but
I've got the research and the idea is to
do it my critique of the mimetic
mediation is that like as Jason
suggested in a tweet today like
sometimes he can't tell the difference
between all these competing viewpoints
he just absorbs them all and not to
place myself like higher in a hierarchy
but as a student I went through phases
like that right it's critical to go
through those and put yourself in the
shoes of a white supremacist or whatever
it may be
mm-hmm um but I think I think there's
like you know we have to get we have to
get through it to something like there
are good memes and bad memes to
oversimplify and you know I saw a game B
and mimetic mediation as not being
sufficiently critical of the IDW that
came before it right so it was it was
baking in some of the same practices
some of the same like knowledge gaps and
ignorance about theory about race about
social justice about post-modernism
right because there's nobody in those
spaces who is like an authority right
and so you know I would be one one
person who has some authority on those
topics but we need a lot more right and
what I was seeing in game B especially
was the opposite of mediation it was
like like literally cancelling and and
kicking out anybody who was like sort of
rocking the boat even constructively
like you know full disclosure like like
I can beat up on people but I was kicked
out essentially
for calling racists racist so you know
the the deeper problem here is people
are getting offended because they don't
understand like you know nobody wants to
be racist perfect call graces there are
explicit racists out there but the
systemic problem is that like you know
there's not been a sufficient public
discourse about this stuff systemic
racism is ongoing with the way the media
handles things with the way think tanks
operate and you know the kind of
feedback loop that that's you know
people you know give back to these
leaders to to to pump them up so it
becomes a trap cool thank you maybe gray
you had a question
hi Brian thanks for being here um I
heard from you really early on in your
introduction today um that you felt that
there's some really like he self
learning and self critique topics that
sense makers seem to have blind spots
around and I'd love to hear you riff
more on that sure well they talk a lot
about shadow work right that's kind of a
personal development hack to to deal
with your own trauma but that has
nothing to do with social issues and the
epistemology of that so my critique is
like that there's not enough
self-criticism of the of the ignorance
like a lot of these problems are over
determined by various social factors and
then and then in these spaces our
confidence becomes kind of over
determined to like people are
overconfident for various reasons like
rebel wisdom has had a lot of kind of
success in terms of traffic and
audiences and and and so has game B and
you know the people involved with these
things so there's a kind of momentum
there's a there's a great degree of
hesitancy to not just engage in self
critique but like
to ask the tough deeper questions like
what if I'm wrong about everything you
know fundamentally and you know I don't
I don't want to pick on certain people
um especially without like you know
saying something nice right that's
what's gonna that's gonna let me be
heard but like the the moderators
in the game B group and you know kind of
under gym rats guidance and an influence
wanted to you know completely control
the discourse right and this isn't like
you know I hope to talk to Jim soon and
like hope that the good faith and
openness there means we can work through
these things but like you know there's
the issue of him wanting to ban like
race theories it's one thing that's
gonna be pretty hostile to sense-making
about what's happening but then like
just on a much more basic level I would
use the word problematic like this this
is problematic or that person is
problematic and I you know I try to use
it in the way the word is meant like
that there's a set of problems that
arise in the in the process of
engagement right and he just wanted he
just didn't like that word he wanted to
ban the word like let's not say
problematic and you know in prep for
this I came across you know some better
definitions like problematization you
know it's a way we kind of D mythos eyes
problems and you know deconstruct common
knowledge that is taken for granted so
we can make a meta move you know and
reform our thinking about it but there's
also something called and I think Jim
and others would be interested in this
it's called problematic integration
theory and it really puts a button on
what I'm trying to say here right and
I'll just read is this the definition
from Wikipedia problematic integration
theory is a theory of communication that
addresses the processes and dynamics of
how people receive evaluate and respond
to information and experiences the
premises of problematic integration
theory are base
the view that message processing
specifically the development of
probabilistic and evaluative
orientations is a social and cultural
construction right so I mean this is
this is a sociological thing that just
for being sociological it's in Jim's
blind spot but we all have the capacity
know Jim's very intelligent right going
back to that we all have the capacity to
learn these things so we could actually
use this theory to work through some of
these things and unpack them but it
takes a process it takes it takes
collaboration it takes overcoming the
fear of being wrong or called out um but
you know this is how we get over
disagreements that are that are
generated from from misinterpretation or
bad premises you know and hence why I
say problematic because all of the kind
of disagreements that would crop up like
about politics and social justice they
weren't like there was no coherence
there you know it didn't resonate with
anything I'd studied uh or anything I'm
currently working on related to these
subjects it's just kind of the standard
reactionary dismissal of of lapped isms
socialism and politics in general so I
hope that is a sufficient answer okay
thank you maybe so we have a private
someone some a private question I'll
read on their behalf just let me find it
okay so who in your view is doing
sense-making well or that you consider
to be a high signal noise good faith
sources and what is in the nature of
their approach that transcends the
critique that you have outlined here
today at the Stoa
so you know Michael Brooks comes to mind
because he's been on the stoah and you
know one of the things I've said to you
Peter is that we can't just have
conversations and then move on with our
lives right like I participate in
Michael Brooks's community I take in all
his content and hmm and and then some
right because there's there's all
there's many many great thinkers on the
left that that few people know about and
so through a show like his you have
access to that you know kind of you know
other alternative sense-making
really like there's a lot of there's a
lot of people in terms of like really
cutting-edge intellectuals like I
reference Benjamin Bratton a lot Zac
who's in the chat here also likes
Bratton you know that that kind of
discourse just kind of flies overhead
all of this kind of stuff like it's on
another plane um and and again it's not
like you have to dive into it we can't
just like great graze on his body of
work you know you can't just interview
him and think you're gonna grok or
download what what is consciousness is
right like you know so hopefully we're
all in the process and the people here
can help lead in constructive ways the
move away from these intellectual dark
web thinkers and they can decide for
themselves whether to come along or not
but what seems to be happening is that
they just they further alienate
themselves into the center or the right
and um you know that that's that's the
paradox at play here with all these
communities like integral and rubble
wisdom that are invested in those
so-called intellectuals and sense makers
a lot of also who I draw on is just like
obscure scholars like papers and books
you know I'm often collecting stuff more
than ever more than I'm reading it
so that keeps me humble because whenever
you come across a popular article like
it's full of holes relative to what's
out there right and and one point I
wanted to make that I thought about
coming into this talk is like you know a
lot of us are thinkers where we're doing
research we're innovating one thing
researchers have to realize is that like
most of the groundwork has already been
laid it's a matter of like realizing
what was good from the past right and
and and so like I said in this in this
book like sometimes these anti
intellectuals are obsessed with old
outdated antiquated debunked ideas
there's so many good ideas in the past
so many things have been realized early
on like this book is very predictive and
descriptive of the intellectual dark web
and it's from 1964 right so we see
history repeating itself and so it's not
just about you know who's you know hot
today um but you know what are the gold
standards what can we really trust when
we go back to but yeah you know aside
for Michael Brooks like you know I want
to give credit to you know like like
Jacobin and current affairs like these
are just kind of socialist outlets that
that produce content on a regular basis
and you know they're they're doing
something intellectual right and this is
they're also doing something very
pragmatic like what they are advocating
for in some sense should line up with
Jambi stuff right if game B wants to
talk about the Commons or you know like
like decentralization or distribution
like you can't avoid and Ashu this this
term and this tradition of socialism so
you know these ideas are are hijacked
and bastardized in the culture war like
you know one of one of the simplest most
powerful arguments for me you know
because I don't like debating and just
you know going going into the weeds of
theory and policies but Albert Einstein
was a socialist and he wrote about it he
wrote like in a four page essay
why socialism you know and that's where
that's what we should be thinking of
when the word socialism comes up right
Peterson you know happy birthday dr.
lobster um is always steering people in
the opposite direction like oh the
Socialists their proto fascists all
these all these hippies with placards
they're the real enemy you know like I
don't know whether to laugh or cry it's
utterly insane um and you know III say
it I say it kind of kind of short and
callously like that because I've seen
all the critiques I've written some of
the critiques like we should be over
this guy by a longshot and it's because
there's not a culture that embraces
critique and embraces these deep truths
um that that we get stuck in the
meta-crisis reproduces itself the sense
making crisis reproduces itself it's
gonna keep unfolding you know and you
know short of saying what's happening in
the world is a direct reflection of
what's going on in here you know it's
coincidental but it's also kind of a
microcosm the more we fight over dumb
things you know the more the pandemic is
in it is gonna kill people and the more
cops are gonna murder people and you
know like you know to bring it back to
politics like Bernie Sanders platform
right and Bernie Sanders aside because
he's you know kind of out of the picture
now the platform is solid the platform
addresses a lot of these systemic things
but the culture war insisted on
politicizing it instead of just reading
it and discussing it and that not that's
part of what I'd been up to you know I
engage this stuff I read it so you know
I don't take well to being attacked by
people who think that uh you know that
new king like you know you know you know
rush limbaugh is a good person
and that and that Donald Trump is not
racist and that America does not have
racism um you know yeah so
we're not going to get to all the
questions today I'm not gonna read them
in order but one is alive for the
chatbox and the people in the room and
it's related to the one you just
answered its from Jason Snyder our boy
Jason Snyder Jason would you like to
unmute yourself and ask your question
yeah Brett just a really a quick
question or a small question no no it's
quick who are some thinkers that aren't
on a socialist and/or critical theory
left that you learned from I asked this
question because as you know somebody
coming in I think I know where you're
coming from but somebody coming in might
think that the arbiter of truth and you
know the real intellect intelligent
conversations going on is on the left
and so I want to know who's not talking
about socialism or critical theory that
you find really worthwhile to engage
with yeah it's a good question I can
probably come up with a more detailed
answer later but the first thing that
comes to mind is comedians love lots of
comedians and I saw you tweeted Dave
Chappelle clip I think and I I did as
well like I love that shit and you know
he's speaking he's speaking truth I mean
in the clip he was criticizing Candace
Owens Hey and Candace Owens you know
it's sort of you know adjacent to the
intellectual dark web and like you know
was big part of the dave rubin craze has
enormous influence for whatever reason
she's you know she's incredibly popular
is it because she's smart
it's because she's like attractive
probably a little but you know or is it
because the United States has a systemic
racism problem and she's paid papering
over that and making people feel okay
about it I think it's the latter and
that's what Dave Chappelle was pointing
out right and so Dave Chappelle is not
theorizing about socialism and in fact I
think he supported Andrew yang mm-hmm
you know so I do go outside the left and
I do also seek out conservative thinkers
in
moment in this day and age it is so hard
to parse that and it might in fact be
impossible or counterproductive right so
I'm not you know for whatever I can do
in it I try to encourage people who want
to identify as conservative to build out
this like much better brand I'm gonna
talk with Justin Carmy on this weekend
who's like a meta modder and colleague
if you will but he identifies as
conservative and we we have a pretty
good relationship across that and so you
know he he has a lot of knowledge right
so I respect what he knows and I respect
his thinking process you know as long as
he's not trying to import any ridiculous
dogma I have no problem with engaging
him over that and encouraging you know
that kind of bipartisanship but uh yeah
that's all I'll say on that cool
so looks like Naomi and Ron are both
tapping out two questions for each other
so maybe no me if you want to yourself I
read yours looks like Ron also suggested
years ago hey sure okay so let's see um
I want to what a forward a premise
that's that I sort of go with from time
to time especially when I'm frustrated
with not being able to figure out why
people in a particular sense making
arena are able to entertain you know
much more entertain critiques of
themselves which is that there's a
there's an integral Aswany this in which
I DW and this in SJW and everything else
everything in between are essentially
like avatars of communities that need to
sort things out in their own particular
way so I'm wondering if you see this if
there's a way to see this as a version
of collective sense making in and of
itself and so instead of attempting to
you know kind of go in with a scalpel
and try to fix
what's wrong with any particular group
but rather to have them hash that cash
things out in their own way and if that
is the case what would be the mechanisms
by which these these collective sense
making bundles so to speak are able to
come together in some way yeah I mean I
think in a sense and there's a quote
here I think in here and the
responsibilities of intellectuals from
Chomsky that and and then the anti
intellectualism book that like you know
an intellectual has to go in with a
scalpel and like surgically like address
some of this stuff um but at the same
time like yeah sure
like there's many many different like
communities like and there's stuff
outside of this word that we're not even
talking about like what about like
Scientology right like are we just gonna
like let that be it because a lot of
people are okay with that or is it
actually a dangerous cult and kind of
you know um mmm like like like money
scheme like what is it right and what's
its relationship to to justice but I
think you know comes back to the
intellectual dark web calling themselves
intellectual and that they should
actually be interested in these topics
that would make them more self-critical
and reflective mm-hmm and given their
role as kind of public speakers you know
with followings
I think whatever they do you know they
they they can lead people in a new
direction right that's always the
opportunity here what instead tends to
happen is like what's happening with
Dave Rubin like he just goes further and
further to the right making more money
and and completely selling out his sense
making and not only is that happening
all his so-called friends have just
abandoned him and throwing him under the
bus right and so one thing I've been
lobbying for behind the scenes is that
we should actually like do way better to
take care of each other like to to call
in to reach out you know and and it's
hard right because people
we'll say like yeah well I tried you
know I tried to criticize so-and-so and
they just they wouldn't have it and then
I'm like exactly this is the problem we
can't criticize each other we can't
learn or stuck you know going in circles
on some of these just really really bad
ideas and you know so I don't know we
can only be in control of ourselves
right that's the kind of stoic and stoic
value proposition you have to just
accept it and so as time goes on that's
what that's what I'm trying to do more
to like you know I make I made the
videos and do long critiques cuz like
that's that's my purpose as an
intellectual I just have to say fuck it
mmm and I want to read an anecdote
quickly along these lines like so my my
classics professor he fashioned himself
was kind of a Tyler Durden type of guy
and he would he would always bring up
this this parallel from antiquity who
was called HIPPA Clyde ease and HIPAA
Clyde ease was was a guy who was like
competing for some first for a wife and
in any made it to the end and then the
final contests like the night before he
decided to get drunk and just dance away
his concern so you know and then and
then one of the other guys is like he's
like you just you just like you just
like lost the competition like on your
own and then he says typical IDs doesn't
care and that phrase actually was like
became a common expression in the
ancient world right in the the
contemporary equivalent would be like no
fucks given right so so typical IDs is
like like I don't care I place my own
kind of values and priorities above the
expectations of society and so that's
kind of what I'm trying to do but at the
same time like I do care a lot so you
know there's a lot of like this kind of
critical knowledge out there and I think
like that's what needs to become the
next addictive craze but it's not
something that is
really amenable to like going going
viral because it's you know it's an
individual thing and it involves a lot
of this like sticking your neck out and
speaking truth to power so you know try
to criticize somebody like from from
like like like find some good
foundations you know like I think of
like another another juxtaposition I
like to bring in is like Steven Pinker
and Phil Torres you know there are two
guys who've just gone back and forth and
no progress has been made but like you
know take the critical side and try to
criticize somebody like like like pink
or an integral list or a centrist and
and see what happens
you know it's not fun and you're not
gonna get far because you're gonna be
scapegoated I mean you're gonna be straw
man and you know this you know then you
start to learn with me like how
difficult it is to try to insert
yourself into people's like nonsense and
bullshit
and right now we were pushing the hour I
just wanted to give you opportunity to
maybe have a brief closing thoughts and
maybe plug anything that you're working
on articles that you'd like people to
read or whatnot or your any upcoming rap
battle I'm curious about that as well I
wouldn't tell anybody if there was right
it's got to be a surprise let me just
close with a few random quotes Howard
Zinn says you can't be neutral on a
moving train you know we like I said
everything is political like you have to
get you have to get involved and it
doesn't mean advocating for somebody if
you don't know what you're doing it
means just like learning yeah so the
articles I shared at the beginning of
the chat at the top those are the ones
kind of relevant to today's talk right
it didn't have a lot of chance to get
into the details of the different ones
but a lot of it is is aggregating other
critiques right now I'm making a meta
critique so if you're not interested in
that stuff check it out
don't be afraid comment
the articles reach out to me okay all of
this stuff is is up for grabs and and
also you know just broadly the rest of
my work because a lot of it is not along
these critical or journalistic lines
it's about kind of you know theory or
you know the kind of futurism mm-hmm and
you know long lines of game be what the
broad kind of attractors and directions
we should be focused on to actually you
know achieve a better world for
everybody not an exclusive one not one
that's just like focused on the survival
of the species and you know fuck black
people right yeah so I'll close there
and I'm happy to keep going in another
session since this one has to be closed
so um all Brett's writings Brent's
writings or I just posted in here not
all of them are the ones that he posted
above so you can check those out in a
moment I'll make some upcoming
announcements on events the first Brent
thanks so much for coming today it's
greatly appreciated
and so yeah upcoming events I'll mention
one next week it's a the author or
co-author with Ben Burgess the myth of
mayhem it left this critique of Jordan
Peterson he's coming in on June 16th at
4 p.m. Eastern Time
do a session called Marx's epicureanism
and Peterson's stoicism and Peterson's
not a stoic so I'm curious how he's
gonna like tie that and but that should
be an intriguing event so you know hers
to be to that we have a wisdom gym we
have a book ten recurring events
Socratic speed-dating is coming up
shortly definitely check that out being
a walking erection is optional so if
you're not that currently you can just
don't you know feel free to come in and
the story is based on a gift economy
we're viewing as a gift for us to use in
this time of need if you're inspired to
provide it get to the store just go to
the website actually can go to the
website the store slash gift all right
and I'll just but there's a game be
coffeehouse I know but no one uses that
I think it's game be CAF coffee
there's a cafe I'll try either of those
it's usually empty you can just jump
into that one and continue this
discussion if you
choose so yeah thank you everyone for
coming up today thank you