going live alright guys we are live you
are back it is Jack Murphy this is the
Jack Murphy live podcast this is a
unique and rare opportunity where I'm
actually hosting two incredible
gentlemen at the same time I've got John
rabe here the author of brave new war
the most probably up-to-date and current
analyst on networks and the combination
of politics technology and warfare check
out his blog global guerillas also his
patreon as well John Rob's best patreon
in the universe I also have Adam
Townsend somebody I have been dying to
talk to you for a number of months even
a couple of years Adam as a former Wall
Street executive who founded a baking
firm and sold it an early venture an
investor in the new york city in the
mid-1990s dot-com times he was part of
founding the admin staff which went
public in the late 90s then China and
workday and slack he called himself in
extreme salesmen and he is here live
with us Jack Murphy John rabe Adam
Townsend how you guys doing sir doing
great
awesome yeah really good awesome glad to
have you guys so Adam was the the one
who had this idea of us three getting
together to talk about current events we
want to talk about what's been going on
with an Tifa what's been going on with
black lives matter what's been going on
with the protests what's been going on
with the riots how does this fit into
our mental models of the world how does
this fit in with Adams notions of a
people operating system how does it fit
in with John's model of emergent
networks and insurgencies what is it how
does it drive with what I saw on the
ground and we can take comments and
questions as they come up throughout the
chat but this is going to be an
open-ended free-flowing conversation and
I'm going to start it off by asking John
John yes I know you spend a lot of time
on these issues you write about it all
the time on patreon and on your blog and
you are currently up to date a hundred
percent as anybody else so what has been
your reaction to the last couple of
weeks with black lives matter at the
protest riots and Tifa how does it fit
in with your existing
I'll update us on what you see happening
with your insurgent Network and our
network insurgency is going on and let's
get this thing going John well it's a
classic open source protest and open
source protest goes back to the open
source development model we saw it move
from software development to warfare and
there Iraq war and then we saw it porta
- protests in Islamic world you know
Egypt and Tunisia toppling governments
there we've seen it used in Puerto Rico
to topple the governor and in variety of
other places what it basically is is is
a protest or a movement that comes
together very very quickly based on a
single plausible promise a single idea
it's the only thing you can get a lot of
people to agree on it's it's got to be
simple and it's got to be actionable and
it has to actually be proven successful
enough to generate a crowd and the
people that assemble to support it to
move it forward towards completion come
from variety different backgrounds they
have a lot of different reasons for
protesting for joining the movement and
they don't necessarily agree with each
other okay they can be a polar opposites
because what we saw in the Iraq war and
the open source of services that they
were 70 different groups and there were
a bunch of different flavors of jihadi
that would knife each other if they were
in the same room they had criminal
organizations they had nationalists that
supported by sort of supported a Saddam
those who didn't and the same thing we
saw there is something that we're seeing
now in this protest is that everybody
who wanted the protest Trump and wanted
the protest to current environment use
this as a way of doing that and they all
joined and anyone who is interested in
destabilizing the United States joined
in also so we have the bulk of the
people
are operating on a relatively peaceful
basis but we also have more violent
elements slotting themselves in to try
to destabilize it to get it to reach a
different level of engagement with the
US what do you what is the plausible
promise here what is what is attracting
these disparate groups to coalesce in
this very moment to take action yeah
well I'm seeing a lot of more elements
in this one what seems to be the basis
of this is that it's a equalizing the
power relationship between the police
and the populace defanging the police
I'm making them less effective at
calling a protest or being able to exert
power from the from the establishment or
those who are in charge um that seems to
be the kind of objective we're seeing
that in the defunding efforts we're
seeing that in the you know pledging of
support where people are kneeling you're
kind of giving your oath to the crowd
and bending their knee taking a knee
become spending any and then you know
that's that's the core focus and
anything that moves it along towards
that tends to be the accepted by the
crowd and supported an advanced do you
think that that is the goal or that is
an intermediate goal but equalizing the
power between the people and the police
is that is that the end destination or
is this just like a hop on the way to
the long-range destination and what and
if so what do you think that might be
well for this protest that is the end
destination so okay soon as that
dissolves as soon as that either Forks
too much that it becomes diffused and
ineffective or achieves a you know a
relative success and that it causes a
lot of defunding events a lot of
reorganizations and police departments
forcing police into the defensive Crouch
they don't engage with crowds they don't
take action when the teeth you know
street crime or property crime like
we're seeing in some some states
then it will fall apart and there has to
be another reason for that for the open
source protests to come together I mean
open sources is very you know this kind
of open source movement protest is very
good at rapid mobilization when look at
this I mean what other protest could go
to 2800 different cities around the
world in a matter of days
I mean you it's an organizational feat
that just can't be matched in using
other organizational methodologies and
the tens of millions of people that
showed up to support it it's a and it's
very effective it's built to take on
bigger foes I mean the insurgency in
Iraq was built to take on the US
military I mean in the US military being
that the sole superpower at the time was
supposed to be good enough and had the
resources that had the bench necessary
to defeat it but that open-sourced
insurgent dynamic allowed them to hold
it at a standstill basically wear it out
over the course of three or four years
patience patience very important and for
a generation war and that is for sure
Adam what do you think about John's idea
about the plausible promise being the
thing that's attracting all these groups
together do you agree with that do you
think that the promise is accurate how
do you see it what's motivating people
um well I of course I agree John's an
authority there are very I'm very
selective about what information I allow
in because once it's kind of in my head
is such a tedious process to extract it
and it takes so much effort to take it
out of my head so uh you know I've read
John's book uh I'll give you a little
bit of background and to answer your
question for it and John and I discussed
this a little bit yesterday going back
four years I was a fan of John's blog
before he had a patreon and I I called
John and I was very interested in his
Brazilian cities both and what I was
seeing within some very good friends of
mine who ran forensic nodes against the
Bitcoin mining operations
had overwhelmed Venezuela which I'm sure
John probably know is kind of on a
periphery about which is where these
gangs took over towns and and how much
of that was the elites within Venezuela
and and the petrol and how it's still
unknown but nevertheless they were
stripping towns of all the electricity
and it was done not only as an extortion
scheme but it was a done it was a done
as a way to and not just take over the
towns but it was it was done as a way to
install new administrations because if
you control the electricity you control
the town right it's the same thing you
hand up from antalya with the bitcoin
mining farms and and everything that so
I was much more interested John and I
spoke at that time four years ago and I
was very interested in okay well in New
York City we don't have that right we
don't have that type of infrastructure
vulnerability we don't have that type of
a four D warfare on our electrical grid
going on which is what you have
happening throughout the world that
Americans are just so lucky we don't see
which is the protest will take over
actually apparatus of the other go it's
really wild to say so I was very
interested and John will probably recall
it because I you know we we refreshed
our memories on yesterday I said well
how will this exhibit itself within New
York and if it does become this kind of
a system this type of open warfare
system the John you know elegantly has
you know described throughout his career
then how how can we respond to that and
I was very interested I anticipated the
crisis is we were going through now at
least you know not with a severity and
not with us as much operational support
as they've been given by media and
everything else but I certainly saw that
this was the way it was going so I
reached out to John four years ago and I
said well John when this comes to
America in this form how can we respond
and locally within New York where I know
everybody I know all the politicians I
know what power lead I know everything
was our best way of responding to it in
a healthy in a healthy way I live here
how can I kind of mitigate all the
agitation and everything else both
politically and do I just pack up and
move I saw was coming on I said do I
just get the heck out in New York and
and hopefully I can outrun the mom so
jobs at work spurt I defer to John when
the way of saying I defer to John John
there whatever he says well it's hard to
argue with that I guess John one of the
things that I was wondering about you
mentioned the phrase how to fork the
inner you mentioned the phrase fork the
insurgency I'm slightly familiar with
that when it comes to like crypto and
blockchain events and and things like
that I'm not an expert on it by any
means whatsoever but I do understand
what you mean by fork the insurgency in
a sense of like splitting these groups
away from their the the goal that
they've coalesced around how have you
seen maybe that playing out is it
playing out the anticipated playing out
if not is there something that you could
suggest if you were in such a position
to make advice about how to fork an
insurgency like this and how to split
the groups yeah yeah a fork is what
happens to an open source movement when
a smaller group decides to pursue
difficult and they convince enough of
those people were formally participating
in in the and the bigger movement to
come with it and it can also have kind
of larger effects like for instance in
the Iraq war and the reason why we were
able to you know wrap it up to a certain
degree is that a subsection of the Iraqi
insurgency decided to blow up the golden
mosque and that incident caused the Shia
militias to start at the cleansing in
Baghdad and that I mean massive militias
walking through the you know the town
taking out neighborhood after
neighborhood and that put the the tribal
elements as you know that we're working
in as part of the and the neighborhood
in Baghdad at risk they were fighting
both the United States and these massive
Shia militias and that caused them to
give up the
cutting a deal with the US for
protection and luckily we're able to see
the signal and actually see it because
I'm in a wrote an article out bet in 95
in the in the New York Times that
basically said this is how this is how
you solve it get the sheet militias to
start doing something like this horrible
way of doing it but it was a way of
running it to a conclusion so three
years later that's exactly what happened
but by chance so in this case some
what's going on and what's potentially
forking it well things like we saw would
occupy okay where people start making
lists of demands that are you know you
know a mile long I mean they have you
know laundry lists and they start to
move off in all these different
directions and their demands of the
local City Council's and the demands of
this has that become so onerous that
people just don't take them seriously
and people argue over it and they start
dispersing from the movement we see a
little bit of that with the paths I call
it they call touch as that temporary
autonomous loan in Seattle in that has a
different motive its it's not
necessarily geared towards the possible
promise of this protest they're taking
it at a different direction and that's a
fork and it's almost a way to
de-escalate an open-source protest is
allow it to fork like that you know
allow it to get off-topic and soak up
their energies and start squabbling
internally and that internal squabbles
enough to shatter it and shatter the
shadow the movement one thing one thing
I've noticed about the guys in Chas and
had them I'm gonna ask you who do you
think these people are in just a minute
one thing I've noticed about the Chad's
Fork which is a good way of calling it
now is that they went from operating in
a 4G space to basically going back to
like trench warfare like now we have a
perimeter we must defend the perimeter
and it's like they're standing in a line
with a gun against people trying to get
in or out of where they are and that
doesn't seem to me to be in line with
like an insurgency a 4G insurgency in
this in this context it seems to be sort
of an error
was made on the ground at least from my
perspective and it is fascinating to see
how the thing can splinter apart and if
somebody wanted to splinter it apart it
sounds to me like one option would be to
like float unreasonable demands try to
make them look like they're coming from
the insurgency group try to just sort of
make them look absurd or make things as
crazy as possible to make people lose
interest it's interesting to think who's
actually following along and this is
something I really want to explore like
Adam who do you think that people are in
the protests who do you think that
people are rioting who do you think the
people are in Chaz are they the same are
they different
is it more as a sneakier than we think
is it as obvious as they're saying like
what do you think Adam do I also get to
ask John questions because I've got
follow-up questions to what John just
said do it and go forward Adam
so it's interesting because I'm watching
the res the warlord it's a awesome the
whole thing is insane and if I had been
given the opportunity if I was the
warlord of my own autonomous zone my
list would be like ten times longer just
say no I've got a lot of things I want
so I I don't know if you noticed but
recently and I tweeted it out they had
created this like community council for
some type of civic resolution things did
you see that John yeah Jack did you see
it had like mine edits to it and it was
mr. so remarkable thing just to watch
this kind of I'm not a lawyer so I don't
understand it and John understands the
things in his own type of a in his own
type of view I just look at it as just
absolute chaos and and my friends from
around the world looked at it and we're
kind of used to this type of chaos this
type of in term insanity right it's
insanity
and throughout those nine edits and
there was interesting because then that
was or they tried to scrub it so I took
screenshots of it just as it's kind of a
memorialization of the insanity right
and how it was kind of being
but when they took that out uh was that
then trying to resolve this fork so were
they trying to take that for you said
that the way these things divide up in a
way they Fork is you know the kind of
move in different direction so here was
a direction and the loose credibility
right by doing that they lose moral
authorities or lose Authority and
they'll lose their persuade that
persuasion that they had that kept
everybody contained so when they took
out those are the civic resolution
whatever that they have within Chas was
that their way of trying to recapture
that for that they saw splitting yeah
yep yeah it's um anything in this
off-topic anything that's off the main
thrust of the movement is a fork so
anything that was you know geared
specifically to the Chas to specifically
to you know certain needs that they had
that weren't part of the movement is a
full and yeah it's very hard because the
the chaotic elements in this are pretty
extreme um there's a way around that
though is that in an open-source protest
it doesn't necessarily have to be in
just individuals it could be very
tightly run groups okay and a tightly
run group which is you know
authoritarian in his nature is perfectly
welcomed within the context of an
open-source movement and if you have a
tightly run group and you have access to
it a temporary autonomous zone you can
do really wild stuff and for instance in
the Iraqi insurgency you know take over
a Fallujah allowed them to open it up to
bomb factories to all sorts of different
development that allowed the insurgency
to power those insurgency over the
course of the entire country over the
you know the breadth of the entire
country so um the knowledge is or the
insight is it's a temporary zone it's a
headache but it's only temporary and and
that allows you to do certain things and
those things have to be focused on
moving the insurgency for
removing the movement for it if you
start to have other ideas in terms of
trying to make it permanent and try to
do turn it into it a habitable zone or
trying to you know have other demands
for other grievances they have with the
city and with the country that it just
turns into something that well pretty
soon after that movement slows down be
rolled up right like the the original
list of demands from black lives matter
didn't include creating autonomous zones
in the middle of our major cities right
so we're ready to go distraction and
this thing that Adams referencing the I
think the acronym was crack ca RK
something about a council and resolution
or something and what he's referencing
is the fact that they said okay we're
gonna have five people on this council
none of them are gonna be white dudes
they're all good they're gonna be this
that another and then the next edit was
like okay well you forgot about this do
you know the disabled green person from
this part of the country okay we got to
do that and they went through the whole
intersectional slicing and dicing of
every oppressed group and they're like
oh crap we got to get even more people
we need even more people and before you
know it they were like four or five to
like twelve different people and it just
the absurdity of watching it happen sort
of in real time was actually a great
demonstration to see intersectionality
in action intersectionality in the wild
sort of how it works and how impossible
it is to use it as a basis for social
cohesion or the foundation of any future
Society which is I think the goal
intersectionality is clearly the moral
framework that that the black lives
matter the white fragility folks
anti-racist folks that they're operating
on the right it's their new it's their
new religion I think well so let me let
me all kind of intrude within it here
because you know I'm I'm I'm less
interested in kind of the the driving
ideology because I don't think that's
particularly coherent right I mean
there's no you know I my family were
World War two vets and the history of
the civil rights movement was uh how
much that experience
and John I'm sure we'll know a lot more
and other people who are you know vets
will know a lot more kind of the history
of this in a historical record but for
my own studies which a fairly extensive
I read over Taylor branch books and you
know my own family which became academic
Innes is you know that kind of black and
Jews uniting in the South uniting and
this kind of conversion and
transformation of the southern church
that occurred after World War two when
everybody came back from war and I can
tell you about it from our own family
experience it was a very real type of
thing that people had never had a chance
to meet before and so I don't think I
don't really assign what I'm seeing to
anything with an ideological or
theological or historical nucleus to it
and that's you know I was very
interested in what John said about
there's this kind of one driving almost
me that that moves the population and
that's I suppose because otherwise
they're just gonna squabble within each
other so I'm less interested in in that
and its intersection I thought the that
crack thing was very interesting also
because if you did the math at the end
of it they had given they are divided
initially they had divided Asians up
kind of monolithically and they said hey
if you're Asian you know this and you're
on this you know here you go and then if
you did the math by edit nine they had
given Asians basically a 2/5 they have
two fifths for the Asians which I
thought was remarkable that they did not
even give them adequate representation
so I'm less interested in that because
I'm also I'm because I realize that that
has to deteriorate but now I'm very
interested in watching as it has already
crumbled right where it's become
establishment now
I mean if it's now such a part of the
media and it's now become a tourist site
it's a tourist destination at this point
it's a it's a tourist I mean it is what
it is it's what people want to go there
so they can take their selfie there
having lived through 9/11 here and I
lost a lot of friends to it I watched
that become a selfie opportunity for
people and so it's emotional
potency has been entirely lost of
whatever a chance were supposed to be
and I see it instead I'm trying to look
through it differently which is also why
I'm so interested in John because I've
my former bosses and colleagues over
Rancourt I've have written a lot on the
Emerald City protests you know on the
Seattle protests and on on various
organizational schemas of how you create
disruptions and how they're managed both
the public relations of it where I see
CNN has clearly become this kind of
public relations arm of of Chas and of
whatever it's Paleolithic movement you
know kind of is and now they're trying
to propel it because it had lost its own
meaning there furth they're now trying
to turn it into this Disney Disney World
for the radicals and clearly they're now
trying to franchise it out and and have
it be set up around it's very clear I
mean it's becoming a franchise very very
very quickly and now they're trying to
replicate it around the country so I'm
less interest interested in kind of the
black lives matter as element of it
because that's in itself so highly
emotional recharge and where it takes a
such a great amount of human
conversation to be able to kind of piece
whatever it is together or piece would
take take away whatever it's not I'm
much more interested now and how it's
also kind of franchising out and its
franchising out very opportunistically
so that it's gonna whoever is not an
inherent right is now going to be chased
out of their homes right so if it's I
can see it clearly is going to move to
to Texas next and it's going to move to
some of the kind of more conservative
hubs chasing you know chasing out the
local populations getting adherence and
then as John said kind of getting people
to take a knee we feel like Johnny could
be I said what do you think about that
job yeah that could have spread that he
could franchise out
if it's too much of a departure from the
original movement though it's not going
to have the heft it's not going to it's
not going to take in this iteration but
if it can be molded into something that
advances the movement we'll see it
it's generally something that that we're
gonna see in protests moving forward
because I mean we what we basically are
experiencing is a kind of a defending of
the police the police are in a defensive
crunch I mean they can't apply force
particularly you know in a public
setting without getting you know severe
repercussions I mean people get fired
people get go to jail over even you know
minor stuff and now we're seeing teargas
bands and you know generalized bands on
non-lethal sand what that does to the
police force as a whole is that it puts
them into a force protection posture I
mean they have no power to use against
to protest even if it gets out of hand
and what they'll do is they'll just
withdraw from so if the protest wants to
advance they'll back off if the protest
wants to loot they'll back off they want
to avoid the confrontation avoid getting
in a situation where they get hurt and
it makes them completely ineffective and
that is a you know that kind of a
reducing that feedback loop that
mitigation loop that that kind of
negative damping that did that slows
down a protest is going to lead to some
interesting things that will see
protests that range a lot farther afield
they get bigger and they can take
buildings and hold them and intake
structures that we didn't think we're
possible you know going in and maybe
even taking the White House and
trampling it over and you know no one's
there to defendant no ones no one's
willing to actually you know put up the
defense necessary to stop it from being
trampled or you know looting and and
selectively looting like we saw in Hong
Kong or you know certain businesses were
targeted I mean the businesses that
supported the protest weren't vandalized
they didn't loot but they focused on
vandalization because they didn't want
to be portrayed as criminals by the
Chinese government and then the other
businesses that supported the Chinese
government that had done backroom deals
or part of it you know national chain
weren't targeted like banks and the like
and they were they were often gutted so
um we can see that here in the states
where there's kind of a selective kind
of pressure kind of there's a user word
I like to use is called alignment
there's a lot of what we're seeing in
networks is in network warfare is is
forcing alignment forcing people to
support and and face in the same
direction as the as the network if if
the government controls a network like
China they're forcing corporations and
individuals to align themselves to
publicly align themselves and do this so
on an ongoing basis not just them
domestically but globally and that what
we're seeing with with a lot of these
movements online is they're trying to
force that same alignment forcing people
to kind of in their public actions and
their behaviors express support or
continue to you know give give
credibility to the unit or to the
protest and and the like so um yeah I
that's my thinking I've much to add
alarm' desire you jump right in real
quick for a second I've seen so much of
this force alignment happening
everywhere all the corporations forced
to send over hundreds of millions of
dollars in some case like a billion
dollars where's all that money going
it's a very good question who's going to
account for that that'll be funny
there's an enforced alignment when the
anti-defamation league sends out reading
list to the PTAs across the country with
white fragility and anti racism at the
top of the list injecting them directly
into our students lives bypassing the
parents sending it to the schools
putting it into their curricula doing
these like community meetings that they
have
week at some schools where they talk
about these issues they ask these kids
to explore and sit with their racism etc
etc so there is this forced alignment
happening on all fronts and all fronts
and later I do want to circle back to
sort of the display of force and how
that impacted what I saw on the ground
in terms of the rioters but Adam you've
got something you wanted to say on that
subject go for it well let me just go
backwards a little bit you know
afterward you said I don't know anything
about the social I don't know a lot
about kind of the social language that
you've used so you know I can't say that
I've observed agree or disagree with any
of them okay just because I don't know
what these things are honestly I just
don't know what these things are the
terminology whether I don't have an
opinion on I'm just not informed on
anything so I just want to kind of you
know just kind of give some framework
for that that it's just not what I'm oh
I don't know I'm just not involved in
these little kind of social kind of
small issues even though I understand
they have greater implications when I
see Chaz though um I it's interesting I
watched it because Americans are not
used to what other countries have
experienced and you know John's
referenced a lot of what he's observed
within Iraq the kind of oil spot type of
you know system of advancement of a kind
of almost tactical guerilla type of
warfare and how it it you know it
advances with enough it becomes this
hierarchy and then take Cesar's control
and it's very interesting however when I
would I see Americans are not used to
seeing United Front
which is kind of a political and
economic apparatus that's very highly
evolved from from China that has a whole
bunch of different purposes they haven't
Americans have not seen that merit and I
have not seen a lot of very coercive
measures that the Chinese Communist
Party has done within other countries
which includes you know Australia which
has this is these are regular events in
Australia
I mean Australia universities have
income
co-opted by the Chinese Communist Party
said that economically the entire school
system cannot exist without the Chinese
Communist Party Europe is going through
its own significant challenges and they
will they no longer have the capacity to
be able to resist that type of an
element cuz they're already so fractured
and Canada's already had this but
Australia is probably the best example
so Americans are not used to seeing what
I've observed both in India and in China
about the driving forces behind some of
these and you know how they infiltrate
our think tanks they infiltrate media
they intrude they infiltrate greedy
politicians particularly those that have
retired from office
you know kind of voluntarily are kind of
been been termed out or however they are
no longer in office and they're there
they're kind of not smart enough to
become a lobbyist lobbyists is more than
just a person who's going to be able to
connect dots they need a lobbyist from
my experience I've known a lot it's not
just a kind of a network it's also just
as deeper comprehension of how to
articulate issues and all the kind of
the nuances of these type of things and
a lot of what I've seen in the people
who have been easily infiltrated in
Australia in Africa you know it's just
in South America are kind of the lesser
politicians the ones that whose careers
in many cases were built on agitating or
built on this kind of aristocracy so
they're very good at prying into the
kind of the aristocracy aristocratic
politicians hey you know my guy was this
my grandfather was this I'm not
particularly the smartest guy they're
offering me a billion dollar real estate
deal for no money down um it's just kind
of very interesting to watch it now I'm
seeing it in America so when I hear as
the warlord of Chas right
I know his rhetoric I I haven't studied
it them all on you know of course very
sympathetic to the the kind of the
suffering you know that he expresses
because I think that's very genuine
and actuality however it's also clearly
now been infused with a lot of
formalized rigid United Front Chinese
Communist Party propaganda uh and it's
its mechanism so I'm not sure normally
what their process is is they'll bring
people over to China to do you know hey
look you know we're not the imperialist
oppressor that America is look how well
we treat our black people look how well
we treat our economically disadvantaged
and China is very good at giving
Americans tours
China is incredibly good at giving
Westerners tours it's to the point that
it's actually nice nice okay yeah yeah
John I want to hear your dog now bark
back to his before kind of thing gonna
so it's it's interesting because clearly
he's been trained and I can see that I
was watching some videos and again I'm
not watching within an idea I'm trying
to watch as a disembodied intellect
right I'm not really trying to watch and
assign my own type of emotional reserves
to it I'm interested in it because of
how it fits in my futurist type of
thinking which I'll discuss a little bit
but uh there's a reason that other
people aren't beating him up I mean
who's not particularly menacing he
doesn't have a significant physical
presence he does seem to be charismatic
and so I think that adds to it but being
a charismatic leader also has much more
vulnerabilities than being a type of
leader that can you know Beach over the
head
all right charismatic leaders he can
much more easily displace than the type
of leader who's a quiet opposition by
hitting people over the head and by
cruelty right you need to have cruelty
to be a leader so we haven't seen any
exhibition of his cruelty um so to me
he's got a whole support network behind
him that's propelling this
right so you think he's been trained by
somebody prepared for this I I don't
want to infer him right as an individual
because I don't really know him right I
haven't had a chance to speak with them
um I don't know I can only tell you what
I've observed right and I'm not talking
about the cause and the expresses and/or
his talents because clearly he is a very
charismatic person seems to be very
relatable he has a intimate there's a
you the little videos I've seen of them
there's a lot of intimacy right people
like talking with him and that they're
not just kind of granting him Authority
he naturally does have some authority in
his interactions with people but that's
what what I've observed also is that
when I've seen him in physical
confrontation places where he's wildly
outnumbered and he's around kind of a
mob that's out of his own control
because that's kind of what John
described is as a you know the the group
only works as long as it's not fractured
but the second that you have a lot of
human interactions going on it's gonna
get fractured right the second people
have a chance to say a couple of words
to each other they're they're not going
to be an agreement what's wrong so
they've got to keep that rage going
they've got to keep that kind of
feedback with going and it's and I'm
breaking up fight it's like there's no
reason people aren't beating this guy up
it's not this type of a natural organic
Authority that he's got and I've seen it
elsewhere
right I've seen it in uh in India and
Pakistan and I've particularly seen it
with how the Chinese United Front
apparatus works John what do you think
about that yeah I know I've visited all
the garden spots and you know they were
wracked by civil war and I like when
they were hot
I saw how people were agitated and God
got involved and how these groups sprang
up I do think though that the the focus
on the Chas is a little bit of a head
fake it you know the real big thing here
is it's forcing alignment
enforcing alignment within the big
corporations particularly the big social
networking giants the Amazon like and
they're changing their way in which they
interact with people on a mass scale I
mean just like for instance the seeing
the books that they're proposing and
having those gonna put in front of you
and seeing white fragility every every
day
I mean being pushed as a book let alone
all the other little subtle things that
are behind the scenes said that were
being changed in order to accommodate
and align themselves with and when
you're talking about changing things on
a national scale that kind of power
power consolidation is a is key I don't
see this as a revolutionary movement
though I see it as a as a consolidation
of power for the dominant and that this
is not this is not about challenging the
people in power its consolidating the
power in a way that will allow them to
exclude people like Trump and others
from from power and do it in a in a
repeatable way John can you please drill
down on that a little bit please extrude
the black lives matter antiva open
source protests and riots are meant to
consolidate power in the establishment
what can we can we just remove the I
let's back out those particular
movements if it's possible because I
think it kind of introduces where we we
have to you know piece into each of its
kind of little component issues that it
is and if we can just back out of that
and instead just kind of look at you
know this the Spanx right there's a
fowling sits on the street and I'm I'm
much more unless interested in in which
army that you know the fouling stripe is
a is fighting on behalf of like what
what Kingdom they're fighting on behalf
of then our the tools that they're that
they're wielding aren't if I'm going to
get hit with with
hammer you know who hits me in the head
with the hammer isn't isn't that much of
a concern to me so is there any way of
having that same conversation without
having an obligation to kind of go into
the into the actual issues of black
lives matter because you know there's
there's a lot of complexity to that well
that's I mean that's what I do is that
they in the in an open source movement
it really doesn't matter who the
component groups are I mean they're
they're sliding in and the each have
their own motivations for joining and
much more complex and than you know much
more nuanced and then the the core
thrust of the movement but they're all
part of a larger dominant consensus in
the country that clearly I mean I mean
looking at the support for the protests
even when bad behavior was in evidence
and me through the looting and all in
many major metropolitan areas shows that
it is the dominant it is the kind of a
dominant movement and getting most
politicians to align with that getting
cities to flip on it quickly get the big
all the companies to express support and
make changes to the how they behave and
mass to get the big social networks that
they get inside our head there are
sitting in between each other all of us
in every conversation that we have
nowadays is is mitigated and mediated by
these social networks and these that
these companies they're forcing changes
on and so you know the extreme version
of this of courses is is what we see in
China where the government and the
corporations and the dominant consensus
is all one and it dictates and it uses
the network and it uses you know
gamified versions in terms of this
social social credit system to enforce
it down to the individual level and
change behavior so you know this is this
is a dominant movement it's not a
revolutionary movement it's propagating
consensus and you don't have to focus on
the individual groups in order to see it
so let me ask you a question
and I'm just so happy to be able to ask
you these questions - so awesome good
arm and which came first the movement or
the corporation's
desire to have this movement I mean if I
were to take so I keep a log right right
well I started a log in 2015 and I've
always kept the log but I've started one
type of log in 2015 and then in 2019 I
started a log about kovat okay and I
started it because I saw what was I'm
very familiar with China with a lot of
the operational issues and kind of
people operating system and I very
pretty familiar with it both
particularly financially and some of the
economic issues within it and so I saw
that the protests had completely gained
moral authority that the police could no
longer handle it um kind of provincially
that it had just kind of though the
protests that you were seeing in hong
kong you weren't
it was just you're only seeing those
because that's all the media was there
was just as many protests going on
Titanic actually a lot more violent
going on in the mainland and they after
they burned down the univer or after the
the people's aren't police intruding in
a university they had lost all type of
you know people background so then all
the sudden and there with a lot of
triads war more violent things you know
in service to the people's aren't police
and so and then all the sudden this
kovaydin came around and it was a way of
really channeling up dissent oh and how
much of you know the kovat was
embellished in order to channel dissent
is something I found very interesting so
I started a log at that point and the
log was in was was Kovac Kovac January
covered February covered March and now
that we're into you know June I'm
recording what's happening here and I
can kind of see kind of the you know
though I can watch the water you know
you know moving moving downstream and I
I don't see any of these exclusive
I see the relationship between the
channeling of dissent oh they are and
how that dissent expressed itself which
is different than it is here for a lot
of different reasons you are you are you
there yep
okay so descent Express you know it's a
different people operating system so it
China is not America over there it's a
much different system or culturally
legalistically there's just a whole
bunch of different systems so within
their system right they can react if
they want to change things they can
change it on a dime okay to change the
law I don't need to get your permission
to change your law it's going to be
changing they change the Constitution
and they stripped away all the
congressional all the People's Congress
powers they just did a lot of changes
that you didn't hear about but it really
substantive changes that just basically
stripped away all the political power
that people had within the mainland and
made them made their own local
provincial government inaccessible to
them so it's very interesting to watch
in our system we still have the burden
of the way I view it I'm a futurist
right in our system we still have the
burden of trying to preserve the
appearance of continuity right we can't
have this violent overnight change
people would resist everybody would be
on its feet resisting if they were to
say hey you know we're going to change
the Constitution in this way so in our
people operating system we need to be
able to still have the appearance of
this continuity that's the way I view it
I mean this is my own kind of thinking
about the thing but we need to have our
own appearance of continuity this kind
of facade that our institutions
everything still exists so as I saw
kovat happening everybody locking
everybody up and how in their house I
and kind of the media imaginations that
were required to kind of keep this to
take to keep this for foremost in
people's thoughts so that they would
volunteer themselves to be locked up in
their house and volunteer and coerce
others which was happening around the
Western countries whether they were in
Germany they were reporting
each other or if your kid without seen
playing they would report yeah literally
to the police in England it's crazy in
Troy I mean the whole thing is crazy
I've kept the log I'm an expert on so um
as as we saw Co vid beginning to die
down not just in terms of the actual
number of reported cases in terms of the
reported deaths we saw the case is going
up but we saw up being somewhat
commensurate with the number of tests
that we're out there alright so we won't
see any yeah there's one little other
factor there though it took us 2 3
months to figure out how to sequester or
the people most vulnerable to actually
protect them well so if you're looking
Florida you'll see the case is going up
among the younger people under 50s and
going down for the older people but that
we've learned how to actually protect so
if we had that ability at the get-go we
would have this would have blown through
I mean it would have been no no-brainer
but it took months how do you know that
I mean that's that's it you're making a
pretty strong statement is all I have to
accept it because it's fact you're
saying if we had known then this would
have occurred why do I have to accept
it's a learning process in terms of how
to figure out how to properly protect
people in rest homes how to properly
protect people who are most vulnerable
it wasn't something that you could do
out of the out of the box the UK tried
it I mean they said ok let's try to
figure figure out a way to sequester
these these people these vulnerable
populations which in the u.s. is huge I
mean what 37% of our population was
vulnerable to the virus it's um
it wasn't something you could do as an
initial strategy before a pandemic it's
something you had to learn how to do and
you know what we made the the big lie
going on today and we always end up
getting to these big kind of deal each
itemizing lies is that no politician is
out there saying ok we're willing to
accept a couple thousand people dead a
day we basically are allowing it you
know communicable cancer or heart
disease on that level but we're going to
try to keep it contained within
so we can continue to have our lives
we're willing to accept that I mean
that's the policy that's an effective
policy but nobody's up there saying okay
this is what we're willing to do and
that we're still kind of giving kind of
most politicians are giving a head nod
to eradicating it through measures or
ignoring like it doesn't even exist it's
a weird kind of you know hyper
normalization kind of thing going on
here that it's very confusing to people
well okay but I want to go backwards
because um again I have to accept your
assumptions which I don't know okay so
let me go back to kind of the the
inception of it because I've chronicled
I mean I've archived all of this and so
your assumption is that there's so many
of them that are both within that I
would be hard to me even chose to do
kind of the forensics on it
because the only being the entire thing
is built upon an assumption and then
it's kind of like this bubble theory of
assumptions that I've got I've got to
have something yeah
okay so I won't do that okay what I will
say is let's just stick with what the
actual facts are the absolute facts
something that corresponds with true
right so so december-january
massive protest in Hong Kong all right
um for the last two years three years
massive protests in Europe about the
yellow vest and the ballot in Germany
all the taxes in about the Catalan
separatists in Greece about immigration
and you know they're still pissed off
about the austerity measures and
rightfully so and about the Deutsche
Bank you know bailout that they were
forced to do and about kind of this EU a
kind of political administrative
Quagmire's that defines himself in with
brexit and how to kind of properly fund
different things and at the same time
how to distribute there's just a lot of
protest going on so what we do know for
a fact is that in in January in Fritton
December and January they were
going on throughout the world it can be
that that's one five oh yeah no I I see
where you're going with this can I you
know I I think I do because it's right
on it's it's it you're exactly right and
what you're saying but do you mind if I
just take one little break I've been
drinking coffee all morning yeah no
problem go for it Adam keep going here
roll with them he's awesome I drink
about two gallons of water a day so I in
advance of this I couldn't drink any
water last night we're live Adam we're
live keep rolling with keep rolling on
subject I'm I'm craving waters but I'm
really trying to psyche
so it's interesting because I'm gonna
wait for him to get back but in any
event it's interesting because again I
still have to accept the assumption
which I don't want to do so what is the
assumption let me write it down okay
that had we had that the information
that we obtained along the way became
the data sets were becoming better and
better so we could observe more in
real-time measures that could be taken
to sequester older people and to save
lives and to do this and and so the the
assumption that I have to agree with
this first that the information was a
pristine or even that the information
the data that we were being provided was
was true I mean things have to
correspond with fact and I don't think
that they ever were so I think we first
have to get an agreement on the quality
the quantitative qualitative aspects of
the information that we were provided so
if I if we can't get agreement on that
and how can how can I agree with John
statement that you know we learn how to
hide sequester old people to save their
lives and also how to eat young people
alive I mean it's one has to one have to
kind of sequentially build upon the
other yeah I think for me the most
important data point all the corona
stuff is just deaths right like all the
other issues are what they are
okay so can I start it up sure
what do you mean yeah I mean deaths of
what I mean what do you take yes help me
understand what you mean what I mean is
is deaths above and beyond what was
typical in an ordinary year at that time
thanks oh so we're drilling down John so
it you were saying that just to recap is
that yeah the pandemic gave an
opportunity to the global elites to
consolidate power and eliminate these
protests and I heartily agree in the
most cynical way possible these the
pandemic allowed a consolidation of
power on a global scale that we haven't
seen no I
okay no no I mean that's that's a part
of what I said
I mean first we have to also agree on
what pandemic is right because pandemic
we did not have an adequate definition I
mean this happened before in 2009 with
the swine flu h1n1 flu and at that time
there actually was an inoperable
definition of pandemic pandemic is just
a term like flatten the curve or
something else is thrown into a
vernacular that has no science
significant science meaning to it but
it's something that's nice for people to
say but particularly at that time were
pandemic was inadequately defined so arm
so we we still haven't figured out or
come to an agreement about what the
pandemic was how we worried observing
the pandemic and was the relation was
the information that we were given the
data truthful and so is the information
that we have calculated and are now
formulating this discussion upon sincere
was it authentic information so let's go
back to December January then so
December January there were all these
riots going on then in January as
actually December malicious State
January because that's a timely that
most people have we saw the videos on on
Twitter which all of us to have a life
on Twitter of people in China dropping
dead okay are spontaneously combusting
on the street basically from Kovac
now I'm pretty familiar with with China
I knew that was impossible right I know
how videos leak out of China and I know
how they're not gonna leak out of China
and if they were leak out of China it
difficult that they would have finding a
fewer especially on Twitter in social
media which is very responsive to
discourse power of China so so now in
January we see these videos now we're
beginning to call something on pandemic
right we're saying it's going to jump
over a little bit and in there really
wasn't a lot of deaths right there there
just wasn't a lot of morbidity attached
to it then we heard a lot about Italy if
you guys remember Italy so Italy was
january/february a a system that was
already I had a lot of difficulties and
that it was well operating well over
capacity it had been underfunded for a
long time and it had a very unhealthy
older population yeah so then around
March 11th we started hearing a lot of
buzz about it Angela Merkel comes out
with a speech March 11 March 11 Tom
Hanks I was just discussing is the food
journalist there were last two days
March 11 Angela Merkel comes out with a
speech saying that this is Germany's
world this is Germany's world war two
moment okay that was the language to use
this is the war on okay so I get very
worried about things that are described
as the war line but that's the language
he used it's also language Trump Houston
certainly and a lot of other politicians
have used so Tom Hanks Angela Merkel and
the NBA all use this same on the same
day where in all the newspapers
everywhere okay all about Kovac Tom
Hanks had exposure to what he said NBA
player had exposure to it so March 11th
is also or early March is also when Neil
Ferguson came out with a very Floyd
report are you familiar with that John
yeah I read it
okay yeah well when you say you read it
what do you mean you read it I read the
report how much a report did you read
okay okay did you have a child a chance
to interrogate any of that report yeah I
looked at it it was being portrayed
really strangely in the media and and
the the things that they were pulling up
and the claims that were being made
really off because if you really looked
at at least from my reading of it is
that if you applied various social
distancing techniques and and you could
achieve the same thing that you would
get from from a full lockdown and what
they were saying they were taking that
report and saying hey this is a reason
why you shouldn't use these techniques
and that we need a lockdown which was
exactly opposite of what the report
actually said so I was a it was very
disturbing I mean I mean one thing I
found is looking at all these Fe
epidemiological models and hearing how
these epidemiological epidemiologists
think I mean the assumptions they make
is that them you know a lot of these
assumptions are really flawed and they
were the models are pretty weak and it's
taken them way too long to update them
and but you know you still can tease
information out of them if you if you
understand where the plaza okay so can I
interrupt you you can tease information
um well first I mean I'm not going to
pronounce in these things I have a
little bit of a list so epidemiologist
or whatever they are colleges yes I'm
not even gonna try it's embarrassing so
whatever you just said what what's their
academic background I mean what's
required what is the what type what type
of a degree is that usually some masters
or a PhD in science but in Bandini
ecology yeah it's a study of infectious
diseases in a population scale are you
sure are you for that my sister's an
epidemiologist okay she's an epic but
are you sure that that's a qualification
required of one well actually
the interesting thing is that we saw a
lot of people writing papers and making
pronouncements on
that came from a variety of different
backgrounds so we see physicists we see
statisticians we see people who are
involved in general health I mean the
volume of data being produced in the
volume of studies in the volume of
information in a large part you know
drowned out a lot of what you get from
the people who were professionals at
this okay more the professional models
so they were built under some just like
hi she's like here's a good example that
if you have voluntary social distancing
requirements and recommendations that
only 10% of the population with John we
got to go backwards there happen but we
haven't rule on what an epidemiologist
this okay yeah and you have an advantage
on me because your sister is one so
you're just used to saying it around the
dinner table I've said it five times in
my life okay I'd have to like stay at
home and practice in front of a mirror
to be able to see the thing so but what
is the academic requirement to be an
epic I mean if can can you go out there
tomorrow and say that you are one of
those why not are you sure that yeah
okay so you're sure that in order to do
that I don't need some other type of I
can't just self-proclaimed if I have a
an academic background and let's say
computer modeling data sets ah that's
not stopping people from actually making
pronouncements and doing studies and
claiming insight into the into the
pandemic and you know we have very very
few examples of pandemics at this scale
that that really let people you know
dive into building models for it and
this one was unique in okay more
different me offering it was he by the
definition that you feel is kind of the
threshold right baggy was he you know
perhaps a degree and eventually in
biology or infect e ology was was he any
of those I don't know it's just it was a
model it was a model that that you can
either make assumptions as valuable or
you not I mean oh you want me to agree
I mean I because this is an important
point because we're you know with Muto
Mathis is really my question to you is
you want me to agree with the deaths
that how successful we've been
sequestering or not sequestering with
what we've learned along the way
well are now even just going to the
beginning of this we're looking at a
report from a person who by the rigid
definition of you would like write the
most authoritative one which is some
type of a degree in biology or in fact
theology he is none of those things is
that's not what he it that's not what he
it is I mean it's not what he is so I
have so I don't want to agree to anybody
to anybody's further argument I think
it's a dangerous thing I mean I want to
agree cuz I'm gonna agree we'll take the
guy but I fear of being an agreement um
on with was something that originated
with a report that was not from an
authoritative source that was presented
as such and initially Angela Merkel
which I mean you know you obviously
picked up on you know she said that
something like two hundred million
Americans were gonna get infected and
there would be a two point two million
possible people dying of kovat I don't
think that actually those those those
okay in general we have a terrible way
of communicating information in this
country and the bureaucracies the health
bureaucracy proved totally incompetent
in terms of coordinating their behavior
to planning in this instance and as well
as the financial bureaucracy did in the
financial crisis and they and the
foreign policy and military communities
totally flubbed the Iraq war and their
response to it and we're seeing that
again and again that these these
bureaucracies that we built that we've
invested in that all these millions of
people that we've paid incredible
amounts of money to indicate in
perspective
can't generate high-quality
decision-making anymore and it's
resulting in in this environment and we
see projections being purposely hyped we
see people saying like the CDC it's
saying that masks don't work okay
because is the noble lie they say right
is that they're misleading people
because they didn't want them going out
and buying masks I mean that's just
incredibly stupid thing I mean there's a
hundred years of Mission Control in
hospitals it's a common sense but now
it's interesting because Neil Ferguson
okay what was part of the research team
that led to the killing the culling of
tens of millions of animals during the
huffing huffing what was a
hoof-and-mouth crisis where Britain just
destroyed their economy by killing all
their all their livestock it turns out
that the data was it was incredibly
wrong okay just incredible all that they
didn't need to kill him he'll forget
bureaucracy messed up right yeah Adam
wasn't I'm gonna step in for just once
again I think that we're all in
agreement that a a million people opined
on this subject there were tech people
status epidemiologists randos Twitter
personalities guys with a medium account
that wrote an article that got 50
million views and seemed to have changed
the whole tone ER and conversation it
was like it was like titled like why we
have to do something like right now and
it just went everywhere I think we can
also agree that the Neil Ferguson report
was sliced and diced in ways that were
opportunistic for people I think we can
also agree that Neil Ferguson has work
in the past is questionable I think we
can also agree that the Imperial College
they are also in the business of doing
climate science modeling and we know and
we don't have and we know how that's
going as well too so I think that if if
we want to establish the fact that the
data is unreliable and that our
professionals and credentialed folks are
also unreliable I think we're all in
agreement there I think the next
question is is who took advantage of
this unreliable data who sliced it in
which direction and to go which way and
why I think that's where we're headed is
that not right Adam yeah so and I
apologize I hope that wasn't
antagonistic it's a subject that I'm an
activist I'm like but and you're awesome
John you know I'm a huge fan of yours
and it it actually brings me to just the
kind of though sometimes just so
interested in as I've is how it
led off into how the media was able to
get everybody sequestered for whatever
reason whether even if the intention was
good or bad or you know just a good or
bad thing whether whether or not or
whether even if we agree or disagree how
the media was able to get everybody
locked up good well the bad cause and
now how the media was able to allow
everybody to escape essentially into
like this dark city world and now we're
clearly they're setting up a media
narrative so I look at it I'm a futurist
right even as a kid I'm a financial
futurist I'm always into I knew as a kid
the world was gonna change I said I want
to make sure I'm on the right side of
the tracks because the other telling
tracks is gonna be horrible since I was
a tiny little kid and now I I look at it
as our people operating system is
changing and I look at the current
social movements that are out there as
the Triads that the Chinese used just as
very overt physical force I've written a
lot on Twitter and in my own personal
life a lot more about China and about
its social revolution and kind of now
for olds and how it was rolled in I look
at as being identical so I'm interested
in how do you see that this is helping
in the role of a power and and not only
how is it helping in the role of a power
but who do you anticipate to be the the
biggest beneficiary and once that has
been accomplished right once they've
rolled it up cuz I've only got a little
bit further to go they just pumped in
five trillion into the market and what
ever are they gonna then dismantle it
and let everybody live in peace and say
look this is our new operating system
deal with it or are they gonna say the
only way that we can sustain our own
power is to continue causing disagree
Disick with equal Ibrahim is the only
way that we can preserve this and that
would require a lot more social
agitation great question
right well I view it as a kind of a kind
of a Counter Reformation kind of moment
for the neoliberal system so the
neoliberal system before was focused on
lowering barrier
lowering barriers to capital flow
lowering barriers to wealth creation and
that ended up concentrating wealth and
concentrating wealth man's a very very
few people and that what they gave to
people instead of the kind of
middle-class experience kind of income
associated with that is the ability to
self actualize in the sense that they
can choose their identity and they could
travel and they could there was no
barriers can usually moral barriers to
fully realizing who they are what they
like to do and you know it's money in
exchange for identity and that worked in
terms of a power relationship for a
while as a replacement for the you know
kind of middle class compact that that
had been in place during the Cold War um
and now it's falling apart in and that's
a kind of a reformation moment where the
you know that the blue church in Jordan
P or Dena policy framework the blue
church is now fighting back and that
it's you know mobilizing and doubling
down on the identity element in order to
consolidate his power again and except
in this case it's going to end up
costing them a lot more money than it
did in the past and it it's smashing
down a lot of the protections that had a
set in place to kind of create this kind
of uneasy relationship things like
police and and you know acting as a as a
Verity or the dysfunctional system that
we had maybe it's not it's not on is not
crazy to think that the the
militarization of police that occurred
in the 90s and then follow on
accelerated in the 2000s Kurt at the
same time that the middle class started
to fall apart
started to dissipate and mass and that
kept
them safe to a certain extent or you
know kept that money intact and now
that's a a in question anyway I mean
this is a you know this is a
consolidation effort in terms of kovat I
think it was a lot more of a power
consolidation opportunity around the
world than it was here in the states and
in the states when the trunk didn't buy
into it so it wasn't utilized in that
that fashion it's more of a
demonstration of the kind of network
decision making system that we have in
place here and we had a consensus
movement where 60% 70% of the population
decided to do this and and the online
consent proceeded the news the news is
being made largely on Twitter and other
places you can actually see the
reporters the way they're processing the
information and they get on board and
then then that aligns into the news and
then we saw that you know another
consensus wave come through with the the
protests and that shifted the attention
away from the Kovach response I think
this is an interesting point you bring
up John because it is sort of contrary
to a notion of like a rollup of power in
the United States from my perspective
and and yours and you've helped me see
this the the decision the the mass
acquiescence for lockdowns came before
we were told to do it I think that there
was a sense among the people that they
were ready they were had been primed now
how did they get primed where did that
information come from
individuals have their own sources we
had our own networks our guys in the
alumina order we were we knew it was
coming we didn't know if it was the
right thing to do or not but we knew it
was coming
other people were primed and ready for
it and then I noted and you know me John
I'm not the carrying water for Trump
ever but in this particular instance it
seemed to me he had an opportunity to be
the authoritarian you know dictator that
everybody says he is but he didn't
actually and I was very encouraged to
see the response which people called
weak some people to be locally executed
state guided
federally supported which I thought was
perfect that seems to be the right
language or the right idea and the right
philosophy so if to the extent that
there was a power role up by the the the
red insurgency or the Mogga Trump
administration I don't see that
happening it didn't I can you just I in
terms of a power roll-up amongst the
read insurgent I don't know what these
terms mean right the red insurgency was
the network that was led by Donald Trump
taking over the Republic all over the
federal government they didn't use this
opportunity as a way to consolidate
their power
when I say role for power I mean I I'm
I'm that's not power I mean that's a
brand I mean I'm not talking about you
know this saw yeah the the the trivial
type of power I mean I'm talking about
Trump having an opportunity to exert
federal control over the states and a
National Guard whatever dude norms so
let me go back when I say power then let
me kind of give it a some so I've looked
at since I would you know you know for
the last ten years or so this kind of
transformation are probably 20 years but
it's only accelerated this kind of
transformation in our political system
now keep in mind I have done a lot in
politics I've done a lot with some of
the top players in politics I've raised
that bundled I've posted I know
everybody they're all friends and have a
bad word to say but I have watch the
transformation which is they are they're
no longer powerful they're powerful in
terms of kind of the symbolism um but
it's not there nothing in compared to
the power of Google or the power of
Facebook the power so I've seen this
real transformation over the years that
i if i I've tried to describe and I
think about it is territorial
sovereignty which is I'm sitting here
right now and you know don't Messiah
wherever and I'm subject to their laws
and I pay taxes to that to a type of
real functional sovereignty which is you
know I'm using social media and I have
to abide by their Terms of Service and
their Terms of Service is essentially
you know more convenient and something I
I have to fall within and I have more
interaction with it I've touched it more
frequently then I touch my own
Constitution of the United States so I
take a look at the roll-up of power not
as some type of a brand out there kind
of grabbing a market share
I think about it much more with economic
currency and social currency which is
the transformation of our people
operating system from one that was a
kind of a republic and whatever a
republic is and the way kind of a
decompress is a republic to now where
we're in we've exchanged gleefully
people have exchanged a Terms of Service
for freedom of speech I mean we've got
so the power elites Google um has been
lobbying Facebook has been lobbying
Amazon these people spend tens of
billions of dollars in pharma industry
lobbies tens of billions are there what
are they buying right so they have taken
over the judiciary which is why certain
people couldn't get a date in and
there's an ad and it's why they had to
kind of charade manna for or stone
people I don't particularly like
nevertheless but they had to really put
them on display because it it is allowed
to show all the people that to distract
most people that weren't within a
corrupt system I know John on a podcast
regionally spoke about banking failures
and why nobody went to jail and how this
kind of led to a you know whole thing
but so I see a complete transformation
on people operating system that has
happened kind of innocuous it's not like
it happened in China where they just
ripped up the Constitution and they said
the Chinese Communist Party Constitution
now supersedes that of the People's
Republic of China Constitution which is
effectively what happened right and then
do it except they stripped all the
provincials and he said screw it
you don't like Z I'll tell you where you
can go and their form of deep
platforming over there is you know one
day you your dad's got a reasonably good
job as a banker and he's been there or
as a lawyer there so that lawyers don't
require to qualification some of this so
he's a lawyer or a judge the next day
he's uh he's picking
he's picking grapes I would have out of
the field to go feed the Bulls it's
really bad over there we couldn't do
that over here so I see that they've
employed these on our kingdom we could
we can't do that at least on a network
level
I mean force people out of jobs I mean
Jack's seen that firsthand I just saw
yeah yeah I mean there was a guy a
Mexican American guy lost his job for
having his hand out a window so it's
like you know isn't it well yeah it was
an okay sign and they took a picture put
it on Twitter you know it formed the
company the company fired and that's why
I'm such a big fan of yours because what
you're thinking is always you know I'm
not like I think of myself ever since I
was a I'm a futurist right what's the
world gonna look like in 10 years and
what wears I'm gonna be in that future
and how can he kind of live a happy life
where he is not burdened by no not
anymore oh boy
not anymore no there's there's a lot of
spots but this what we're seeing now is
going to move to San Diego I'm telling
you I've lived overseas it's this is
portable this is coming wherever you go
this example ain't gonna be that
unfortunately so for you it's San Diego
your spot is how were you going me yeah
oh no no I'm um New England this where
I'm stuck yeah oh there you know you got
a lot here
you got a natural border all barriers
right you've got a right way back yeah
so you're awesome so a reason I've
always been so intrigued with having
conversations with you and I know we
tried to have dinner you know in the
years back when you're visiting your
family here I think your son if I recall
is because you are kind of thinking is
kind of what I see in my head but how do
I now make this happen so you're right
we are doing that same deep platform and
I've seen overseas um we're doing it
here within our system and that's what's
always intrigued me about you I recall
in your when you're just first starting
your patron
one of the things you wrote about was
how the gun movement I don't want no
one's called ap NRA
to take the platform people will have
guns or whatever you call that type of a
thing but you said the banks are now
going to be de platforming people to
enforce
this movement to take away people's guns
remember yeah you're way ahead of the
curve with that uh and that's what I was
thinking how do they do this I know
where I I know where they're gonna get
to right because I can see it because
I'm a futurist and that's what I think
about so but you're the guy that kind of
says okay I say you know John this is
where I want to get to how do I get
there I'm alright I'm a visionary I'm
I'm B entrepreneur entrepreneur not the
operator I to complain I'm also a
entrepreneur but I tend to having been
burned on trying to figure out where
things are gonna head is that I look for
actual instantiation some little teeny
example that points me in the right
direction so I'm not just theory
crafting which is always a fear of mine
that I'll end up building this elaborate
theory that that's based on nothing and
it it falls apart at the you know first
first pushback yeah the whole deep
platforming it's done through alignment
and you know most people are still
thinking that everything has to be done
through legislation or has to be done
through the government and that's not
true I mean if you get enough
corporations and individuals to align
and and you can get government does it's
not necessary you can be platform you
can get things done and that's a that's
a form of power in a networked age and
we're gonna see a ton of that in in
particular in this instance this is
largely focused on on equalizing power
relationships with the what at least an
intersectional see is to power Lee
eliminating their ownership of guns
eliminating their access to police
eliminating their access to jobs and
wealth and power
it's a-you know that equalization is is
key to all of this they printed it could
be a positive thing and that we're all
kind of more on an equal basis but it
can be also used as it as well so anyway
it's interesting because again what I've
seen is over the last few years
corporations the Megas right because
they Volk result unit and there's only
five or six content companies anymore
almost in the world is probably only
kind of them anymore in the entire world
that are effective the rest are just
kind of you know just trying to rub
nickels together essentially you're just
a business long enough until the one of
the makers acquires them right and
there's only three or four pipe
companies like Google where you know
they do all the plumbing and you know
there's just a few them so I've it's
interesting because they've enlisted
this balance and the fowling has darn is
working in service of them because the
argument of the filings is that Nancy
Pelosi can't act quickly enough Trump
out can't act quickly enough so we don't
care about the Constitution anymore
because it's not responsive to us right
and not only is it not responsive to us
as quickly as we need it to be it's not
like this uber refined type of you know
this you've commented a lot on the
behavior of a keishon that we've seen
now and the change in behavior that's
being built into people but people it's
not not only is it not responsive
quickly enough legislation but it's also
they no longer have the physical
proximity to a politician anymore
so for them because they don't they
can't sit next to a Pelosi anymore right
it's not like it was ten years ago that
they are this experience of sitting
across from power whether it's Pelosi or
whether it's Facebook the only way
Facebook is more available it's more
convenient to interact with Facebook
power than it is with Pelosi power so
she's you know she's retreated
deliberately she's retreated from power
and in her stead she's pushed forward
you
Facebook even yesterday I think she said
you know journey people should demand
advertiser it's deep platform Fox media
or whatever I don't watch TV but I heard
her say something like that on Twitter
where she is um she is deliberately
substituting the a legislative power and
constitutional power for this kind of
territorial sovereignty for functional
sovereignty where she's saying listen
we're useless go to Facebook you know do
your thing faceball
oh yeah interrupting sir yeah I was
gonna jump in there for a second so many
great things going on here the the one
thing is is coming to mind is we're
talking about using the networks to
force alignment to affect change and
there's a couple of things happening one
there's just like the decade-long
consolidation of the Democrats into the
corporate party right Matt Stoller has
done a fantastic job of laying out how
the Democrats gave in to Chicago right
neoliberal you know market ideas and
when they came into power in after
Watergate they just for some reason
forgot about putting a check on
corporate power so the Google and the
rest of the folks they want to keep sure
they want to make sure that the federal
government stays distracted and doesn't
get involved in using their power to
actually regulate trust Matt Stoller you
should check out his book Goliath it's
fantastic I did a podcast with him it's
coming out next week now the other thing
about alignment and an effecting change
I I think I've heard you maybe say Adam
that it's not happening quickly but I'm
thinking it happened in lightning fast
so we had the riots and protests in the
last couple of weeks already we have
seen in Washington DC a whole slew of
police reform legislation pastor DC City
Council without any public review we've
had New York City Police Department
disband their 600 member played in
plainclothes division and I imagine that
this is playing out all over the country
all at the same time so really what's
happened is it black lives matter the
phalanx is you want to call it whatever
they have become a political party with
force with billions of dollars
supporting them they're the most popular
institution in America practically
behind the US military at this point and
they're making change and effecting
change in a real way very quickly across
the country and achieving the goals that
they want to achieve and into me it's
scary because they're not elected they
don't represent the views that I hold
they have a contrary view of justice and
there's all kinds of other elements
there that's kind of terrifying but
we've seen and John pointed this out
years ago is this alignment between the
resistance and the corporations and they
are together they are operating together
they have their own plausible promise
I'm not sure what it is but they are
working together and in concert and you
can see it happening and you know it's
not always necessarily for like
immediate bottom-line for a company like
Nike to go woke or whatever but it is
for sort of long-term consolidation and
for a long-term ability to keep the
government at bay which they have been
very successful in doing so ask Matt
Stoller a Democrat he'll tell you all
about it and then also now affecting
change immediately in local
jurisdictions actual cops taken off the
street actual police policies change
actual money being taken away from
police departments so that's what the
corporation's want that's what they want
though I mean they're all aligned in
this regard yes but so the I'd never
said that they weren't that the our
political processes and corporate
processes were not working harmoniously
clearly they are I mean I I just said
that they've been able to use its
filings to arm overwhelm back in China
was called no guard the house right but
during a social revolution but they've
used it to entrench deep political power
and in and then let that power retreat
because they got sick of having to run
for office anyway and let all the
corporate power
run run dominant and you know I
obviously you know the they were doing
this deliberately I mean defund the
police um was uh was it to me what it
appears to is as a corporate interest
because you know that money has to be
money doesn't disappear it's reallocated
elsewhere so whenever I hear that I hear
well where's that money gonna go and you
know some small sliver of change will
make its way into activist organizations
and hopefully good of community
evangelists and advocates but we're
talking about billions of dollars it's
going to wind up some
and I'm much more interested again and
where it goes and it's it's going to go
back to those same mega corporations I
mean the interesting thing for me is
that even just an example of this is
that you know they're creating all these
gofund means to bail out people who are
being arrested and all they're doing is
creating a it's feeding a beast right
it's like when Tory with Bernie Sanders
said you know I wanted to take away the
system and it sucks and and he said well
give me two hundred million dollars I'm
not gonna beat up the system really good
by feeding it he thought he was gonna
feed it to death it's basically that's a
feedback loop I mean it's their synergy
between corporations and and and the
network and it's not being a like unlike
China it's not being led by the
government it's not being dictated by
the government but this this new system
Network and corporate combined I think
it's being led more on the network side
but the corporations are opportunistic
and they're and they're taking advantage
of it because it allows them in many
ways to operate unfettered as long as
they censor as long as say help help the
movement along hope the network grow and
get powerful my fear is it is that over
the long term is that you know what we
should be aiming for as a dialectic and
kind of a back and forth between a
consensus idea that this is what we need
to do together right now and a dissent
that can dismantle it when it shows
weakness and when it has expired which
is largely has been on the right you
know for the last three four years and
and what we're when we're headed towards
and the stronger movement is that when a
network is locked in when a network
becomes consolidated and it becomes
rigid and that it doesn't allow the kind
of free association free freedom of
ideas and and we become rigid and
unproductive and things don't get
started things don't get it done and we
die as a society we die in terms of
creating prosperity we die in terms of
producing
producing for movement because nothing
outside of rigid kind of you know area
of ideas is loud I mean if you go
outside of that you stray you're
immediately shot down you're at risk and
so that could creates what I was calling
the kind of a long night is this kind of
network authoritarianism network Dominus
Network totalitarianism where it's it
has one idea that it puts into action
and then it's locked down through
sponsorship that gets into every single
conversation everything we talk about is
is guided in that in support of that and
we don't even have any mechanism for
stopping that from happening what are
gonna do take down a global corporation
three and a half billion people
connected to it it's just it's not
doable um and once we get locked into
that you know the I mean we have a eyes
that make that get better every day in
terms of making that possible finding
those little nuances in the conversation
that are going in the wrong direction
that are operating against this can
network think so I apologize there's a
there's a little bit of a lag I
apologize I valued throughout any time
oh no go ahead please
so it's interesting because I you know
I've kept this log for four years into
Trump's presidency because I saw the
world you know it's very clear that they
weren't gonna allow another insurgent I
mean that doesn't really require too
much thought to know that I was gonna be
a challenge to an elite system but so I
saw that over the last two years and I
always you know I wait it out but I'd
write a lot of notes about it myself is
that the spectacles that the Colosseum
would I study log of Rome ancient Roman
history I guess you could call the
period but nevertheless a lot of the
period of that of that time prior and
after and that spectacle I would say
spectacles at the Colosseum would always
get larger and you know clearly there
was become the expectation of the mob
which is what you were trying to kind of
satiate there and you needed a bigger
bigger distraction because underlying
some of the social conditions
I'm deteriorating that you needed to
kind of give people some type of safety
valve and a release from that and they
did a pretty good job of it and even up
until medieval times they you know
continued to do that where you know the
elites would give back at least
periodically they would give back one to
twice a year and say here's a big
festival right and now we're seeing
every single all I look at it episodic
lis right we're existing in a time of
like everything is a sitcom show or a
police show and we're going from episode
to episode in each episode young
amplifications like on spinal tap where
it just keeps on going up to eleven and
then twelve so we saw russia uh two
scoops gate where you had two suits and
then we're seeing just louder and louder
and louder and more people emotionally
engaged but i do think about once this
dies down which clearly that movement
for the time being is no longer I was
just doing a Google search on it now
just to see what type of volume it had
it's definitely died down the velocity
of black lives matter searches
everything else has definitely died down
now we're seeing more of CO vid so we're
going to get back to a covert hysteria
which is fine I mean you know if you can
anticipate it I can I can buy stocks
they're gonna benefit from but then what
happens next do or we can now
continually go through these episodes
where they have to get louder and louder
and louder I mean at what point even if
let's say Biden wins and whatever the
Democrat attachment to some of this is
perhaps not even ideologically but just
through convenience right is is can it
be turned down or we just now gonna look
through these endless OODA loops
whatever your language your military
languages or we're just going to see
more and more episodes becoming more and
more louder and therefore agitating more
and more and then just kind of like is
the media just gonna continue sending
out these like beacons to agitate people
more and more to get them to go into the
coliseum and participate in a spectacle
right well we'll keep on having a you
know complex crisis II said that slam us
that our bureaucracy is unable to deal
with and with each one
it offers an opportunity for people to
consolidate power and and for you know
disruption to occur I you know what
we're seeing what we saw with the
protests is more of a pattern lockdown
we're kind of post ideological now and
there's not really an ideology driven
driving it's a more of a kind of a big
pattern like you know kind of the way
queueing on is works in a in a kind of
smaller scale but writ large that lots
of people contribute to and lots of
people enforce and that each of these
each of these events reinforces that
pattern it you know it allows it to grow
and loves it to get more complex game
more adherents where people spend all
their day just watching the news kind of
go by them on Twitter and Facebook and
other things they pick out the things
that actually match that pattern and
they they paste it and share it and they
go okay look at this as a new one and
they know the moment they see it they
even the headline exactly a face and if
you try to show them that the headline
doesn't mean what what they think it
means that they are completely unable to
change their mind on it because it fits
in the pattern it would and changing
that would have to would force them to
you know confront the pattern or you
know disrupt the pattern so is it going
to get worse of course it's getting
worse but our challenge is to to figure
out how to use this mechanism this
network decision-making system kind of
it's serving as a little bit of a
replacement for nationalism as we go
forward in terms of what it can do in
terms of cohesion that mean within the
consensus it's it is pretty cohesive
how do we regularize it how do we turn
when we started big markets of financial
markets how did we turn them into
something that was useful instead of
disruptive it just to stabilizing I mean
how do we turn bureaucracies into
something that actually you know do
things that are beneficial is that
something that you can actually do with
the open source insurgency and these
networks that coalesce even even I'm
gonna use the word sorry Adam even black
lives matter in Antigua they come apart
they go together they come apart they go
together I you know you're the expert I
don't see how oh how there is statute it
closes say okay yeah I mean how we get
out of this long term at least
McClellan's framework is that we turn
our society into an artifact you know
technological artifact is that we use
that to manage everything and and what
we're really doing right now is really
just fighting over how that artifact is
built and infinitely ai's no that would
be socially I said that they would
actually end up running how we interact
so I've had some really interesting
conversations with folks lately I did an
interview with Joe Norman yesterday was
a complex scientists specialist PhD
written papers wasn't seen to leb way
ahead of the curve on kovat and and
looks at all these issues and he he we
were talking about regulating a
biological entities you know their
regulation response to viruses the
barriers that they erect how permeable
the barriers are and how that relates us
with social media and memes and fake
news and viral spread of information and
we were talking not happily but talking
about how in the future there may be
regulated social media networks that
have like fail-safes or tripwires that
prevent the spread of some of these
viral fake news or viral information
that causes this kind of disruption and
that's totally in the same vein I think
of having a eyes manage our social
networks but for the medium term for
right now what I'm more concerned about
is this sense that the federal
government is losing its power the
traditional political parties have what
are losing their power black lives
matter appears to be one of the most
popular institutions in America at this
time its operating as if it were
political party they're making demands
are getting response out of the federal
government but it's not an official
party in that sense that what we're used
to and they can make demands that the
rest of us don't want and then because
of the alliance in between the
resistance and the corporations and and
the blue church they're able to enact
their legislation overnight it was like
in two days they had legislation done
and there's gonna be more legislation
coming so I'm seeing this as like a
natural phenomenon that we can't control
I mean it's like it's like the mob on
steroids ultra uber connected not fun
it's not just a mob track it happened
before not just with the civil rights
that were intruded upon within covin but
it also happening uh I didn't have an
opinion on Russia gate whatever it is I
just thought it was interesting to be an
observer to be a speculator too but it
was amazing how quickly it happened how
quickly all the legal processes were
thrown out the window we defined how
quickly punish we was on TV saying
something absurd which was just you know
did some absurd thing we're not close
and with Ukraine Gate I guess it was
called how quickly they were able to get
to an impeachment so it's not just them
these social movements that are able to
act violently by violent I mean quick
but able to act quickly or move to move
things but our own political apparatus
when they choose to can move even
quicker what if I were just a networker
just say yeah it speeds everything up
more women now or when the network
leverages its leverage which so John
which leverage which Daniel get the
overall driver the overall drivers the
network as that pattern builds but you
it doesn't stop opportunistic
corporations and politicians from taking
advantage of it if you're I mean it's a
contingent leadership though it's a
contingent opportunity you have to align
in order to take advantage of it
or you just can't decide one day I'm not
going to align any more than expect the
same kind of support but the mobile poet
socialism has a is nothing new with an
America
I remember the New York time drink I'm a
capitalist right I remember the New York
Times printing things ten years ago and
I want kids to make money I want
everybody to make money it makes the
world a better place and I remember and
I've seen socialism and I've seen
communism close up so I saw I remember
the New York Times writing off edge by
you know academia they're saying how
wonderful communism is and Google talks
for the last 15 years or ever has been
having a lot of academia come in to
these little two hundred thousand
dollar-a-year kids telling them how bad
capitalism is so um but they're not
attacking it directly do you notice that
that that that they actually are staying
away from it because that's that's a
something that hasn't proven capable of
getting the consensus support so they're
they're attacking it indirectly and
achieving the same thing I mean how do
you change the composition of
corporations change the composition of
boards changing the composition of you
know who gets employed and how much they
make and all of that that's an indirect
method of achieving the same thing but
if you go after wealth and directly you
run into it the opposition but if Google
Talk if Google did not allow that I
might quickly I like Chris heads you
know I've read a lot of it stuff but
it's a little bit it's a little bit
annoying with this stuff after a while
and I remember him and some of his
colleagues going to Google talks and
saying how they want to burn down yeah
right now why did whoa but so the irony
speak for talk but couldn't Google have
squashed that if they had just not
permitted Chris Hedges in their doors so
couldn't they have just D platformed
Chris hedgy ins because he is already
obviously going to do platform anyway um
but it was deep like they could but they
don't see that you don't see that as a
threat and there's no call from the
network 2d platformer there's no there's
no benefit to you don't get alignment
points for 3d platforming Chris Hedges
and if there was a call arm to
oh yeah then do it a second I mean if
they'll take somebody out if they're if
they're it's a network cause work but
why can't they
I'll populate the networks messaging
yeah I just don't see the mechanism it's
like okay create a viral meme right now
and get a million hundred million people
tomorrow and if that was possible then
you know how people would be doing yeah
but it's I can give you in reading
examples because I'm chronicling all of
this I have you know I don't know
whether I'm not why the CIA conspirator
type of people or black operations type
of people but there is definitely now
where you can take in adequate just
nonsensical type of things and give it a
life beyond what normally would have
been organically popular pop possible
through like a ready type of a vote type
of thing so they can create something
that looks authentic you know that's
that's not I mean and so my question to
you then is well I'm able to yeah
well if they are if they're control of
actually designing and implementing the
artifact if there is a social artifact
there is a social ai's that that could
manipulate us on a global scale than of
course they're gonna be in the driver's
seat longer-term
so let me give you an example it's very
interesting right it just happened
recently is Twitter announced that they
caught like $200 in BOTS or fake
accounts or whatever and of China they
were waiting diffusing you know Chinese
propaganda or trying to create social
dissent and uh you know it's very
interesting to me because I I'm uh I'm
uh I'm a little bit skeptical of that I
think that it's certainly possible that
they did but it's also suddenly possible
that it's just kind of a convenience
that they can throw into the Wolves you
know in order to let the other 99 escape
because the ones so
social when you see an account on
Twitter right the first thing you might
look at is how old is that account it's
like a vintage right right oh but so if
you see something is 2020 May 2020 that
has five thousand tweets um you're gonna
say this is you know this is not
authentic activity right clearly this is
part of kind of a synchronized you know
group now if I were to see an account
from 2009
that's timestamp 2009 it's got 5,000
tweets it's going to look a lot more
real right you're not gonna think too
much about it you might say hey you know
whatever but why can't Twitter I mean
it's their program right this is their
shop why can't they all mess with your
domitor and uh you know put a put false
mileage on on the car right don't most
definitely can do all of that okay yeah
it's just you know and all this in a
venting activity meeting the you know
this external manipulation is all I
think greatly overblown at least win
that within the context of the u.s. it's
just that our internal discussions great
so much noise that anything that Russia
trying to get to is just really just
lost I mean they know hundred times what
they're spending now and it would still
not make a dent because we are so
freakin noisy and we're so good at it
the quality of this of the stuff that's
coming at us I mean in terms of trying
to manipulate each other is is intensely
good in many houses what would happen if
we were just stop that if Twitter just
closed that valve so for example if
they're I'm just gonna give you an
example let's just say the current
social movement is black lives matter
okay and what were to happen if that
were just closed if Twitter had just
closed off and Facebook and all the
other for social you know ten media
companies has just decided to close
all right Adam Adam they're closing
valves all the time just not not the
ones I want them to they're closing
valves all the time they closed the
valve on me it's in the terms of service
right now that they can elect to show
your tweets to people they are people
there are people disconnected from
following me and Scott Adams everybody
all the time there's third-party apps we
think actually that you authorize that
people are infiltrating to disconnect
you and your network I mean it happens
to me I have good friends that there's
no way they unfollowed me but they were
forcibly unfollow okay so Twitter is
fiddling with all the tubes and all the
valves and all that everything just not
in the direction that I may want it to
go yeah and if they started to try to go
after groups that are affiliated with
the consensus network is that they'll
get internal dissent I mean the
employers will explode because I mean
one thing about these networks is that
that they can infiltrate bureaucracies
corporate bureaucracies and government
bureaucracies and then go down in the
layers they have people who are it's not
it's not so much even ideological you
know kind of infiltration it's it's just
I am aligned with this network and when
I see damage to it occurring inside my
organization I will you know raise the
flag and then I'll gather the network
support to try to attack the people were
trying to implement it it's tough it's
not a god ship I can't Twitter and I'm
asking I mean I don't know the answer to
this so it's just can't Twitter just
fire those employees I mean they can
take it you going clicks deeper they
don't want to example when you when
you're hiring it when you're hiring okay
but when you're hiring an employee right
on a regular corporation you're asking
to do a lot of different personality
tests and to do personality profiles
they can be better managed and you can
kind of observe what type of character
and and kind of the best tools to help
manage that person given that type of
personality they have they can also hire
that's kind of a an indicator or a kind
of a meeting type of indicator they can
also hire according to kind of their
their willingness to not participate in
these type of social no Adam Adam might
are deliberately their delay
really screening for people who will
participate any social cause anytime
what I'm asking John is if they want to
shut it off if Wiener wanted to shut off
the valve closed lost a valve to a look
today for example black hole matter
could they I mean I give my aunt where a
man she'd be an uncle it's like I don't
understand this question they don't
they're aligned with the resistance they
scream their employees they train them
to think this way they incorporate into
algorithm it's part of their friggin
mission they've been taken over okay
that kid yeah I mean Twitter has to do
what's in its own I look I understand
okay I mean that's you know I hate to
say self-evident but we Bowl on Twitter
we all know what's going on with with in
Twitter and they have to see I don't
think about it is left-wing I think
about it is they're doing whatever is
best for their own financial interest
they've got fiduciary obligations to
improve shareholder it doesn't matter
it's old economy is not really true
anymore it's Adam Adam I want to ask you
question do you really believe sincerely
that the hundred percent of the
motivation of corporation board
management and staff is to maximize
shareholder value um but when I I don't
know how to how to answer that in the
way that you the way that you framed it
because I'm not exactly sure what I'm
agreeing to but yeah I do think that
fiduciary obligations of a company won't
best shareholder return interests yeah
yeah if that were only whose phone if
that were only the case I don't think
that that is necessarily in the case
anymore I think there's been a
misalignment in some ways I wish that
they would just exclusively focus on the
bottom line and that would drive a lot
of different decision-making I believe
there's no one I mean look they just
took off
the federalists and Zero Hedge off of
Google advertisements which is actually
money straight out of their pocket
because they've just had a different
ideology now maybe there's an analysis
to be made there that they would lose
other other advertisers and net-net it
was best for them but I don't think that
that's the
so I think Adam from your perspective is
Oh as a Wall Street guy as an investor
someone who depends on boards to be
focused on rate on shareholders and on
profits you need that you need that to
be true so that your worldview works but
I don't think it's true but let's look
how it drives with Jon okay because
which would what you know Jon's
articulated is kind of you know this
network and time how it immerses with
itself within a system and how it
infiltrates within a system and how it's
very disparate at the same time right
but so that same network also attacks
the Board of Directors all and the
largest institutional shareholders of
Twitter right they're not only going
after Federalists I mean Fairless I do I
like Feroz I even said something about
ESA it's obviously wrong but it's a very
small operation now but if I'm that
Network and I want to inflict damage and
impose real Authority I'm going to go
after the is it be our largest to
shareholders of Twitter and I'm gonna
say unless they do this I'm gonna do
this and I'm gonna say oh please what
are you gonna do to the Saudis Saudis on
Twitter don't thing
well let's saw that's let's just keep it
a high level okay well I understand that
but I mean some of the some of those
major shareholders are also aligned with
the resistance and they also have their
own motivations I wish there was such a
clearly set of incentives and alignments
that like we could apply logic and
necessarily to this circumstance but I
don't see it and maybe maybe that's just
me I'm not working on Wall Street and
I'm not a network specialist so it just
strikes me as it's not necessarily the
right frame of reference to try to
understand what's happening perhaps I
mean perhaps but again if we're only
looking at a few different corporations
and we're taking a look at a GDP of a
couple trillion dollars that that can
kind of allocate that money any way they
want whether they want to subsidize a
broadcast of CNN and hotels or not
airports despite nobody really wants to
see who the heck wants to see seen it
and then
poor I want to see like some Tom Cruise
movie or something show yeah exactly I
don't want to say like taunt
so but so if the government chooses to
pay a premium to have in airports and
then you know in the authorities that
you know that have jurisdiction over the
of the airports um to show CNN and pay a
premium for it
well then CNN's going to do what whoever
is controlling up straying for the
person and government so you know this
happened with with in TPP news lots of
you know I I think that everything is
downstream of politics I don't you know
John would argue John and I have an
interesting contract because he thinks
everything is kind of downstream from
social right and I think everything is
downstream from politics and I and I
don't think we have a disagreement I
think we're just trying to establish
which came first like the chicken or the
egg
I don't know it's a age-old question
yeah we're we're broaching two hours
here this is usually the time or I like
to wrap things up most people stamina is
about this long mine included so I want
to give you guys an opportunity to make
like a couple of final statements Adam
you want to go first in a couple minutes
and then John I'll give you a chance and
then I'll say something and then we'll
wraps up this amazing experiment in a
threeway
podcast with John rod Adam Townsend tack
Murphy life yeah so well thank you for
for being such a wonderful host
it's really awesome and I've really
enjoyed it and I'm a thrill to speak
with John I'm uh
I'm a huge fan of John we shots in four
years ago I subscribed to his patreon Oh
which is awesome and some of the things
it's funny because I read these things
and I'm like John can't be right oh no
no and then he's right and I'm like darn
it why couldn't he be wrong I didn't
want that to happen yeah I know I know
and so so thank you again for that my
own interest really geez days is just
kind of being the archivist for what's
happening with him what I think of as
the fastest roll up of power in human
history I'm a huge kind of roman-era
I
I've I've I've spent wonderful nights
kind of replaying war battles and you
know writing things about and reading
things about the currency devaluations
it's so fun to me and it's so
interesting for me watching things go
from kind of Alexander the Great
Augustus within such a short time span
so I like being an observer of it so
thank you jack for for hosting it's so
thoughtful and and thank you John you're
awesome and I'm a fan and Jack
congratulations on Matt Stoller because
I'm a fan of his also although we
disagree about Boeing just say you know
if you have a funny it kind of battle
without because he's wrong about that
both so much John
well thank you jack for hosting Thank
You Adam for suggesting this and getting
this all put together it's been
fantastic talking to both of you guys
wow it's really cool to you to be able
to dive into topics like this and not
get you run into a stone wall usually
you run into somebody's like oh it can't
it can't exist or this can't happen or
this is a this is impossible and it's
usually they just have a cognitive
filter different vensim from saying you
know we're all immersed in this for all
super savvy in terms of you know knowing
what's going on and seeing where it's
going and to be able to do that for two
hours is a real pleasure and thank you
so much guys my pleasure thank you very
much what I do appreciate is we all have
our own perspectives and backgrounds and
and even hopes and dreams but the thing
that Burton brings us together is
pursuit of truth and pursuit of trying
to figure out just what's going on and
how to figure out what's gonna happen
next irrespective of right wrong or
otherwise so thank you guys very much
for that I really appreciate it
everybody out there thank you so much
for listening check out Adam Townsend on
Twitter on John Rob patreon
/john Rob join that that's the best
patreon on the entire planet and you
guys please follow me at a Jack Murphy
live on Twitter Jack Murphy let's calm
and come down check out the liminal
order liminal - order calm thank you
everybody guys I will talk to you both
very soon appreciated thanks everybody
have a good day right
expect obvious come by now you dad
Thanks