September 27th 2018 eppela days ago I
had a conversation with someone with a
person of potentially far-reaching
influence in terms of enabling
fundamental change processes partially
with money but also with connections to
people who could make communications
flow a lot easier and it kind of got me
to that point of asking this question of
what if we suddenly got to a point where
because of imminent runaway catastrophic
climate change that we actually already
in the middle of and this little window
of opportunity to pull back from the
brink of an unraveling climate system
but if you look at it from the
perspective of a human species that
wants to survive in a relatively stable
climate in too many millennia the future
not just a few centuries of decline then
sooner or later for one reason or
another and the people are holding on to
financial capital for other reasons are
still trying to accumulated will very
quickly move towards liberating funds
for deeply transformative change and I
think we're at the brink of people
really wanting to invest in this idea of
ecosystem restoration
on societal and ecological regeneration
and this vision of redesigning the human
presence on earth in such a way that we
become healers of a planet that we
increase and pay attention to planetary
health I think moving from talking about
sustainability to really wanting to
restore and regenerate is a change in
the conversation that is still gaining
strength and that unites people who talk
about regeneration as the path to a
flourishing and thriving future whatever
you want to name it but there is a
growing group of people that work
actively towards catalyzing this change
and yet the organizational structures
like the institutions the NGOs the
players in this field are also stuck
within the current economic system and
limited funds to do what they're trying
to do so the many organizations that
I've been involved in all had a little
bit of a dance between what would we do
if we had unlimited funds and what is it
that we can actually do and how are we
gonna get the funding for it and do we
need to shift our communications from
this word to that word or include this
agenda because that's what's wonderful
right now and we can drive our overall
mission and vision by joining in with
these parents and so that that has
guided a lot of strategic
decision-making in these organizations
and then these organizations also while
deeply believing I think the people in
them want to collaborate and want to
reach out and see the synergies and the
potentials but again the limitation of
funding in the organiz
sometimes actually drives the
organization to make decisions that are
somewhat competitive with other
organizations and then you look at
prices or grant money you suddenly have
all these people were doing wonderful
work compete against each other in order
to get some of these funds and I've had
this conversation with people in the
bottom encephalo Institute and also with
the lush spring prize about how do we
move away from prices that ultimately
still a zero-sum and create winners and
losers to a system of challenges and
growing a community of exchange and
growing a learning community and a
communications platform in a in a entry
point for funders to get to know
Thunderball projects and in such a way
build a nonzero-sum ecosystems of
challenges that that are getting people
inspired to be active or getting people
rewarded for having already been active
in a certain aspect of regeneration and
so this all brings me to this big
what-if questions
suddenly the funds were there in all
these organizations that in some cases
have 30 40 50 year track records of
working for positive change and have
been networks their education systems
the the pilot projects and the successes
and their failures all all these
projects if they suddenly all got
together and said how are we going to
deploy the necessary capability and
knowledge the ability to communicate the
ability to plan and design the ability
to do regional assessments and work
together with everybody in your region
on three regionalization of production
and consumption and local resilience
building restoration of local ecosystems
local watersheds
that is a massive task just in terms of
capacity building and education and
right now we have all these
organizations that deeply have
experience in contributing to this kind
of education but we don't have a plan of
how they would all work together and how
do we scale their work because sometimes
they have 10 15 active teachers but then
they have people in their network who
could teach but who couldn't get a job
because there's only that many courses
because that's all what's fundable if
all that changes suddenly we need to
really look at all the network all that
experience regional assessments of who's
got permaculture agroforestry
regenerative agriculture experience in
this biome in this regions in this
country in order to create supportive
networks but also create pathways for
people who don't want to go to
university anymore because they don't
even know whether the degree that
they're getting after four years
including a lot of debt will actually
serve them in this rapidly transforming
world when all these people want to join
ecosystem restoration camps I'm going to
join the regeneration rising in and and
work to make the change in time so we
have a flourishing 22nd century and see
massive improvements by the middle and
towards the end of this century that is
a massive task and are we ready how do
we bring everyone together how do we do
these audits how do we create pathways
where people can then say okay I'm
taking four years to spend some time in
two different ecosystems restoration
while I do that I take the guy education
design for sustainability online course
and to the regenerative practitioner
training and the story of place with
with Genesis group and how do i finance
the travel how do I have access to the
Internet to make sure that I can access
these this route courses all this
explained made easy so people can see
that
this is a pathway which would after four
years give them a huge global network of
contacts of like-minded people who want
to be part of the rejuvenation would
give them live embodied experiences of
any part of team√≠s of having been part
of projects successes and failures
seeing changes that they've worked for
with their own hands in front of their
own eyes and being trained in let's say
have a degree like PDC under your belt
have a guy education training of
trainers under your belts you could
offer courses and become a multiplier
have holistic land management is an
approach to the whole field of project
management and the about skills and
socio cracy awareness of
process-oriented psychology and the
dynamics of groups all these different
possibilities that we we need to have a
lot more people trained up in all of
this and how do we build the networks
that enable that not just for five
hundred a thousand five thousand ten
thousand learners but for millions all
over the world how do we link it into
the school system with initiatives like
Ashoka's global change leaders or
alexander Laszlo's and and pavel luke
shots and and joshua co bestows
wonderful recent report from the global
education futures on learning ecosystems
how do we build those learning
inconsistent and enable them when the
funds are flowing when we don't have an
excuse anymore that we have limiting
competitive decision-making in
organizations that i actually aligned in
vision and mission and we now really
have green light to build the synergies
and the the better work that we can
co-create together without these limits
of because I deeply believe that the
change foot with particularly the
younger generation of wealthy people on
the planet that realize that there comes
a point when you pass 510 million then
you really don't need that much money in
your life and when you're past a hundred
or even a thousand million then it is
any responsibility bearing down on you
to activate all this money in order to
bring about the positive change that
might just be the one single change that
will save us into the 22nd century and
create that thrive of a world that
normally meaningful relationship with
nature with each other that we're all so
unique that will ultimately through
giving away to become a more equitable
world where people together fries and
yeah I better stop because this is
getting long again but I think this was
a rant worth having and to all of you
out there all these wonderful
organizations that part of the
regeneration rising we should start
thinking and convening to explore what
we would do if suddenly financial
restrictions were lifted and we could
actually roll out many many more people