so mark I find that as I'm listening and
watching as you're sharing I experience
a really fun kind of visceral pain of
both excitement that these messages are
being shared and like almost a relief
about that and the places where I just
can't wait for us to get to dialogue
deeper without it and our dialogue is
about the nature of second person has
been really fun and juicy so far and I'm
looking forward to the continued ones
that we get to do but the points that I
wanna just kind of emphasize that you
shared the I just think are so
meaningful is the very first few lines
that you shared was that we're creating
a map that is tying our personal
resolution and our collective evolution
the becoming a future human in
developing the future of humanity and
that those two things are more
intimately tied than they ever were
before because we don't just affect and
are affected by our local tribe or our
country or our globalization is such
that there there is no such places away
right we we can't leave Britain then
come somewhere else to start over we
can't kick the British out of India we
it's a climate change ocean
acidification they're all global issues
and so we also can't just tend to
ourselves and do our part and say it's
good because there's existential threats
from what any of us are doing right so
we have to really take responsibility
for the whole thing for our part of it
but for the whole thing and to really
get that all the issues are global and
that we have a part to play in all of
that and how how unavoidably connected
our personal lives and all of humanity
are such a critical women yeah totally I
mean in some sense you could say that
the process of evolution is to transcend
all dualities all splits and to
externalize interiors and that sounds
like a kind of kind of fancy phrase
exactly very clear again second
simplicity mmm-hmm so for example in the
great traditions they would say
something like to borrow from one
tradition from Hebrew mysticism Mala
Mala mouhot which is generally
translated as know that which is above
you and they retranslated it as
the second person know that which is
above mean hock comes from you that you
affect the entire thing but that was
actually even 500 years ago was really
only a realization of the eye of the
spirit right yet that wasn't verifiable
right that was a kind of it was a
realization wasn't a Dogma it was a
realization of the eye of the spirit
that I'm affecting the whole thing but
now right that very esoteric elite
realization for only the most
enlightened ones is actually
externalized right and the best sense of
externalized
and actually every human being that's
actually awake realizes that actually
Google Earth what I do actually can
affect the entire thing and that which
was only available to an elite in the
democratization of knowledge and we
actually know that it's true but as the
interiors actually get exteriorized so
it's this fascinating moment right we're
that deep esoteric knowledge that the
human being and humanity we're actually
inextricably interwoven is now obvious
it's self-evident exactly and here's
something to see how this relates
because I have felt that the creative
process the source of creation God going
through the entire labor of creation
right that ends up with you and me
sitting here has a real vested interest
in us creating not only am I asking of
that in what I need but that force is
asking of me needs me yes and one day I
was thinking thanking God thank you God
thank you got it and I heard this little
voice it Thank You Barbara right it was
somewhat of a shock but of course if the
divine force of creation is creating us
in order for us to be an expression of
that creative intelligence when we say
yes right I really feel I don't know
where that fits in the non-dual are they
the true self is that the the God force
itself is yearning for us to come
forward oh my god I mean oh my god I
mean exactly so beautiful and enticed
trust what you're saying Daniel exactly
what unique self is what the implication
of unique self is God says thank you
Barbara
duncan yourself means we need sell means
is all of the divine reality works to
manifest a barbara not because it didn't
need Barbara I'm just saying with the
absurdity of it right
all these divine synchronicities over
13.7 billion years work to manifest
Daniel but you I need you I mean it's
just got a shot amid the realization is
shocking when you get it yeah it changes
everything so you get that we need and
are needed by right affect and are
affected by right and that we all get to
recognize that more than we did before
but it's also more true than it was
before both and the more true part is
part of what's so critical about this
unique time which is the the increase of
our technological capabilities extending
what we effect and the globalization of
our technology is such that we really do
affect more more quickly more tangibly
more meaningfully impactful moving
faster and and more powerfully I mean
exactly what Daniel just said it's
there's two things that are happening
right when we're aware of it we're aware
that there's this inner penetration
right that's happening and that God
needs us and we need God and we're
saying thank you to each other and we
actually our co-creative partners and
it's more true than it ever was before
you know and here's where I want to kind
of just maybe point and share with you
and would love your response why do I
refer back to sacred texts right why is
that necessary I would just leave them
behind I mean aren't we kind of we're
becoming in a human why we you know why
are we doing this kind of antiquarian
outdated thing is this just kind of a
thing that gonee hasn't worked out from
his child and he's trying to kind of you
know feel at home no no actually
actually pathological evolution happens
when you transcend a previous level and
exclude the level before it okay we got
it
we're completely new right that's
pathological right organic right
evolution that produces something new
and gorgeous transcendent includes the
highest intuitions of what comes before
strips aside the distortions the
pathologies and takes the essence I mean
take some like Zen right Zen is half
realization and half Japanese Imperial
 right and you got a pension
with a disentangle to to right and in
this realization so
when we go back to a sacred text we're
actually accessing the divine spark and
we're taking responsibility for the god
voice that's powerful well I see that
and I wanted to share with you an
experience I had I was asking the
universe or the divine what kind of
person could actually guide all the new
powers of humanity right nanotech
biotech quantum computing and these are
powers that are radically new hmm and I
had an experience of the risen Christ
now that made me go to the New Testament
right I come from a Jewish agnostic
secular background and in the New
Testament I discovered this person who
was actually manifesting what we could
become and so the sacred text of the New
Testament and certainly coming from the
Old Testament was a manifestation of
what's becoming and then when I was able
to see the Christ as that which we are
becoming I could internalize it and I
didn't find any image in modern culture
whatsoever so horrible to the risen
Christ if you take it at all seriously
yeah I do
take it as real and we are else would i
look in science fiction no and mythology
no and he did it as a present so that's
an example absent absolutely a sacred
text and I'm asking you to write the
foreword to this because you're the one
who would understand this is not only
going back because it's important it's
taking there was something there that
takes us forward and me and Christ both
started as Orthodox rabbis we both got
crucified a certain time and hopefully
resurrection is happening so we're good
let me let me just you know let me just
kind of just comment on it for a second
so important then here Daniel and Daniel
this thing will be dialoguing about and
have a dialogue about let's just kind of
feel into this for a second so the risen
Christ right Christ consciousness so
Christ consciousness is interpreted
through my level of consciousness and
that's why we say we'd only wake up and
show up we grow up and grow up means
psychological maturity and grow up means
to grow up to higher levels of
consciousness so if I'm egocentric and I
have an awakened experience I've woken
up
and I think well I'm god great because
I'm at an egocentric level of
consciousness if I actually grow up to
an ethnocentric level of consciousness
have an awakening experience as well
where the chosen people right which
might be a Jewish move or a Tibetan
Buddhist move or I mean you know or a
Christian move lots of people have made
that move no one owns it
means I wake up right but then my waking
up my state experience of knowing true
nature is interpreted through an
ethnocentric prism which is why I've got
right and therefore I think we're the
chosen people and the shaman who wakes
up goes in massacres the next tribe so
I've got to wake up and I've got to grow
up now I'm worldcentric so my risen
Christ what is now a world centric cares
for all of humanity as a social activist
now in Cosmo Sentra
so my risen Christ is the personal
basically evolutionary impulse yeah and
so so there's three kind of if you will
there's three divine forces that come
together there's sacred text but as a
living reified I think we promise not to
use the word reified so I take it back
but as a living kind of a living
pregnant expression of a divine force
sacred text then there's the reader of
the text Barbara right and then there's
the divine force third-person running
through reality so when God meets God
right and has a threesome Barbara the
sacred text and source and that text is
reinterpreted but it doesn't mean that
the text is now no longer authentic the
text has always interpreted the text is
never not interpreted yeah so by
actually claiming that text right and
evolving the text something happens I
just give you one example then tens of
you Daniel thank you for this is so it's
so so important it's not talked about
anyplace but in the spiritual scene
which is why these new movements and
evolutionary movements are disconnected
from the basic you know spiritual
impetus of so many of the great
traditions and therefore become much
less effective but let's give you one
example take the binding of issac famous
biblical story Kierkegaard talked about
in his book fear of trembling you know
father and son camping trip hey sound
let's go for a camping trip oh we're
going to a sacrifice here Oh where's
where's the cow no cow what are we going
to sacrifice I think you okay so that
story is read on the Jewish New Year of
Rosh Hashanah kind of a traumatizing
story that's why all Jews are either
therapists or in therapy because we read
this story on Rosh Hashanah
oh my god but if you actually read the
story more carefully you realize that
actually Abraham himself in the
tradition was offered right as a
sacrifice by his father the major
tradition about that and so in this
pattern of repetition compulsion right
evarin goes to offer his son right which
is a cycle of abyss and here's that as
the god voice and actually when it says
in God right tested Abraham the word
used is Elohim which is the Hebrew word
right for an impersonal force and if you
read the text carefully in chapter 22 of
the book of Genesis what happens is
Abraham wakes up and realizes that he's
misinterpreted the god voice it Abel was
responsible for disambiguating the god
voice and realized that he's actually
projected onto the god voice right the
voice of repetition compulsion right now
when she's now right the cycle of
obesity is now abusing and when Abram
passes the test not by sacrificing his
son but by taking responsibility for the
god voice right in realizing that
actually Elohim doesn't want to
sacrifice his son now all of a sudden
the sacred story becomes unbelievably
powerful and I got that not by making it
up a very close read of the sacred text
in which the name of God first is
eloheem right which is right this in
personal force and then the word changes
to Adonai which is the personal intimate
God of love now stay with me for one
more second in the 13th century the
Zohar the primary nagging him open opus
text of Hebrew mysticism reading this
text in Aramaic right audaciously she
says Elohim God tested Abraham the
source says Elohim God died eight sohara
that's the evil inclination 13th century
esoteric text which has an evolutionary
sense - it says what God is this that's
the evil inclination so much we need to
actually liberate the text and actually
this is an Orthodox text this is not a
kind of her this is the Orthodox
internal text that got lost so we need
to reclaim that as part of our
evolutionary heritage and reclaim sacred
text in order to create a cohesive
emergent evolutionary moment which
everyone has a seat at the table I think
so I I mean I don't know the Jewish
mysticism but certainly from the New
Testament yeah it is it is a forecast of
potentiality and we can avoid Armageddon
which is of course the worst of it by
connecting as co-creators that's the
alternative the message I got if I might
say so from a Christ consciousness is
the alternative to Armageddon is a
planetary Pentecost right when enough of
us here from within in our own language
in our own spirit the words of the
divine right in our own images right
then we the walls go down and that
beautiful and that sacred text it's not
it's not for everybody there's a whole
part of you know humanity even in our
circles who are wonderful that basically
can't locate themselves in a great
tradition which is beautiful
yeah that's complete beautiful but
that's and and we need to create a new
language right of spirit which is beyond
the great traditions and we need to
allow people to be part of the great
traditions participate in evolving those
texts evolving the great tradition
involving the great evolving the god
voice yeah which is not disrespectful to
the divine it's the ultimate devotion
it's the divine in us evolve in the text
like happened in every generation that's
what's critical it's not that there was
a there was a static text and we're now
come along and evolving it was always
being evolved and so that participating
in that way you get to be a dual citizen
you get to be a citizen of Christianity
and a citizen of this world evolutionary
movement in dual citizenship it is a
real option to meta points that I hear
you saying that I think are defining of
the emerging epoch yeah one of them is
as you said early on there's a great
reconstruction effort that we are
participating in here post
deconstruction what is a new narrative
that is reclaiming and I see you doing
this
really intentionally beautifully all
throughout reclaiming the beautiful
parts of previous models at a second
tier in a roller higher level and in
order to do that you've got to divest
them of the not functional or you know
no longer relevant parts and so
reclaiming subjectivity as meaningful
right not just the epiphenomena of
objectivity as as fundamental also
requires
recognizing the cognitive models through
which subjectivities experience
absolutely the bias that can be in there
I'm working to evolve the cognitive
model absolutely and so that's such a
deep thing to say yes subjectivity is
real and important it also comes through
cognitive models so we have to evolve
these to be able to interpret this ever
more meaningfully so that's like the
meta thing that I get there that's so
important and the second part that goes
with that is I think one of the
definitions of the emerging epic is
synthesis absolutely and synthesis
requires taking the functional elements
of everything that's come before the
word local and now that we're global and
can couldn't have done this before
divested of the local only right the
cultural dysfunctional parties right
synthesize them that creates a
synergistic emergent of something that
is fundamentally new but that includes
and transcends and that's in religion
and spirituality and with science and
all that it's in social systems with the
functional parts of Marxist and
capitalism anarchism imperialism to sing
to new models that really are
structurally different than but
inclusive of all of the beautiful
synergistic synergistic emergences I
mean really you're really you're calling
us to the holy trinity which is
aggregate I'm gonna make it up right now
aggregate integrate evolve right I mean
that and that is this this movement of
synthesis but actually sitter justly
produces something new in terms of the
first thing that daniel said it's just
worth pointing out when when daniel says
subjectivity what he means is the
quality the interpersonal quality and
what he's pointing to is is that that
subjectivity shouldn't be dismissed or
disqualified and what mumford called a
disqualification of the universe but
actually needs to be reclaimed however
we need to reclaim it at a higher level
of consciousness because now we're aware
that it's mediated to the prisms of our
consciousness and that there are
cognitive biases that are at play so you
need to actually clarify the lenses of
perception and not make a regressive
move right which is this comfort move we
actually we need to go to an involved
pleasure in which these voices become
clearer and clearer right stunning you
know yeah beautiful and I thank you
Daniel yes and I feel I personally
connected to the impulse of creation ya
know so it's it's strange to say
subjective or person
all relationship to the origin of
creation and the immense creativity that
everybody incarnate
so the personal subjective for me has
become a connection with the process of
creation that is also personal as well
as process well who said thank you
Barbara that's the personal yeah that's
the personal and I feel both of them
simultaneously but and that's the thing
that both of the simultaneously maybe
will will conclude with that right just
like you when you were talking about in
session three Daniel about Harris's work
right and we talked about that all the
dimensions of reality Tetra arise they
all arise right the interior of the
individual the interior of culture right
the exterior of the individual texture
of culture they're all arising together
so these three phases of the divine
right the eye the interior of individual
of the we right the interior right that
the thou the second person and the it
which is all the third person for a
second third person they're all
happening together so in the one hand
right Barbara says I'm connecting to the
impulse of evolution we feel that on the
other hand the impulse of evolution is
saying thank you Barbara
yeah and they're happening at the same
time and the ability to hold that and
not need to make one right in the other
wrong those are all valid and they're
integrated aggregate integrate evolved
at a higher level is how we create the
new human yes well they're all
internalized yeah right and interiors
are real yes
just like exteriors are yeah awesome
awesome
hey coming up next week have a great
night do some frame