hey everybody we are back this is the
Jack Murphy live podcast you can find me
and Jack Murphy at Twitter at Jack
Murphy live you can go to my website
Jack Murphy live.com sign up for the
mailing list go to Amazon buy my book
Democrat horrible and please help
support the cause thank you for tuning
back in I really appreciate we've had
some great guests lately and leading up
to today we have an even better guest
coming on John rabe
he is a former military captain in the
Air Force a technology company CEO and a
thought leader in understanding open
source intelligence networks the future
of communication and politics and he has
an amazing patreon and blog called
global guerrillas that's the best five
dollars you will ever spend on the
Internet
I highly recommend you go out and get
that he's also available on Twitter and
I'm very excited to have him here with
us today so John thank you so much and
how are you doing Oh doing pretty good
thanks jack
Oh awesome so like I was saying to you
before I like to give a little bit of
context for the listener so that they
understand who we're talking to here and
you have such an impressive background I
thought we'd spend a few minutes just
talking about how you came to the point
where you're at today and one of the
first things that jumped off the page at
me is that you were I think a captain in
the in the Air Force and were involved
in some really interesting stuff can you
talk about that a little bit yeah well I
went to the Air Force Academy and that's
the way you easiest way to become a
pilot in the Air Force at least it used
to be astronautical engineering was
hoping to get into the space program but
halfway through pilot training the
shuttle blew up and the space program
just pretty much died so I ended up
switching gears and ended up going
through c-130s for a couple years and
then I got drafted into a special ops
unit and what kind of aircraft were you
piloting on those things cuz that just
blows my mind a variety of different
aircraft
okay okay okay and then after the
military you went on to I think he went
on to Yale for graduate school and he
started a couple of tech enterprises can
you talk about a couple of those because
I think I read the
that you were involved in one of the
first blogging platforms is that right
yeah yeah when I got out of grad school
it was a 95 and I was looking for a job
and they had this you know when wired
was a bimonthly Wired magazine yeah so
it was a bimonthly at the time and they
had an interview with this guy called
George colony the CEO of Forrester
Research if you've heard of Forster it's
a technology research company docked in
Cambridge yeah and it asked him what he
did all day and he said well I said it
at the windowsill looking out over
Harvard Square with my feet up on the
you know thinking about the future of
technology and I thought okay I want to
do that yeah think about the future of
technology looking out over the over
Harvard Square so I applied and somehow
you know is the most intense interview
process I've ever been through it ended
up with like 15 analysts versus me for
two hours defending it yeah and these
guys are all you know razor sharp and
they were they're out for blood so I
ended up coming in right at the
beginning of the Internet and they
hadn't really developed their internet
coverage and I was writing about it and
I ended up becoming the guy that every
paper quoted so I had the you know every
week was Wall Street Journal New York
Times Business Week you know constantly
quoting me and I spent hours and hours
on the phone with these reporters and
talking to companies and got involved in
virtually every startup every startup
that launched on the internet between 95
and 97 came through my doors talk about
yeah what's cool and somehow I was they
had a kind of a knack for figuring out
how technology was evolving and where
was going in and how to explain it
simply so I'm ended up getting out of
force during 97 is starting in
e-commerce or a finance startup and back
in 97 you know there weren't any big
companies in finance online it was just
they were just starting and they saw
their business shift over so I did a
company called Gomez we did rated the
brokers in the banks and then we ended
up building a performance network that
tested the perform you know transaction
systems of these these brokers and banks
from 52 cities around the world
you know 23 different internet backbones
it was like a big technical thing and
that ended up selling for
about 300 million nice couple years ago
yeah you know I also learned about
finance my role even though I built a
thing
diminished over time and then I left
that in 2001 and joined a company called
userland and we were I was I had written
a report back in 97 on a Forrester I
called a personal broadcast networks
this idea that you would you know you
every individual would publish to the
system and then people would subscribe
to it and then there would be this
network of self publishing of you know
text and video and and images and people
were looking at me like I was crazy it
was like what are you talking about we
had Netscape and Microsoft you know
knocking on my door saying you know what
is this how do you build it all right
and I gave him some ideas but it really
wasn't built yet but I knew that was
coming so I was looking around and I saw
a company in 2001 called userland
and they had the first you know personal
blogging system and they had a spec they
were working on called RSS Wow and I
joined them and we launched the first
personal blogging platform you know
personal blogging platform which had a
publishing and subscribe feature where
you could subscribe using RSS we opened
the spec up for everybody to use and it
really simple syndication became kind of
the standard for a bit and you'd get a
feed that looked very similar to Twitter
I mean it was had the RSS had that you
know limited number of characters
mm-hm and and it looked exactly like a
Twitter feed and then you could take any
of those items and then you could repo
you know add some text to it and post it
to your blog so it would look basically
a early Twitter early Facebook wow I'm
back in 2001 and it got big got really
started to take off when cut a deal with
the New York Times to start having them
syndicate their content using RSS so
yeah that that kind of turned the tide
on that but you know three years later
there's you know Facebook took out
started and in a dorm room using that
same model and Twitter took off a couple
years after that and
we have you know what we have but wasn't
able to make money on it but it was fun
doing that brand RSS still very very
well used and popular today right I mean
I put oh yeah podcast via RSS yep and so
in about 2003 I was watching what was
going on with the war in Iraq and I saw
some stuff that was familiar to me both
you know doing you know counterterrorism
counterinsurgency work earlier in my
military career and then what I knew
about the internet and open-source
software development and how the
internet changes the way we structure
organizations you know how phone systems
you pick with us you know wireless
technology structures organizations and
so I read started a blog called global
guerrillas in 2003 and started writing
and I did that for years and it got
bigger and bigger and I ended up
publishing a book in 2007 called
brave new war then ended up being pretty
popular
you know chairman Joint Chiefs read it
and was waving it around I ended up
doing briefings with the CIA and the NSA
and and all over the DoD and the JCS for
years and what was the what was the
basically the premise look yeah the
premise is that insurgency and warfare
was changing I mean that when we used to
fight insurgency there used to be a you
know single cohesive group you know
there was a political cadre at the top
and they had you know different
departments that mirrored what you saw
in the nation-state so you had you know
economics Ministry of propaganda and
then it the end result was a pyramid
like organization so if you wanted to
roll it up like you would in Algeria or
you would in Vietnam you'd work on the
bottom you find somebody that was
vulnerable flip them and get them to
report on the person above them and then
on and on and on up until you get to the
the leadership cadre and then you kill
them or imprison them and the whole
thing collapses well you know modernist
urticae is different it looks like an
open-source network and an open-source
software we have lots of different
groups coming together to build
something complex
and these groups these individuals don't
have to agree on anything other than
that they want to move the insurgency
forward or the product forward right and
in Iraq we had upwards of 70 different
groups all cooperating together to fight
the insurgency and there was you know a
bunch of different flavors of jihadis
there was you know Baathists that were
Pro Saddam Methodist or anti Saddam they
were nationalists there were criminal
organizations and whenever we found one
of these groups and rolled them up there
was you know another 69 to go and then
the group the group need to go up with
like one or two layers and that was it
that was the end of the group and then
there was a commercial interactions
where people were selling their their
expertise you know you had different you
know when you would late in IAD there
was a you know the bomb maker the
financier the the in placer who I
usually had a hole in the in the bottom
of the wheel you know the footwell of
their car so they can place the ie D
your then you had a Scouter who would
find the exact the best place to do it
and that would hit a convoy and then the
trigger man when the trigger people
usually would video you know what they
were doing and then used that as
collateral for selling their services to
do the next to ided job and these were
these were lessons that we learned in
Iraq you're saying and addressing yeah
that was just from Iraq so my my
projection was you know here's all these
you know there's a very different
dynamic here and that this is going to
change you know protest politics and
warfare and the potential is that we're
gonna see a lot of disruption because of
these small groups can you know do a lot
of damage because they can do something
called systems disruption which is kind
of like sabotage in the old days but
we're much more networked in an
interconnected world now and that means
that systems disruption is like a whole
nother you know two or three orders of
magnitude you know more damage if you
hit the the system in that you're hit
the network in the right place you know
you knock out the right node you know I
call it the system Punk'd which is
similar to a blitzkrieg warfare
you have a chapel it's like the point of
greatest emphasis for breaking through
the enemy's line and then you know you
send the tanks into the rear area in in
the network warfare you would have the
system pumped and you would knock that
out and that would cause a cascade of
failure that would knock out the entire
network and then you know cascade into
the next one and the next one in the
next one and that very small groups very
in even individuals could could do that
and initially I was looking mostly at
the physical infrastructure rather than
the online you know infrastructure
political and social because I figured
it was harder to do it was very easy to
do this the physical and we had examples
of it like in Nigeria where the group
called mend which is the movement for
the emancipation of the Niger Delta was
wiping out about a million barrels a day
of oil production and it was a light
sweet crude that we love you know
without the sulphur content and they did
we're doing that in 2006 and 7 and we
saw the same thing in Iraq where the the
oil production that we hope to have
after Saddam was gone didn't materialize
in fact it went down because the
insurgents are knocking out the oil so
these lessons that we learned what does
that mean that we were wholly unprepared
to face them because I remember it
seemed like Rumsfeld and the crew they
wanted to you know to take out the top
and they thought that that was sort of
gonna be the end of it if I'm
remembering correctly I mean this is a
while ago and I was not quite as old
then as I am now but that seemed to be
my my general you know take from just
being a lay person involved Oh most
definitely um yeah I they were totally
floored I mean they were wiped out in
terms of ideas in terms of how to
respond to this I mean I wrote an op-ed
in the New York Times about how to
respond to this using you know thinking
in terms of open source dynamics back in
New York Times in 2005 and that got me
my initial publicity and visibility to
write the book but when they started
using the thinking in the book and
started looking at the world in a
different way solutions presented
themselves and in Iraq
the interesting thing was that the
al-qaeda in Iraq Fork the insurgency a
bit and what they did is they blew up
the golden Mosque which is you know
trying to create more of a shyah shyah
civil war okay and that that initiated a
basically an ethnic cleansing of Baghdad
where these big Shia militia started
rolling through Baghdad cleansing
neighborhood after neighborhood and the
insurgents were caught between these big
militias that they couldn't form a big
enough defense to defend themselves
against them and if they did they were
hit by the Iraqi military in the US
military
so they're caught in this three from
whore it means total total losing
position all caused by the al Qaeda
expanding expanding the fight and
forking forking the insurgency and bring
in a direction that wasn't designed to
go right do you think that we've
sufficiently learned those lessons from
then and from your book oh I don't I
don't think so um it was just it just
lucky that Petraeus was listening to his
lower-level commanders and heard that
you know these groups are ready to flip
and work with the Americans in order to
stop the ethnic cleansing from wiping
them out and they did you know the fact
that they listened and they caught the
opportunity you know was it was the good
thing we certainly didn't see it in the
in the macro level we should have been
we're still in Afghanistan we started
doing the same kind of thing in Syria no
you know it's just a bad grant strategy
I that's what I wrote about in January
right all right
your grant Chatterjee just a little bit
more on the subject before we transition
which I think it is actually smooth
transition into the main topic for today
is what it I used to work with a guy who
was when a head of one of the largest
electrical associations and by that I
mean like power companies and power
grids and he he used to spend a ton of
time cooperating with national security
folks to try to you know you know harden
or whatever safe in our
our vulnerability is in the electrical
grid because that's obviously like a
really weak point in a high leverage
opportunity for damage on a system level
do you think and how are we reacting the
United States to like the opposite sort
of you know tactics being used against
us here domestically I think we did
pretty good
I mean what I found is a lot of the
effectiveness of system disruption
depends on how tight the market is so in
oil because the market was tight because
of Chinese demand increasing in the
early 2000 every a bit of disruption
just drove the price up it went up in
you know 2007 remember went up to $147 a
barrel right yeah peaked there in the in
terms of electricity it works if most
effectively when when there's peak
demand but it's got to be tied to a
larger political movement there a larger
political kind of situation and we
haven't gotten to that point yet right
so when we do I suspect we'll probably
see that flare up pretty quickly
and it's been very effective in terms of
you know because once you start bringing
down the infrastructure what happens is
people search for sources of order and
sources of protection that are local if
they're not getting it at the national
level and that causes how you know very
quick polarization right you know it
happened in Iraq happens in other places
where where that kind of disruption
occurs you said when we do that sound
pretty certain do you think that that
type of swells are inevitable here
domestically oh well no I mean I mean I
probably overstep there but it okay if
it happens versus when you know it it's
far easier to disrupt online in a
disrupt social systems and it is
disrupting physical systems right which
is which is a great segue into the main
conversation for today because well I
live I live in that online world I live
in that information matrix and I have
personally been involved in
being attacked by you know what I think
you call us open network insurgencies
and and you know basically mobs coming
to to hit me where it hurts the most
in my professional reputation and taking
away my ability to earn income for my
family you know getting me banned and
stricken from coaching Little League
even even like putting pressure on my
landlord to evict me from my residence
all because of sort of what I would
consider to be misinformation
disinformation spread about me because
someone decided one day I was I was the
you know target right and so this is
this is sort of the environment that I'm
living in personally and I want to talk
about sort of the grander picture which
you've written about a ton and and I had
Jordan Hall on yesterday and we were
talking extensively about the blue
church and and he was calling the
opposition the red religion and I
believe you have been calling it also
sort of red insurgency and most my
listeners are definitely red versus blue
and so we definitely enjoy that
perspective and so I wanted to just
start start off this conversation with
you by talking about you know can you
tell me what is what is the insurgency
as you see it today and what is the the
context and what is the context
politically culturally and sort of give
your definition and your sort of
perspective on that and then we can you
know go on from there sure yeah Jordan
is a good friend of mine we've been
trying to think about this for quite a
quite a long time but we have slightly
different takes you know I I approach it
from what I saw in terms of how people
were actually engaging in conflict and
then worked back from there I don't you
know theory craft first and then try to
find examples from examples back so what
I saw back in 2000
ooh wow I guess it'd be 2015-16 is that
there was an assertion see forming an
online insurgency an open-source
insurgency and they were starting to
back trumpet and that drew on the the
the earlier Tea Party roots
it all goes back to the big financial
crisis that was unaddressed
that kind of really shattered that a lot
of the legitimacy of the American
government in 2008 it wasn't even so
much that people lost money which it was
a big deal but it was that they didn't
punish anyone for it right like not like
not a single person was prosecuted
instead yeah right and you know and they
didn't do the you know the kind of big
programs to get people out and the same
thing is happening in Europe because of
German austerity they'd never been able
to kind of spend their way out of the
reason the return already been in since
2008 so when the Germans got him in a
hammerlock and the real estate thing is
so it was very fascinating for me
because at that at that time I was
actually working in real estate and I
originally had worked for a hedge fund
in 2000 2003 or so and then I
transitioned from there into real estate
and I was doing on the ground real
estate development I was a a broker a
builder you know in an architecture firm
we did design-build we did multifamily
properties commercial properties and
such and so like I I lived seeing people
that made like fourteen thousand dollars
a year come to the table with four for
loans at a hundred and fifteen percent
LTV who had no business buying condos
and I'm sitting there across the table
collecting my 300 grand from this person
that I knew was no not ever gonna be
able to to manage this and you know man
I lived the insanity and and with my
background in the hedge fund and fixed
income finance I understood the
mortgage-backed security system and how
the liquidity was being pumped into the
system and how underwriting standards
had totally collapsed and it was just
basically like a giant bilking of the
entire nation to feed Wall Street and
then when it all went to nobody
nobody got in trouble and and when I
both read the book the Big Short and saw
the movie and I got to tell you watching
a movie I got emotional because it was
such a scam perpetrated on the American
people and then nobody went punished and
and I you know people like to blame bush
or Obama for the way they handled it but
the truth is they both
their hand in it and it was sort of not
a Democrat issue not a Republican issue
but really an establishment issue right
where they both they both just turn
their back on the regular people and gay
and really that was the point at which
income inequality and wealth inequality
in the United States exploded in a
basically straight-up fashion on the
chart I think right right right
and the legitimacy just evaporated yeah
which was the which was a key thing is
like you know people that used to trust
in the system actually I mean they would
the trust was a little shaken after the
Iraq war you know you know getting into
into a war based on false pretences they
had nothing to do with 9/11 it was just
a war of choice and it was it was
stupidly conceived and poorly fought and
you know even Afghanistan was bad
because I mean 18 years of doing the
same thing you know next year is gonna
be better let's keep on going right you
know that's just it shakes your trust in
the system but the financial crisis was
really like wow I mean this is really
corrupt I mean this is like this is like
and when we the damage done I mean if
you're looking at lost growth and
everything else it's about 30 trillion
dollars right that's just insane amount
of money right and we had the
opportunity it really was also an
opportunity for us to take on this you
know big project I call it you know
tilting at windmills uh but like I think
I might write about this a windmill
theory is that we need a big project in
the post Cold War area mmm era to kind
of keep us focused on the future and
keep us together we did that with like
building the Internet in the late 90s
everyone was focused on that they'd
absorbed our attention billions went
into it and we had long-term benefits
from that right and then in the response
to terrorism in the early 2000s I mean
even though we spent five and a half
trillion dollars on these Wars you know
it it brought us together for about a
decade
yeah and then we had the financial
crisis and it should have brought us
together cleaning it up right and and in
getting us out of that thing but we
didn't do anything right we lost and and
all of a sudden the nation started
fracturing and they going you know what
are we doing together I mean why are we
even you know are these people or even
related to me or you know if I call a
fictive kinship is this idea of national
this idea of a nation is based on
something called a fictive kinship we
have common stories we have common goals
we're better you know they're kind of
related to me yeah and you know I trust
what they say because they're related to
me right an imagined imagined order that
we all adhere to and then we all sort of
believe in the same narrative and that's
right we maintain unity and one thing
pardon me if I meant to say this too
many times throughout today but one
thing Jordan said yesterday was that the
financial crisis also was like a sign of
the end of the meritocracy like right it
exposed once and for all the final
exposure that the people who were
leading us weren't necessarily the best
at leading us they were just simply the
best at attaining power and then using
it to their advantage most definitely
but it was it was a sign that the
economic meritocracy was flawed and
broken yeah because the guys that were
making the big bucks were doing it in
criminal fashion and they were and they
weren't getting punished for it so you
could you know steal a billion not go to
jail not even be castigated and then you
could steal a buck and you go to check
all right right and then you have the
other side the government which is this
and the academia and you know everybody
who is you know thinking about how how
to manage the country and they said you
know trust us we're authorities were
experts and they got it so horribly
wrong right I mean you know when you
have people up there saying you know
this is one in ten thousand year crisis
and you know my friend now and they seem
collab we would talk about you know what
dataset are you using yeah okay one in
ten thousand years
we even had this system for more than a
couple decades so it's you know one in
ten thousand years making that kind of
projection it's just nuts right but MIT
showed that they were hollow that they
didn't have any in a complex world the
world the world is too complex for their
expertise to have as much value as it
used to you know the world used to be
more just complicated okay and then you
can you could you could engineers
society to a certain extent using
expertise and that now we're complex
yeah would you would you talk about the
difference between complicated and
complex because that's something that
sort of keeps coming up and
conversations that I'm having
and it it sounds like semantics but it's
really not it's a very clear distinction
right yeah I wrote up a report on that a
couple months ago so if you get to that
and the thing is it talked about how to
manage a complex world or a society in a
complex world it's this so there's four
classes of system Souza's the simple and
that's like simple heuristics you know
which is you know simple decision making
processes that we follow every day you
know you get up in the morning and you
go to work and things like this and you
know how to solve those and then then
there's a complicated world a
complicated system and that's like what
you do with engineering and that's why
you know doctors do you know you get
degrees and you can handle it lots of
complexity and things work according to
the rules of you know that we've
developed but you know takes a lot of
Education and to to do that well at the
large scale and then you move into you
know what's called complexity in a
complex world the system takes on
characteristics that aren't predicted it
has emergent features and and and goes
in directions that you didn't you
couldn't anticipate and it's not just
because everything is interrelated it's
a it it creates his own tendencies and
and follows through with those so you
could have a policy that goes in one
direction day one and day three the
policy is not working anymore because
the system changed completely overnight
right so it's like Starbucks in their
policy about you know having everyone
you know pay for a coffee or something
before they use the bathroom
well the within within a day that whole
policy was thrown to the hell we had to
change it and fix it and come up with
something else or face another firestorm
and face you know boycotts and faced all
this other stuff so I mean it was
amazing how quickly think I mean that's
just a goofy little example but the
thing is it works like that everywhere
now so these guys who were experts with
these you know even one year plans they
can't they can't get more than a couple
months into these plants before they
fall apart right because
because acting within the system changes
the system itself right yard.that just
the system is just moving in directions
that you can anticipate all right all
right and that what you can do you can't
even really and make the kind of
predictions as to what the system will
be if you take undertake this action or
that action often what you have to do is
prototype or you know come up with you
know five or six different potential
actions get them out there and find
which one actually takes hold mmm and
you reinforce the one that actually is
getting getting traction
mm-hm and and we see that we see that in
our information conflict today right
yeah it's just the system is constantly
discrediting the experts which then you
know creates this kind of roiling in
atmosphere you know nothing seems to
work everything seems to be broken
there's no one seems to be able to fix
stuff you know we can't get healthcare
because we pay three times more than
everybody else and right now for
instance we pay as much per capita in
public healthcare money as Germany and
every other developed country in the
world we pay as much mm-hmm but we only
insure about 1/3 of the people or if we
want to build a piece of you know subway
mile a mile of subway cost three times
as much as anywhere else in the world
and the people doing the work get paid
the same mmm so you know you can't it's
all these like built-in things that are
preventing us from getting things done
and and you move in one direction and
you're facing obstacles you didn't
anticipate so you know one of the things
that this environment makes possible is
that you can use disruption to push a
complex system into chaos right and in
chaos it's very uncomfortable when
people get really nutty and they have
you know chaos is when everybody is
making decisions on their own without
reference to anybody else right all
right without a reference to any kind of
known rules they're just making stuff up
on the fly as they're going through
there they're grasping great straws and
they're they're not they're not working
in concert and so it's very
uncomfortable to be there and people
don't want to be there what happens is
if you can
get a system into chaos like through a
disruption a political disruption when
it comes back out of chaos into
complexity you can reset the system you
can change the dynamics of the system
change the dynamics of the debate we saw
that happening in immigration recently
every time it got chaotic it came when
it came back it was moving it closer
towards one pole or the other so getting
back you know getting out of this kind
of this world is you know how it works
is that we what I saw early on in you
know 2016 is that it was something I
called it open source insurgency and we
had seen that in politics in Egypt in
other places it was open source protest
where lots of different groups
everything from the Muslim Brotherhood
to the Democratic groups the feminist
groups in Egypt all came together in an
open source protest and they only had
one goal one plausible promise was to
get rid of Mubarak which was the source
of all their corruption and they all
stayed together until that ended and the
leadership of that protest they didn't
let anyone like take control of it and
hijack it whenever they wanted to talk
about you know a new constitution or
this or that
you know people just ignored him only
the leaders actually move them towards
getting rid of Mubarak they followed
right and so we had something similar
with Trump is that he was like a grenade
for the insurgency to go into Washington
and disrupt it and they backed him as
long as he was a grenade people
continued to back him right so did you
see the beginning of the insurgency
before Trump announced and before he
started shaking things up and doing his
thing like the groundwork was there what
were the conditions that enabled that
because I've always argued that the
Trump phenomenon is you know at least in
retrospect a predictable outcome of the
circumstances prior to the 2016 election
and it's not that Trump came in and
started and changed everything and made
it you know bent it all to his will he
just happened to be whether out of pure
genius or happenstance riding the right
wave at the right time
yeah I don't I don't see him as much as
as much of a leader as a kind of a
weapon mmm the insurgency I think I see
great so they propel him forward he
channels them give them certain
superpowers I mean like for instance
anything he's attacked for that isn't
part of you know the reason the group
the insurgency is held together is
ignored so you know all that other you
know Access Hollywood tapes and
everything else that doesn't matter it
all just felt you know would kill it
would have killed a normal politician it
didn't even touch him because people
people weren't looking at him as a
candidate per se they were seeing him as
a weapon and they were sending it in to
Washington to break things
what's what's identified in this vase
the days and the hoos well is it I mean
everybody who is shaken by the 2008
financial crash I mean really where that
legitimacy was lost for them and they
sauce things were totally broken and
corrupt and they want to change right
and they wanted that just a little bit
of change they you know in fact a lot of
them voted for Obama looking for that
change they didn't get it
and the people who didn't you weren't
getting it from the the Republican Party
they were just you know part of the
problem they would say that they were
trying to clean things up or you know
XYZ and they weren't doing anything and
this was a chance to first in royal the
Republican Party oh you know take it
over and then take over the White House
and it you know it's a lot of different
groups I mean it was like you know you
could it's it's hard to even classify
because it was more individuals and it
was like formal groups that were coming
together under this under under know to
push Trump forward right and the thing
about open source insurgencies they're
amazingly innovative we saw this in Iraq
is that you know the I Edie designs
weren't developed by you know one cadre
dedicated to that there were you know
thousands of different developers and if
they came up with something good they
spread it throughout the whole
insurgency the plans were shared and
like open source software and you know
we'd come up we had a three billion
dollar program to counter
IEDs we'd come up with a countermeasure
in three weeks later they would have a
counter to our counter right right
it would fast I mean they did as much in
about a year as the IRA did in 2003
massive innovation so they were really
really quick and the same thing with the
you know Trump's insurgency is that they
were coming in in this case they're
coming up with different types of
attacks and different types of framing
things framing issues and he would take
things out of that you know the
contribution basket and then give it
national platform either you or another
you think he was he crowd-sourced his
platform rather than rather than came at
a top-down correct interesting yeah I
mean there's lots of people of course
isn't sorry about that yeah there's lots
of people in that you know the campaign
and other places that would say they're
all claiming credit for it but it was it
was the this urgency they did it right
you know I was interviewed a week after
Trump on reddit the Donald all right
yeah I mean and those guys I mean the
300 thousand there this three hundred
thousand centipedes that we're working
on that stuff every day yeah and it
4chan guys and they and everybody who is
kind of like you know mimetic boiler
rooms I mean just they were in the
garage innovating innovating innovating
finding ways to spread it and then it
went through Facebook and the cool thing
about Facebook and the danger from the
elite perspective is that there's no
single place you could stand on Facebook
and see everything mmm broadcast medium
right so everything is broken into these
little neighborhoods and so when the
message goes out it goes out on a
neighborhood level and you can't see it
from above and so is it it made it
possible for lots of information and
lots of you know kind of insurgent
mimetic kind of warfare
you know disruptive stuff to get
distributed without any counter I
thought a break so my first my first
thing when you mentioned 4chan is that
those guys didn't lose their shirts in
the financial crisis in 2008 nor nor did
they have their heads all the way so far
up like tarp and the application of all
and such do you think that and maybe I'm
wrong but D they're angry in different
ways yeah that's one thing people angry
for it's like a it's like the Iraqi
insurgency right
there's people angry for against the
2008 financial crisis and there's people
who were angry at all that you know the
social kind of PC stuff that was like
Inc they felt was encroaching you know
there's a guy who wrote a book Phillip
Bobbitt you ever hear of a shield of
Achilles so he wrote this book back in
the early 2000s and it was really big in
foreign policy circles in me it was
really popular and he outlined a kind of
this idea that the nation-state this
idea of a cohesive nation-state that
promised economic security and and
protection and you know physical
protection and and cohesiveness was in
the post-cold war world giving way to a
thing called the market state and the
market stake just provided you
opportunity and it connected up globally
and that opportunity was very kind of a
media liberal kind of idea but it what
happened is the political goods wasn't
they didn't deliver economic progress
economic security what they offered was
the opportunity to become anything right
a more of a kind of an identity
explosion I mean in Europe it would be
like you can travel anywhere and work
anywhere you you don't have any borders
and restrictions you you can you know
gender identity you can have any kind of
you know identity formulation that
you're interested in and they they
package that as a political good in
route as a replacement for Economic
Security and they put the two at odds
saying that you can't have one without
the other it's like and there are a lot
of people who you know if you're in the
upper-middle class and you're globally
interconnected and you're doing really
really well the top 30 percent typically
are in every country in the developed
world you know what they're looking at
for is in terms of political
is that you know that's social identity
social borderless kind of political good
but forever you know the bottom 70%
they're not globally competitive yeah it
used to be protected by the nation-state
they feel abandoned that you made there
they're going you know it doesn't really
matter if I have all this identity stuff
if I you know I'm not making any
progress I'm living you know less
well-off every year yeah I can't in 2001
I guess I had finished grad school and I
did a joint degree at Georgetown School
Foreign Service and International
Affairs International Finance and I was
set up to be an international investment
banker and I was so excited about
joining the global elite and traveling
in the world and you know being in the
upper echelon and and being
supranational and multi Continental and
you know the whole the whole thing was
so sexy and attractive and you know in
my in my book I lay out my own guilt
about that about being a formal former
globalist because I really I really did
drink the the dogma a lot our whole
heartedly back then and maybe luckily
for me 9/11 happened and I didn't
actually get my job on Wall Street in
that field but like I saw it and I saw
the the attraction and then I also began
to see what global development was
actually doing to people and what it was
doing to the middle class and then what
the trade-offs were and I think that
that was one of your other points beyond
the 2008 financial crisis that sort of
have left the confidence in the system
shaken was the impact of global trade
and globalization and and I don't
necessarily just mean like we trade this
for that with China but like foreign
direct investment where we put money
into other countries we you know and
demand all these law changes and
stripped their stripped their soils and
poison their water her and take away
their rights I mean really the dark
underside of globalism is is really
Shady and what it's done to the middle
class to in the United States I mean is
that we got one of your fundamental you
know oh yeah you know I mean there was a
so many things they could have done we
could have done better
they predict you like for instance in
global trade and I saw the kind of lay
the onboarding of the there are former
enemies of Russia and China after the
Cold War ended as one of the kind of the
key things that we had to get right
after the Cold War ended and we messed
it up in particularly with China is that
we just you know we thought that just
connecting him up to the global market
would make them more democratic it was
inevitable and that yeah was is like a
limited good would come from it right
and what and eventually what happened
also is that you know there was all
these companies that wanted to invest
like Apple and stuff that when it had a
greed factor to get into China that was
pushing this policy forward but what
happened is that they are command
economy and you know given unrestricted
access to the US economy they were able
to you know throw resources at you know
export infrastructure that allowed them
to wipe out markets in the states I mean
their their trade deficit grew so fast
that it that was wiping out a company
after company across the you know the
middle of America and we did nothing I
mean adults back in the cold warrior you
know with Baker well you know he did I
mean at least he was adult with the
truck when we ran into this with Japan
we said okay we saw that they were
killing in the u.s. Cardo industry we
almost killed it they said let's cap it
at 60 billion dollars trade deficit you
have to figure out they went to Japan
and said you have to figure out how to
balance this or just restrict it and it
worked we saved the car industry
everything seemed to you know stabilize
after a while and we didn't do the same
thing with with China in 2002 and we
were focused on the Middle East instead
it's like we couldn't hold two you know
two ideas at the same time you know and
we just let it go and it just you could
you could actually map the Trump
counties County for County with the
counties that were most affected by
Chinese trade Wow
that makes perfect sense to me I
remember in school we used to call we
used to call that idea that false idea
the embrace of death that like if we
just embraced these other countries that
they would then somehow turn it
to capitalistic you know free markets
and free minds but that obviously didn't
work and what's what's ironic to me in
some respects is looking back on the I
suppose what 1999 the WTO protests in
Seattle and right they were people were
protesting bringing bringing China into
the WTO and normalizing trade with them
and man I thought I thought that all
those people protesting we're a bunch of
loons and then 20 years later I look
back and be like man they were exactly
they were exactly spot-on and ironically
enough those are also some of the same
people that would call themselves an
Tifa and such today so it's a it's a
very weird circular well the China the
China policy I mean it you know once you
get the grant strategy wrong at the
everything that follows it just gets
worse and worse and worse it's like a
cascade of errors I mean not only did we
wipe out all those jobs because of
Chinese trade I mean by sending all
these jobs to China all this
manufacturing the China I mean they
don't have any restrictions on pollution
so they just ramped up the carbon
production and now they I mean they
produce more carbon than the US and
Europe combined Wow and accelerating
away and there's absolutely nothing we
could do in terms of you know cleaning
it up in the US to even match what what
their growth is right and you know they
accelerated all the timelines whatever
time lines we heard about five years ago
I'm you know climate change those are
all accelerated I mean they're just like
because of China and you know the thing
is it you know is I can understand the
kind of disbelief in it and you know
pushing back against all this idea
climate because it's coming from experts
right and experts are been wrong so many
times right but it's a you know it's
it's just good insurance
you know prudent if you take some
measures and you and you try to you know
stop flirting let's say financial crisis
or climate crisis or you know it's just
uh taking some precautionary members
measures is actually a smart thing to do
rather than waiting till after the fact
totally yeah and just just to wrap up
this conversation about Japan and China
Japan definitely in the 80s this is
something that I think
journalists and and I don't know what
you call contemporary historians people
trying to talk about history today miss
about Trump he grew up came of age
professionally in the 80s in New York
City
and in real estate and one of the most
prevalent phenomenons in New York City
real estate at that time was the
Japanese coming with all their
mercantilist money and buying up
prominent real estate in New York City
and it was all the news also the
Japanese takeover they also bought like
famous golf courses all over the country
and it was also all in the news about
how Japan was like killing our auto
industry and yadda-yadda
and then as you said they we worked out
a deal with them and it seemed to seem
to work out for us so that is the sort
of origin story for Trump's perspective
on like we need good deals with our
trading partners right he's trying to
put the cork back into the bottle and if
our like closing the barn door after the
horse is gone it's like trying to you
know contain China at this point is
pretty pretty darn tough it is tough but
you know I bring it up because I've you
know I am NOT holding Trump's water or
carrying it his water every day I mean
either but like it did not give him at
least some sort of like I don't know
he's not making this stuff up right like
he grew up with this he lived through it
he saw he experienced it and it was a
formative thing for him and so like
these ideas aren't just like coming out
of nowhere of him trying to be some
strongman maniac or whatnot but you know
it hey the things that happened to us
when we're young and forming our visions
of the world and lived experiences have
an influence on the way that we behave
as we get older and it's just not it's
not an insane behavior on his part he
may be he may be miscalculating but well
yeah I wrote a piece of maybe last year
about the thing that really upsets the
foreign policy types is that they think
they can't see where he's coming from
and the way I explained it is that you
know he is putting trade policy above
national security policy in a post-cold
war world we don't really have any
enemies
we just don't know and that's not the
priority its economic success is the
priority so what he's doing is you know
before you know trade policy was a slave
to national security policy and
and we basically opened up our trading
system to anyone that joined us because
we're willing to take the hit in order
to you know stay safe but without an
enemy that becomes kind of stupid you
know because you're open up you opened
up to like five different mercantilism
mercantilist nations that are export
oriented and they are all focused on the
US because the US has the biggest source
of demand in the world and it makes it
hard for us to make money you know he by
putting trade first you know that
explains his behavior in Europe yeah
particularly with Germany it explains
his behavior with China and it's
something that the national security
types just can't can't wrap their heads
around they're they're used to the cold
cold war setup we're not in a cold war
anymore right and so any contemporary
analyst that doesn't use the word
mercantilist when talking about
international trade and acknowledging
our trading partners is acting as such
is just either ignorant willfully or
ignorant through some sort of
indoctrination or whatever and I get
frustrated to no end reading about that
stuff we can we can talk about this
element of everything for a long time I
want to I want to get back to the
insurgency the network and and so we're
talking about 4chan we're talking about
Facebook we're talking about Twitter but
we're gonna get to it and I want to you
know talk about how does this insurgency
work like what is the method by which
its it's exerting its will and let's
talk about how these things are an
emergent phenomenon rather than like a
top-down directed phenomenon etcetera
let's get into like the the nitty-gritty
functionality of it because a lot of the
guys that I roll with on Twitter and in
real life you know I think a lot of them
credibly had a major influence in this
insurgency you know people with hundreds
of thousands of followers shirk millions
and millions of page views and driving
driving media cycles and whatnot and so
I have a personal interest in my
listeners to definitely have an interest
to think about it holistically and
systematically so how does this
insurgency work and where you know what
can we expect from it you know coming
from moving forward okay well good place
to start I have a free report up on the
NSA it's a from dissent
for 2017 it's the example I put on the
patreon page so that's a quick download
and it has it all laid out and basically
the structure of the warfare were saying
that I that I worked out was that there
is this open-source insurgency that
works according to it works in the
mental realm the psychological space and
then there's this thing called the
resistance that works in the moral space
and then there's this in the
corporations that work mostly in kind of
the attrition area the area of physical
connectivity okay and so these got these
three players and they're defined more
by how they fight and the insurgency the
type of warfare you know that you engage
in when you're in the kind of
psychological realm is you know a
maneuver warfare it's based on you know
you see it in in classical you know
examples would be blitzkrieg maneuver
warfare is about you know rapid
movements to wake up the mental cohesion
of the enemy so they can't they can't
trust the facts that they're that
they're seeing they could become
disoriented they become overloaded so
we're like in World War two when a when
a tank column broke through the enemy's
lines I mean they ranged deep into enemy
territory and they were feeling up at
the you know the gas stations and kept
on going even if there were just a
couple tanks they kept on going kept on
going and circling these the troops at
the front line and you know coming up on
towns where they had command and control
centers and and making them flee and to
the person on the front line and where
the you know bulk of the troops were
they heard that you know tanks were
behind him and that they weren't getting
the ammunition and they weren't getting
the the supplies they needed and they
were expending him at a pretty high rate
just to maintain where they're at and
they gave up and they just retreated and
mass they couldn't process the fact that
you know just a few tanks were actually
all that stood between them and and the
rest of their supply lines it was too
disoriented
and the same thing we saw in in the
online world is where you know rapid
transients you know rapid switch from
one disruptive idea to the next would be
disorienting overloading things that
were challenging - or challenges to
conventional wisdom and in technique and
convention things that caused people
pushing hot buttons to cause people to
explode and not think clearly that stuff
works exceedingly effectively and in you
know the kind of psychological realm of
warfare and maneuver worker and Trump
and his insurgency excel at that and
that you know the standard opposition to
anything that would grow over time was
never able to you know form in many
cases like even the the the trade stuff
right so the trick we put up a various a
trade and we put up new tariffs
typically that would just build a
building in opposition to that would
build and that that would dominate the
headlines and the pressure become
intense and it forced the president to
relent well we're switching between tone
so many disruptions that stuff even
doesn't even make it to the front page
no-one's even don't even giving it any
thought right over there right over look
it's over right so the second one and
this came largely in response to the the
rise of the insurgency in Trump's
particulars you know flavor its
particular you know approach to bleeding
it is a is the resistance and this is
more warfare this is more guerrilla
warfare actually and more warfare works
by creating a a moral framework that
serves as kind of a gravity to your side
everyone comes to you and that you look
at the enemy and you look for more
weaknesses according to the you know
your moral framework and you call them
out okay you shamed them you disconnect
them that way either as individuals or
as a group largely you know it works
best online you know going after
individuals and you were you experience
that in a straightforward way what
happens is it you know it it creates you
know distrust
and you just trust it you know when you
target somebody that you know no one no
one wants to be near them or next to
them when they're going down everyone
starts to disassociate from that person
you know in in a guerilla war you know
if you can if you can call the the
nation's morality into question you can
start you can shatter it and and you'll
have you know multiple centers of
gravity that will form and then no one
can make decisions because no one can
agree on anything in this case you know
the the kind of moral warfare that we're
seeing is proving you know pretty darn
effective it's also you know moving into
the economic realm with a AOC and the
like and then the third one is the
physical disconnection is the the big
online companies in particular and their
er you know it gives you mostly in
nutrition depleting the ranks of people
they see as threats by disconnecting
them by and they tend to a lot you know
ally themselves with the resistance and
the you know my prediction back in 2017
or so was I was waiting for the leader
of resistance to emerge somebody would
you know lead the resistance to take
over the Democratic Party as effectively
and as convincingly as Trump did with
the Republicans and there wasn't anyone
until just recently with AOC now a stage
the thing is she doesn't look like a
normal leader and stuff but you know I
mean it you know she is she's really
really good online yes I mean her tweets
and and her social media and Instagram
and everything was really amazing and
she has a you know a high degree of
authenticity which is really makes her
makes her very effective I mean just
that little video she put up just
recently about campaign finance that she
critiqued yeah and that was 22 million
times in 24 hours that's just nuts I
mean that's like you take all the
audiences of all the news programs and
you combine them and you don't get that
right exactly now what one thing that
you brought up was that you think that
the I mean and it's obvious that the
corporate corporate world is aligned
current
with the resistance and I know that the
corporation is a blue church all the
media companies ad executives
universities everybody is basically on
with the resistance and you know we see
them move towards disconnecting people
from you know you get unperson
on the internet you get to delete it
from Twitter you get and really now the
the real crux is like the payment
disconnectors right like taking away
people's ability to just even receive
money that seems to be a real fatal flaw
in this whole insurgency system at this
point but the the the corporate world
and the resistance are aligned do you
think that that is a stable alliance
because I would argue that like the the
Bernie guys who many of whom became
Trump supporters because of their
disaffected their dissatisfaction with
the with big corporate with the blue
church with all the corruption and all
of that I would have thought that like
the resistance folks would be anti
corporation but it appears as though
that they are in alignment do you think
that that is a temporary thing is that a
permanent thing is it because like as
you described in these open insurgencies
where they have a common goal even
though they have different ideas about
things or different ideas about what
would happen after they achieve that
goal or different histories and
everything so there's a lot of tension
between the corporate world and the
resistance you know some at least in the
mid-level manager space and some of the
Silicon Valley companies have embraced
it you know whole scale or wholesale but
for the most part a lot of the corporate
space is just scared of them they're
just scared they want to make money
Graham but they you know they they don't
want to piss him off either do you
really so really think making money is
still the number one goal and all the
decisions are driven by making the most
money possible for their shareholders
and so they purse or even alignment with
the resistance as being the best path to
profitability
yes on the whole I mean they're
definitely true believers in a lot of
the smaller companies and at the
mid-level manager space
who are like truly truly part of the
resistance because the resistance is
made it's very puritanical and you know
it's a it's different than the
insurgency because it's actually trying
to build the you know a new consensus
morality patches and baton what's that
new consensus morality based upon John
well I think it's um it's re
okay so here's here's the idea is that
we're in a globalized system and we're
throwing lots of people with lots of
different backgrounds into the same
system and what they're trying to do is
they're trying to renegotiate how
individuals interact you know
differentials in power mm and so you
know a lot of this is you know based on
this this core idea of intersectionality
yes right and which is which is almost
kind of the original sin of the movement
because it's it has you know some flaws
in it that will explode over time its
fatal but yeah but the I in concept this
idea of coming up with a consensus
morality that were people from lots of
different backgrounds can agree with
that kind of a minimum set of of how we
rules for how we interact both online
and offline may be a good thing but how
they do that how they get there is is is
the big problem because they're getting
there through intersectionality which
which is like this I mean you've
probably gone through this on your show
already and it's this idea that
everybody is oppressed every identity
group is oppressed by other identity
groups and at the end of the day you
know one identity group dominates over
everybody else oppresses everybody and
and who's that oh yeah what's in this
case is you know in this this area so
you know of course white heterosexual
males and they're the top dogs and so
what the the goal is to overturn that I
mean - you know overthrow them and then
set up a new dynamic they you know the
it's like the the people who are like
into Marxist theory would say then you
have this kind of Nirvana the realist
would say you know when they look at
communism they
okay this is a chance for us to take
control and tell everybody what to do
yeah right and so there you know this is
the difference between you know marks an
A or a Lenin or Stalin right eventually
that the hardcore group thinkers would
win out and that you want to put your
group at the top right so it makes it
hard for us for me to join on I mean any
group that wants to put me in a
concentration camp it's like it's like
you're nothing right so in my book I go
into detail about kimberlé crenshaw and
where intersectionality came from and
like the the the line at the end of her
piece it just says I'm a male white male
power is implicit and understood and
that therein basically is is the core
centerpiece of this new morality of
they're trying to impose on everyone and
and I have to say at the same time I'm
feeling you know apprehensive and
concern for the future I'm also feeling
slightly justified I've been talking
about intersectionality for almost
coming up on four years now and people
would just poopoo me and tell me I was
dumb and crazy nobody's thinking about
intersectionality nobody knows what that
is and that may very well be true but
the like core tenets of
intersectionality has been infiltrated
into and disseminated through the blue
church and top-down information
distribution and like put into the heads
of all these people as I think partially
came to a massive collision in the
Cavanagh hearings where the the language
of intersectionality and radical
feminism became the language whose
editors of the u.s. Judiciary Committee
in the halls of the Senate blowing my
mind thinking to myself you know people
thought I was a nut for years but now
you know I'm talking to a retired
military officer and the tech CEO and
the guy who's been Wall Street Journal's
telling me that you know
intersectionality is the core tenant of
this new moral moral network that the
blue resistance is trying to impose on
everybody and using and co-opting really
the corporate space in order to you know
enact their they're sort of their war
I mean yeah that's real well you know
what where do people think this whole
call-out culture comes oh right I mean
what what rules are they violating I
mean you know I mean if they've heard
the word patriarchy they've heard
intersectionality Yeah right right
if you anyone who says that is is
basically saying you know signing on to
that whole structure but you know they
kind of postmodern thinking in terms of
you know everybody's oppressed and and
that you know Lang the language used is
very important and the control over what
is said introduction of new terms and
and and banning of others is is pretty
dangerous particularly start you know if
they can exert control over you know
corporations particularly the big online
social networks things are gonna get
pretty dicey because you can start to
burn this into a eyes right and and it's
right happening already in search search
algorithms the way that they were you
know hide and reveal information through
search I'm I'm terrified I mean these
are these are the guys that are writing
the future reality information reality
have the IDE ideology in their core and
it's going to be expressed you I mean
you said it best and that's terrifying
burned into AI intersectionality is
going to become burned into AI is that
that's a fair statement that's scary and
particularly with that kind of original
sin notion you know is that there's
there's no way you can overcome your
identity no because because it has
original sin and only white males have
they're the true original sin right so
it's um yeah it's a it's an interesting
thing it's the prong is out it's pretty
depressing
yeah it's right we're boat we're both
we're both sort of weighing the the
immensity of those statements and and I
think it's heavy it's very it's very
happy but I mean we could talk about
this that particular subject for a long
time but I wanted to keep moving down
you know cuz I want to get to eventually
talk about aoc talking about predictions
for 2020 talking about what individuals
can do in this
environment right Rob so how does my
question here it's like how does this
all fit into the big picture and what
does the future look like this
intellectual red and surgeon see the
moral blue resistance in the attrition
and physical disconnection of the
corporate space so of tailed also with
some ideas like is online real because I
hear people say that it's not all the
time but I'm saying that online is
driving reality instead of the other way
around Trump's in the White House
because of it right exactly what do they
think it's like of course it's real
right
I know people keep Twitter is in real
life I'm sorry but actually Twitter and
social media are driving real life so
you got the causality backwards there
but what what does what does the future
look like how does all this stuff fit
into our big picture how does an
individual navigate operate in this
system how do you protect yourself how
do you thrive if how do you operate what
do you what do you do John I mean you
okay studied all this stuff you must
have some ideas for what a I mean what
abnormal a normal dude and a woman who
loves normal dudes what like what not to
put racial tones on normal but you know
you know what do we do okay well I mean
it's a you know Marshall McLuhan called
this a the back in 67 he wrote you know
we're in a grill of information war
where there's no you know World War
three will be a guerrilla information
war where there's no dividing line
between the military and the civilian
world and he was right we that's what it
is right now it is we're seeing this
globally and we're seeing a fight for
the future occurring online and
everyone's a participant whether you
want to or not you can you can withdraw
and hide and get off social networking
but you know you're you're basically
just running away from the battle right
right because it's going on and then
yeah the other thing you can for so
first you have to recognize you're in
this and second is trying to figure out
how it's actually fought I mean I I've
done my best in terms of training and
I'm continuing to try to do that in
terms of structuring this in terms of
how it's actually fought online you know
through networks all right and these
networks have very specific ways of
fighting
that's very they're very pretty
if you can pick then you can pick your
network and participate right now or you
can try to figure out and reinforce ways
in which we can use this kind of new
network decision-making system to make
our current system better so if you look
back over history you know every single
new decision-making system that we've
developed weaving you know found a way
to make it valuable in building
civilization I mean we have the old
tribal thinking which is like this
system of cohesion and fictive kinship
that allows us to operate as a unit as a
group where we trust the other members
of it and that's become nationalism and
you know where we you know a nation this
idea of nation that were we trust other
people even though we don't know them
because they're Americans or because of
you know if you're German in German or
French or French then we had a
bureaucracy which was great at
mobilizing resources and you know doing
big you know undertaking big projects
that really took off in the 20th century
got massive but you know there was
meritocracy and a structured approach
that would became useful and we found
that the limitations of that I mean is
that it can't do the you can't take over
everything like we saw with communism
and fascism it it can be very it's it's
without moral structure and it can be
used to you know scale up destruction to
right and then we have a markets and
markets are great at you know finding
the the value of something and
allocating resources in particular it's
really good they're really good at you
know finding the place where the the
money should flow the resources should
flow and we've combined them we when we
use markets to select the leadership of
the bureaucracy all right would you know
we elect people to run our federal
government and our state governments but
those you know are bureaucracies and
they do certain things and then we use
you know this tribal connectivity to
stay together and and and make decisions
as it as a cohesive unit now we have
this new thing networks and networks are
you know so far we saw with the
insurgency it's great
at undertaking big projects this you
know this Plaza will promise this one
goal that a lot of people come together
to to work on that's very innovative we
can come up with ideas that push it
forward that works great in software
it's work great in protest is right
we're effectively in getting say Trump
into office then you have networks using
the way they didn't resistance is using
it is that it's using it to build
something you know through consensus you
know kind of a cohesive structure that
it can be enforced
you know limits on behavior as we go
global which is like if you done right
that's great if done you know to excess
is going to be terrible right same thing
with insurgency you can you can disrupt
disrupt disrupt disrupt and you know
that's good at kind of unsticking the
system if it's stuck you know but if you
do too much you're just caught in this
endless loop like Russia is right where
only the oligarchs have power you know
there are the ones only ones of making
money it's just constantly disrupted and
then then the third thing is this you
know how to use networks deliberately
you know through a eyes and I came up
with some early stuff thinking early
last year on that and I wrote it up it's
a you know we saw getting the AI wrong
can you know accelerate disruption or
right we saw that with the way they they
took viral content and accelerated as it
went across Facebook and across these
different platforms and so if you had
something that was you know extremely
disruptive it got much more play than
anything else because it was you know
obviously more attractive than and more
engaging and so they've toned that down
and but we can do a lot better we can
actually use these kind of this kind of
I think personally AI and everyone talks
about it for all these other things in
it it's not really about you know
building a solo intelligence is really
about where it's actually being used
most effectively and most widely is in
social networks it's actually glue it's
kind of it's is turning our social
system through you know social
networking into a kind of a
technological artifact which is um which
is new and McLuhan kind of predicted it
said we had to do that in order to kind
of stop us from ripping our throats out
all right a collective throats out
but the idea that social is social
networking through a I can actually
smooth things out somewhat make us more
effective as a group so you have these
three different things and how we
incorporate them into the larger you
know social decision-making system is
going to be the fight for the next 20 30
years you know if you look at say world
war 1 & 2 was really the surprise of
bureaucracy and markets I mean world war
one they thought it was gonna be a short
war because history history told them
that there's only there's limits to the
mobilization right and we're gonna only
get a certain number of troops and the
wars are gonna be relatively short
because there's always you know room for
manoeuvre but the bureaucracy was so
effective at mobilizing the resources it
was able to put millions and men on the
field and then immediately wiped out any
kind of you know maneuverability and set
everything into trenches and then
markets proved so effective that they
were able to finance all of that correct
you know they were they were financing
mechanism they never had up to up to the
1900 a little different than going
around and like shaking down villagers
for pieces of silver I guess huh alright
yeah there was just global markets like
that that could finance a big buildup
right and you were limited how your
pocketbook so them surprises that you
know can really cause massive Wars and
unexpected with an unexpected kind of
ferocity and duration maybe it's going
to happen here as we kind of you know
try to figure out how to use these
networks this network decision-making in
an effective way
you know there's flaws with each way
that things are being built I mean I
like on the identity side in the
resistance I mean I'm personally I think
identity as a focus is more like the
short bus of history when everyone
there's you know to me now if you get on
with too much identity you're gonna end
up
yourself down right do you think that
there is an a valuable iterative process
between the resistance and the
insurgency that could lead to something
productive I don't know I mean you say
it was a thing now that she's like
pointing a leadership face on their
resistance and you notice everything
everything that she says how she says it
is all from a moral perspective
everything yeah there isn't one thing
that's not in fact when she said at the
State of the Union it had that kind of
scowl on her face looking at Trump yeah
all the other guys were you know all the
other people were there were scowling at
him because you know this or that
identity issue did it today you know we
saw you know hot-button issues and they
didn't like him she came back and said I
don't like him because he doesn't have a
future
he'd never he's not taking us anywhere
you know it's like it's a incredible
wasted opportunity you know it's like we
should be going somewhere and you know
that's morally incorrect you know just
to waste this opportunity right and I
was like wow it's interesting I you know
I don't know maybe they maybe they can
through their interaction develop
something interesting it's gonna be
gonna be a hell of a fight coming up in
2020 yeah
well that's interesting segue there I I
was thinking earlier that it would be
Trump versus an establishment figure but
you know I think you wrote that AOC has
become the de facto leader of the
resistance and therefore may become the
kingmaker in the Democratic primary and
then that to me would seem to signal
that Trump would be running against
somebody who knows how to navigate his
battlefield whereas before especially
those poor other 17th GOP guys you know
Trump was fighting a war they didn't
even know where to look to find it first
of all and Hillary Clinton you know
definitely didn't know I there and if
he's Trump's running against Warren or
Harris or somebody I don't think that
they can marshal you know his you know
I'm trying to use military where it's
only
know what I'm talking about can like you
know face Trump you know where Trump is
but it seems seems to me that AOC could
could shift that to like a a fight that
happens in in territory that's familiar
to both people yeah I not quite sure who
she's gonna pick she may not pick it out
the person outright she'll just rip down
the ones that she opposes right so it'd
be kind of like a you know reverse
selection and because she's certainly
too young to run and that you know she's
she both she and Trump are immune to any
kind of standard expert based policy
right critique which the media you know
spends a lot of money doing and and in
academia and standard government
approach and standard you know
establishment politics is fought over
these policy quibbles you know it'll
cost too much did it you know and how
are you gonna you know pay for that
right
well they they're totally immune to that
kind of critique you can critique them
inside book and they just power right
through it right it's like it didn't
even happen right and and and so that
puts him on a kind of a you know there's
no way that she could be taken down and
there's no way that Trump can be taken
down because there are creatures of the
network right they but they only can
marshal minority of the population like
sorry you know 35 40 percent and there's
this fight over the center you know
who's who's less less evil right or
who's who pushes your buttons bless or
pushes your buttons more yeah and the
positive sense
and it's a big choice if it was you know
a resistance candidate and a certain
surging candidate or that's a big choice
as a big difference huge huge chasm
nobody nobody building a middle ground
coalition there although I would argue
that Trump Trump was able to bring in I
think people like me who after gay
marriage was settled and pot
decriminalization looked eminent didn't
have any anchors to the Democratic Party
but had always been kind of libertarian
and
don't mess with me I won't mess with you
you know that's a lot of people that I
found ended up voting for Trump as
opposed to Hillary Clinton and I think
if the resistance puts a candidate
forward who has at their core this moral
concept which has at its core
intersectionality which has at its core
that white men are evil in the
perpetrator of all oppression and must
be destroyed and the way that you
destroy the power of white men is
through the destroying the inherent
power which is their masculine power and
so to me I see I see
tying it all together for me and my
audience here I see the resistance is
gonna end up reflecting the terms of
intersectionality and it's this concept
this philosophy of intersectionality
ideology is pushing our parties to take
on the form of the diagram that it draws
right so you're gonna have single women
and people of color on one hand and like
white men and the people that love them
on the other hand and I just don't see
how any self I mean it's gonna it does
happen but self-respecting white man can
vote for a coalition that has in its
party people that think that you really
are the devil and should you know be
locked up and thrown away and you know
to the extent that they double down on
the intersectionality in that morality
system you know I see the bifurcation
just only get worse as he tends to move
a little bit she's not like you know
with a green new deal yeah I mean you
know everyone's attacking it from the
socialist angle which seems to be that
and then the policy people on the Left
even are going that's not doable
whatever but I you know I was looking at
more from that you know I was talking
about windmill Theory right if we have
to have something the tilt against some
big problem they maybe it's we spent
five and a half trillion dollars on
useless wars right we didn't even win
and that you know even a couple trillion
on this thing if it brings us together I
mean and they're focused on kind of
creating green jobs even if it ends up
being a subsidy program it's not it if
it's not like more unfunded mandates
it's more like a subsidy build out of
infrastructure
it gets them away from the standard kind
of intersection of morality kind of
approach it does it gets Amina moving
into the economic space building a
future and having as something to shoot
at even if it's the wrong thing it gets
us moving yeah if it's I don't know I I
think there's I think there's hope there
on the insurgency side you know I don't
see a follow on the Trump but it's not
to say that there won't be you know you
don't see it
I mean well there's not one on the
landscape now like a Trump to point out
but I kind of always figured the one
would emerge yeah well you know it's um
I'm a you sent there as a weapon to
break things up so if things start
moving things start you know history
starts moving again
new ideas start to surface things start
happening you know I mean look between
the between AOC and Trump they've
widened the debate right now we're
talking about stuff that we wouldn't
have talked about we were locked in this
post Cold War narrow band of policies
that that anyone even questioned the
validity of the you know they were
shouted down by the establishment right
you said why are we still in Afghanistan
you don't know next year's can be better
and they said that 17 times so you kind
of go yeah are they insane or yeah let's
rethink how we're using derivatives
because they wiped out more wealth in it
these a very extreme derivatives have
added to us in wealth well no no you
don't know you don't know we just need a
different kind a better kind yeah just
what we'll put the brakes on just for a
couple years and then we're back to
business funny so any side story I used
to work for a firm headed by the former
secretary of the Treasury Nicholas Brady
and at the time he was pretty old old at
that point and he used to come into our
trading room and he'd just be like this
is like mm mm maybe like derivatives God
watch out for those derivatives
derivatives are gonna be the end of all
of us gonna just walk out of the room
and we thought that he was kind of crazy
we thought he was just sort of like a
doddering old man that didn't know what
he was talking about but boy he had it
nailed and he we used to just throw that
word around all the time
and and and he was right so I were we've
been at this for about 90 minutes so I
want to like push this through to the
end predictions sir for 2020 on your
part what do you what do you see
happening Wow
I know it's early it's gonna Trump
running versus an opponent and depending
off close they are to the resistance if
they are if the Democratic Party can
under Pelosi the establishment figures
will pick an establishment figure it's
gonna be a lot of infighting a real
civil war inside the Democratic Party
because I'll you know they'll have to
push it through really I it's hard to
make a prediction until that's resolved
yeah right so that so we got really to
to kind of conflicts going there's this
fight for control of the Democratic
Party between ASC and her group and
Pelosi and her group and then and you
know I don't think that the Mueller
things are gonna tank Trump know okay I
mean because that those investigations
really they have to actually reduce his
popularity in order to work because he
goes there's no there's no legal means
of getting rid of them outside of
reducing his popularity and make him
vulnerable to a Senate vote so uh so
many people think that there is actually
some kind of legal process for removing
them that is inexorable it doesn't
require you know popularity or vote
so he'll probably be in line on barring
a heart attack going into 2020 yeah so
until that until the Dems have you know
resolved their civil war I think it's
going to be whoever a OC picks Trump
Trump versus an establishment candidate
or Trump now I don't functional versus a
resistance candidate well you know if
it's if it's a resistance candidate
comes out of the Democratic Party and
it's versus Trump there may be an
establishment third party yeah right
which would then make it really truly
chaotic yeah okay so everybody's like
particularly if the establishment person
is a little bit to the right true
alright yeah yeah it becomes and you
know they're gonna be calling your
socialist or you know whoever you
whoever gets the not in the Democrat
you know socialist and that they're
gonna destroy the world but for that
3540 percent they're gonna be totally
signed on there can be interesting um
you know there's always a outlier that
things could get disrupted to the point
because people are polarizing to the you
know to a high degree that we can end up
with a couple incidents that roll us
into a you know a civil conflict it's
always on the outside you know there's
always like you know people are so
polarized now and they don't see
themselves you know there's no fictive
kinship anymore and we're just you know
radically we're rapidly destroying all
the common narratives and stories you
know that can unite us and and people
look at the other person you know other
American and go you know you're not mate
right so this is a very interesting
point and the American nationalism man I
can't believe I'm gonna wait into this
here American nationalism today is a
shared belief in an imagined order that
believes we thought in personal liberty
and the right to pursue happiness and
etc but it was irrespective of your
ancestry right other people will argue
the nationalism in other countries was
strong because of blood ties and
ancestral ties but in the United States
if if the imagined order breaks down
what is it that's going to bind us as a
nation well that's the that's the thing
that we have to create using networking
and other things that we have to find
another way to do it right and who's
working on that who's working on a new
imagined order for us to all supersede
our ancestral heritage and DNA and come
come together in a rare in unique
circumstance right because nationality
around the world is about blood and
heritage rather than an imagined order
where we are in the United States so
who's working on that oh we're all
working on it yeah online right now but
it's definitely true if you go to Europe
or you go to you know Germany for
since I'm starting to determine the
other day and you know they were going
through their justification for
different social policies and different
things that they do and they go you know
we don't understand why you don't do
this in the States
well you know why you just basically let
people you know twist in the wind you
know and without any kind of government
support and I go oh it's just a it's a
matter of perspective in Germany
everyone's kind of like related you know
you have a very very cohesive ethnic
outlook or you know the historical
outlook and it's like it's um it creates
a different dynamic then here it's very
you know very competitive here Polk can
we can we develop something new it
really depends on how we how well we do
online because it on lines were we're
gonna develop it right so we've taught
this would be my last question and we'll
wrap the weave the word cohesion has
come up a number of times
Jordan Hall did a great job in his
situational assessments and other pieces
describing the way that the blue church
top-down method of distributing
information and narratives was effective
at generating group cohesion and it
seems as though that these networks that
have emerged have become effective at
disrupting group cohesion if I'm right
okay but if I'm wrong tell me but the
are the networks that are evolving are
they inherently disruptive to group
cohesion or can they be used in a
positive way disruptive to the cohesion
of the of their opposition sure yeah so
within the context of the group it's a
lot of cohesion in more more importantly
than cohesion something more important
than cohesion is coherence
I'm just understanding well it's just
the ability to actually formulate
thought and you know run through it a
decision-making process to the end I
mean when you when you don't have any
relationship with somebody in you know
I'm a fictive kinship everything they
say the information that they present
isn't trusted mmm so you can't use that
in your you don't believe them you don't
know if they're gonna actually do
something that's giving you that
information to because they they
thank you you want to do do you harm
so and then then if you were living in a
if the the the psychological realm if
there's lots of fake information and
spun information the motive conjugation
of you know and all the things that
would actually you know spin info you
don't even trust the info itself you
know and how it's being you know
presented right and so how can you make
good decisions there and then then you
have a you know with the with the the
networks and they're kind of physical
disconnection you're losing voices
you're losing you're losing perspective
you're losing people that would actually
be able to contribute and they're just
disappearing so you're you don't even
know if it was soft band so that you
know that the information and the
contributors to the decision-making
process are even being heard or that you
are being heard as part of that
decision-making process right so we're
wiping out coherent so you know in this
this warfare on on all three you know
three dimensions I think if we can get
back to coherence online and back to
coherence in networks then it'll be very
very powerful how to do that is gonna be
a big battle well I've seen I've seen
the lack of coherence on the other
person space as I talk to them about
things which seemed plain as day to me
facts which seem real to me I explained
them in a very orderly and methodical
fashion and they look at me like I'm an
insane person they don't trust what I
said they don't trust the framework and
they don't trust the data and then they
just completely disregard it I mean I
think you could write it on a personal
level oh oh yeah you better match my
fear as is from what you just described
was that big tech is actually working
against coherence deliberately yeah
I think so seems like it they're cutting
off nodes hiding information squashing
people sculpting them banning them and
then using the big a eyes to accelerate
certain things and and hide other things
I mean they can really mess with it I
mean they can they can make us as
completely incoherent shoes you know
look at they took the viral stuff this
stuff that was like the bombastic
content and they accelerated
you know during 2015-16 in order to
increase the time that people spend
online half-right keep you do it and yet
you know with YouTube and you just you
know you go a little bit in one
direction and it will take you all the
way in that direction down the rather
exact just to keep you and that's like
decreasing coherence because you're
bringing people in to these extremes and
they're not they're building patterns of
ways of thinking that that are
distrustful of the of other people right
a really great example I heard about
that YouTube phenomenon is like you
search for a video on how to walk and in
like three weeks you're watching videos
on how to do extreme marathons it's like
right they just suck you down and push
you all the way to the first extreme
just to keep you online so I I've heard
that Trump is trying to start a
government program to figure out how do
we manage AI and what we do within the
future it seems like that that's a big
grand project I know a lot of people
that I'm talked to online think that the
AI is ten thousand times more of a risk
than anything else that we're facing
right now and how we manage that moving
forward is going to be really key so I'm
interested to see how that plays out but
it's been 90 minutes and frankly I could
talk to you for another five hours but
I'll let you go you've been very
gracious with your time thank you so
very much I hope we can do this again
John where can people find you online
and what's the best way to get access to
your to your information just a John
rabe at patreon perfect and put that
into Google and you'll find it I'm
pretty easy to find and I have a couple
reports up there I have the McLuhan
report I think was free and the and the
you know the online warfare report
that's free up there yeah it's five
dollars guys it's the best five dollars
you overspend on that on the internet go
ahead and sign up for it I highly
recommend it if you want to increase
your understanding of this exceptionally
complicated complex world please do
follow John rabe and start reading what
he has to say he's been immensely
helpful to me very personable and
friendly on this podcast thank you so
very much and uh you know I just
appreciate your time today well thanks
jack alright they still talk take care
yep
[Music]