hey everybody we are back it is Jack
Murphy this is the Jack Murphy on
podcast you can find me Jack Murphy on
Twitter at Jack Murphy alive Jack Murphy
live.com Jack Murphy live all over the
Internet's today we have a very special
returning guest for a I'm gonna call the
emergency podcast it's certainly a very
timely one and
right away this is jordyn hall and if
you haven't listened to the other two
podcasts that we've done earlier please
make sure you get those for some
background and some context Jordan how
you doing man good to see you again see
you too you have to say you actually
look quite healthy
there's no you don't know I can actually
see him it's not audio only for me poor
thing you guys don't have to look at me
yeah well you know we didn't have the
makeup crew tonight so we're going all
audio I appreciate that Jordan trying to
stay fit although I have eaten I think
at least two weeks of my two-month food
supply in a matter of two days
pretty funny isn't it it sure is all the
granola bars are gone already I don't
know what we're gonna do but I'm really
happy to have you on Jordan you're a big
time thinker you understand the world in
a way that very few people do and I know
that this event right now works very
well in with your general thesis about
the state of the world and I read to
your situational assessment that you
published I put that out on my Twitter
feed everybody please read that and I
know that if you're using the word
situational assessment it is serious
time those are your big pieces so I'd
like to pretty much just sort of open up
the floor to you Jordan what have you
been thinking about what's been going on
what have you been doing where are we
who well it's interesting you point that
out because to be honest I thought I was
retired from writing things down and
it's kind of like the very first one
where I was just finding myself spending
a lot of time giving people more or less
was in that particular piece right so I
figured I might as well just write it
down and share it because it seemed like
it was well Franklin's gonna save me
some effort but just honestly the best
stuff because that means the best you're
you know you're doing something that
people care about
definitely I'm sure you've been in high
demand in the last week or two everybody
wants to hear what you're thinking about
this because you've really been able to
put together a framework that a lot of
people have found a tremendous amount of
value in so I'm excited to see sort of
cautiously how this fits into everything
yeah so the question of what I've been
up to I think actually taps pretty
heavily into the maybe the key thesis
[Music]
more or less than see wouldn't when did
this start ramping it's hard for me to
even recall I got in the RV and headed
out here gosh about two and a half weeks
ago maybe three okay time is compressed
but it really is is going by very
quickly its coordination right its
coordination it's it's a it's it's
playing a note playing my role in this
large distributed cognition network
that's in the process of waking up to
its both its capacity and quite likely
its necessity in the context of what I'm
calling just the meta-crisis I'm
stealing Thomas Portman's term just say
that's we're in we've been in something
medic rises for a while but now it's
real sharp a real salient and you know a
big piece of it for me for the first
gosh two weeks was straight sense-making
well what's what's happening here and
more importantly what are the things
that are going to begin to happen in the
weeks and months ahead that we need to
be aware of now because it's moving so
quickly that our reaction times just
aren't ready for it right right and
anybody that's looking at this thing
with data current data it's actually
stale data and everything that you need
to really know is like already happening
so somewhere else in the future and we
have to be thinking down the road
because acting on today's data is not
going to get us anywhere is it no it's
it's it's a little bit like if if you've
only driven it like 35 miles an hour
your whole life and then all sudden
somebody put an accelerator in the car
and just floored it yeah
and so the instincts that you've
developed for how to turn and and how to
dodge things in the road at 35 they kind
of work at 36 and 37 and 38 and 39 but
before you know it you're going 50 and
70 and 80 and 90 and 120 and 150 you got
a fancy car and that can get very very
disorienting if you're still using 35
mile an hour reflexes right and you know
this thing is something is happening
fast ie exponential fast and we could
talk about that is a very specific thing
but it's also happening happening
complex and that's another problem I
think that arises in trying to grasp how
to deal with it you know you're in some
sense we're not really dealing with a
virus
or to put it another way we're dealing
with the meta virus of which a
biological virus is just one aspect
there's probably many we're thinking
about it very interesting way of
thinking about it now I said I didn't
want to get too much in the background
but you've used the word sense-making
I'm using this word quite a bit myself -
maybe you could sort of put that into
context for people sense making what
what is that and and what do you mean
that you're a node in a sense making
network of a an open cognition network
this is very important concept for
people it's nice I remember why I like
talking to you always make me explain
things in a way that makes sense there
you go right that's it exactly doing it
just exactly taking perception so sense
making is perceiving right so just
listening and looking and hearing and
then and by the way as we talked about
that in the past disciplining in
training with your entire instruments
you're using everything every aspect of
your body or in mind to be able to
really perceive what's going on in
reality and then be able to bring that
together into something that I mean just
you know it makes sense it hangs
together there's a way of grasping of
presenting yourself in relationship with
reality where you can then make good
choices I mean it sounds a little bit
how to say abstract but if you think
about it in a very concrete notion if
like when you're shooting a basketball
the way that you poised your body and
you bring your elbow in to the center if
you regret the center of your chest you
bring your wrist back you balance the
ball in your hand like that's sensitive
you let's bring your body into an
affordance into a position so then your
action taking is a very fluid connection
of what's happening and it's it's that
relationship to experience right right
and the reason that we are having this
crisis of sense making is because our
old sense making tools are now obsolete
right those are the 35 miles an hour
ones that we had before yeah and this
kind of runs in two directions we've got
the the ones that we have as individuals
you know just are our own particular
individual capabilities and faculties
and that of course varies quite widely
there some people may be seals for
example who were trained operate at a
lot faster than 35 miles an hour and so
when the world seems to speed up for
everybody else for them it starts to
slow down and there's a handful of
people for whom that's the case but
broadly speaking the world that we are
used to has been training us to operate
using a certain style of thinking and
using a certain style of collaboration
that is well let's just put it this way
is appropriate for for a slower time a
simpler time right the nineteen
seventies and then the flip side this is
actually equally important is the
institutions of sense making
you know like Walter Cronkite let's just
be very very concrete Walter Cronkite
and the mind the kind of mind that was
listening to Walter Cronkite made plenty
of sense in 1969 yeah and does not make
any sense at all in 2020 no and that's
because we have five billion Walter
Cronkite's now right and they're all
talking to us and we're all listening
right well that's a real part of it yeah
meena one of the challenges one of the
upsides and the downsides I mean when
the downside is there's noise everywhere
a lot of that noise by the way it's
increasingly sophisticated intentional
disinfo noise yeah a lot of dumbasses
same things that they should just be
silent about but I make experience quite
a bit of that on Twitter lately I think
Twitter was designed for it
but it's the upside - yep and you and I
are talking on that same exact Network
so hopefully we'll do a better job than
those guys we were just slurred on
Twitter exactly right exactly right and
so we've been talking about these
concepts for a while about how the world
is now talking to itself many too many
instead of one too many and the top-down
communication structures information
distribution networks of the past are
gone and now information is flying
around everywhere and that has pros and
cons and in this case how do you see the
pros working out like how is it working
out for you personally what's been
happening what are you what are you
seeing how is it happening
systematically for you right now to be a
participant in this open source
cognition network of which you've had a
hand in sort of formulating the concepts
around I think that's true well it's how
do I say this right the experience that
I'm that I'm noticing is actually a
little bit like would it be imagine that
you just had a crowd of people and music
was beginning to be sung we didn't quite
know what the song was I guess we're
doing the Jazz metaphor again but now
it's much larger than people yeah and
the trick is you've got a voice which is
to say you've got a particular piece of
the music that's yours to sing and
imagine everybody in the crowd is sort
of milling about and you listen to the
people around you and you notice okay no
no that's not I move here a little bit
there that's my part and I'm next to
that person until it finally it arranges
itself from a crowd of people who are
sort of trying to figure it out to
acquire this thing in Beethoven's Ninth
Symphony right that's the experience
that I'm having right getting on
conversations talking to people trying
to figure out okay what piece do I have
how can I help who can I know choose the
right person for me to be talking about
in what order what are we missing like
all that like really really trying to
get a handle on how do we actually use
the possibility how do we use the
capability for literally anybody on the
planet to have a conversation with
anybody else on the planet in any
combination using audio video text
whatever to go from noise to signal
right
and how do you think that that's playing
out right now generally speaking with
you know John Rob is telling me and
everyone else that the the the answers
and solutions to the to the corona
crisis are gonna be crowd-sourced open
source it's part of the open source
intelligence networks open source
cognition are you seeing that what what
are you seeing and then let's try to get
into some specifics yeah okay this stuff
- there's some really powerful stuff
here so one of the challenges one of the
real challenges of what I'd call the
blue church we talked about that a
couple times ago of course it's just the
old the old-style way of making sense
you know radio stations and newspapers
and you know three three three increment
on a dial is that it's a very narrow
band I think an only can only tell so
much in an hour and a half long segment
and so they have to pick of all the
stories that they could tell they have
to pick the handful of stories they can
tell and it's kind of one size fits all
which really means one size fits more or
less nobody now
I can't help it but you might imagine
that there was a time both of us were
quite young when they were doing a
really really good job of trying to
actually figure out what was the best
stuff to say and of course over the past
40 years or so the necessities of
marketing is met they figured out how to
tell the most compelling stuff to say
the most salient laughs not the most
relevant stuff to use our friend John
for Vicky's very good terms
yeah but in this in this digital medium
it has infinite bandwidth
it's infinite which means that I can get
in principle exactly what I need to hear
one size fits you personally now it's
not easy just yet and unfortunately the
guys who were supposed to be doing a
good job like Facebook and Twitter have
been doing an absolutely abysmal job but
the potential still there and I've seen
it happen so let's give you an example I
guess two days ago I was in a
conversation with a gentleman in my
hometown San Diego this is my previous
domicile the place where I pay rent San
Diego and he was already well on his way
to coordinating a hub for local people
people in San Diego to be able have
access to the information resources they
needed to be to be able to solve the
various problems that people are running
into you know things like okay what are
the appropriate protocol in my home what
is what is self quarantine actually I
mean what can I and can I not do okay
here's that information or what if I've
got my elderly mother living with me
okay what if what if I want to put
together a neighborhood group to support
child care because I got two nurses who
live on the street and their kids just
came home from school and the hospital's
need them all right all of it just
thinking one of the problems we need to
solve let's get some smart people
working on it hammer it down and then
share it so everybody gets it and you
can distribute it all the way to the
edge and by the way you can make
absolutely sure that there is somebody
on your block who has it and can
actually walk it over well these days
not quite walk it over maybe but writing
it over to the you know the elderly lady
who lives across the street just to make
sure she's taken care of and it can all
be done by self-organization but there's
nobody from the government who's coming
in to say we're weird we're here to help
you that was a really important solution
in 1947 these days to pretty much get in
the way except for a rare few who are
doing an exemplary job
yeah and it's not necessarily limits in
just that I mean there are like people
are I just looked at an incredible
website that takes the the stuff that
was being told by Johns Hopkins and then
he uses the actual data from Wuhan so
the real data that described an overlay
map of the number of reported cases and
the number of what they call the actual
cases so that the Chinese authorities
went through and actually interviewed
people said okay tell me one exists when
your symptoms first started show it
right and then they said then they back
projected that onto a chart and so we've
got this really nice map that shows holy
smokes by the time we actually have a
case diagnosed in the hospital we've
already got a thousand cases that have
actually got symptoms around in the
environment that was some of the
structure they're showing so these this
team and maybe it's just one one person
took that model took the real-time data
built a bunch of software that could
take all the inputs that were coming in
from the world build some algorithms to
create some variances projected it
against the the visualization plow from
Johns Hopkins this create an entirely
new way of looking at it well you can
actually get a sense of a projected
model of the number of actual cases in
your environment which is a very
different thing and that's very powerful
it's a valuable resource to have
available similarly I just spent some
time today working with a group of
scientists and doctors who are have
self-organized to curate the scientific
literature and try to provide the most
current up-to-date synthetic information
to synthesize all the data that's being
produced by all these people all over
the world who are getting real-time
information and bring it in and provided
as a resource to literally anybody who
wants it and again that's the thing
today just people can you coordinating
and I think this is a thing that gets
lost we kind of named things
institutions as if they're real
like like Johns Hopkins I named it as if
John Hoffa the real place a real it was
a how do I do this then it did stuff
Johns Hopkins doesn't do anything if
there's people at Johns Hopkins which is
good thing or a place bunch of it's the
people who are doing it and I think
that's the inside the inside is at the
end of day it's always been people
choosing to do stuff and now what's
happening is we're discovering is that
the right people can work with other
right people to do really good stuff and
they can do it fast and they can do it I
don't want to say like the old-fashioned
way which is using their own sense
making and making their own choices for
what they think is exactly the most
important thing for them to be focused
on and that becomes very powerful
it seems to me that this is actually
engaging far more intellectual power and
capability than perhaps some of the
older ways of doing things you know so
would this in your mind accelerate any
potential solutions that we can find or
are we creating dead ends or obstacles
or oh how are we how are we surfacing
the right things out of this whole
cacophony of information that's out
there this is a real problem so let's
talk a little bit about the history of
the Internet as an example because these
things tend to go through very specific
cycles and we're like halfway through
one of those cycles right now and I
imagine that as a consequence of this
crisis we'll move all the way through it
of this part of the way so back when the
the www right the world wide web portion
of the internet first started yeah
there weren't that many eight websites
and so you can kind of know all of them
we're all the ones that were relevant to
you you keep them in your head you look
back in the day to Mecca you need your
friend's phone numbers you just know
that you know the URL and type the whole
thing in literally demonym eww right but
after not too long there was just too
many so you couldn't get an information
overload and so Jerry Yang said well
I'll go ahead and just start creating a
taxon I mean categorize all the websites
and I will carefully go out and create
bookmarks of linking to all of them and
I'll publish that as a website of its
own yahoo becomes an information
repository to take care of the problems
of information overload and that was
that right and so that's how we cycle
through and by the way blogs originally
blogs were that kind of thing a blog was
a collection of websites that were
curated to be around a particular topic
and then we had so many blogs that we
needed some sort of other architecture
to be able to capture the blog's that's
happening now so it's happening now is
that we have so many projects for
example that are coming out in so many
different dimensions that it's now
become information overload instead of
it's hard for me to find the resources I
want cuz there's they're scarce it's now
time for me from the resources that I
need because they're they're too
abundant so we're going through a
process right now people seeing that and
beginning to create structure creating
mechanisms to to create taxonomy and
tools to categorize and simplify and by
the way to curate in increasingly
scalable ways so that people can
ultimately get what they need and that's
building out infrastructure I think
that's the face right there's a process
of like awareness just some people
become aware of a possibility then
there's a process of exploration they
just begin playing with it and learning
in it and they start working around then
there's a process of skillfulness that
there's a okay I get how you do this and
they start working on it then there's
emulation other people can learn very
quickly from the skillful individuals
who are doing something and they begin
doing it then there's the process of
infrastructure okay we've got something
more or less hammered now need to turn
this into a layer like something that is
durable that other people who come on
top of it more or less get it for free
and they can keep make and then go
through that process again from the
beginning
yeah and this thing is tricky because
there's so many dimensions to it you
know I have been spending a lot of time
this is fun
a lot of time trying to figure out if
there's a way to generate a truly
effective legitimate alternate currency
model and let me tell you why so here's
here's the way it works like here's like
a case study so I'm sitting with with a
group of people and virtually and we're
trying to think through what are the
various sensitive points the points
where important things can happen like
if you get it right it works out if you
get it wrong so it's quite bad so what
are the sensitive points they're coming
down the pipe
second or third order consequences of
the virus yeah and pretty quickly we're
like okay this thing's gonna either you
quarantine you you don't and either way
you're shutting down the economy if
you're quarantined you're shutting it
down cuz you tell me buddy to go home if
you don't you're shutting down because
everybody eventually goes home because
they don't want to get sick whether you
run whether you're running Italy or
you're running China either way you're
shutting down the economy and in
particular you're shutting down the
aspects of the economy that involve
people congregated like bars and
restaurants and musical venues and
things like that and a lot of the people
well 70% of the population is living
more or less paycheck to paycheck and a
sizable fraction of that group has about
$1,000 cash in the bank or less which
means that if you shut down the economy
and you've got people who in particular
who are in vocations that don't pay them
paid leave for not being at work you're
gonna have a sizeable fraction of the
population you just flat out run out of
money in two four six eight weeks yeah
this thing could easily run that long
all right well that's a problem if I've
got 70 million people who literally just
ran out of cash because we had to shut
down the economy to deal with the virus
issue now I've got 70,000 people who are
either choosing to well one they're
gonna miss their rent or mortgage
payments but they may actually be run
out of food and water and they can't
afford to get it so what do they did to
this starve to - did they start stealing
it from other people what's that look
like well Stefan lis not good unless we
can figure out how to make it good it is
an opportunity so we were trying to
figure that out
yeah there's a lot of really cool
approaches and this is the ideas like
there's probably at this point 60,000
people who are thinking about this
problem
people off on the road and thinking
about seven groups that are congregating
and everybody there's got a unique
perspective and some have some very
powerful ideas our particular team was
looking at it saying cuz I've got a
background in the cryptocurrency space
you know one solution has been promoted
from the top down which is a perfectly
fine solution MIT Romney came on I think
supporting it today
well has just sent a check of a thousand
dollars every American family you know
just make that happen
and that could happen and I think it'd
be quite a good idea although I think
checks are probably a little bit
obsolete since you can't actually go to
the bank but any event there's a way of
solving it now okay but I've got we've
got extra bandwidth there's folks who
are thinking about that and I don't need
to worry about that if they pull it off
great problem solved on to the next one
but if they drop the ball we need to
have a solution in place we can't just
hope that the government's gonna figure
it out if they don't figure it out
somebody's gonna figure it out
so one solution we've been looking at
was a dusting off a white paper that I
actually read back in like 2008
peer-to-peer mutual credit system and
we've literally been going through doing
design mathematical modeling grabbing
folks who actually have the technical
skill set to build the underlying
platform fortunately because the
cryptocurrency thing was such a big
amount of time and energy and resources
it's actually a lot of good code out
there and it's looking pretty good so it
is entirely feasible that you know what
is this and then April shows up and for
whatever reason the government decided
not to pull the trigger and $1,000 in
people's pockets and then and I could
show up like patent at the Battle of the
Bulge and say yep we already got it
figured out here's the solution go and
that's what we should be doing do you
care to give some details on that that
sounds fascinating to me a peer-to-peer
mutual credit system I'm gonna get real
nerdy that's gonna waste a lot of time
we could do it a different situation
okay we'll do a different time we're
talking about the financial the
financial effects and I was wondering
what you thought about the comparison on
a number of different levels between
David you hope you suckered me I gotta
tell you now all right dudes I am I'm a
little bit enthusiastic about it right
so here's the way it works
and I apologize for a lot of these
things are abstract but the basic idea
is to actually take in the context of
money
we have a bunch of different things that
money does we have money as a as a unit
of account like it's five dollars you
have to be able to say like how many
units of value is this particular object
it was a medium of exchange and we have
a way of keeping track of accounting
metric and typically when we think about
money we think about in terms of mostly
a medium of exchange right you give me a
loaf of bread I give you five of these
green pieces of paper and you think
thank you and you walk walk away right
but you can also look at it in terms of
an of an accounting ledger which is to
say that you give me the loaf of bread
and I give you the IOU for that loaf of
bread and we could just say five units
so five units of value has now been
transferred I'm in the red five and
you're in the green five okay so a
peer-to-peer mutual credit uses that
concept everybody starts at zero just
imagine now the hard part here is
actually some slightly less autistic
than me people are gonna have to figure
out actually make other people feel
really good about doing it but in the in
the context of crisis it might happen so
you show up with this with this app you
get a now what the app does it says okay
who are all the people who you truly
you're friends with and we may actually
have to do to run Dunbar numbers to
really interesting powerful reasons so
who's your first hundred and fifty and
then what you do is you say all right
just gut check how much you be willing
to loan this person no questions asked
now Jack Murphy how much repeted alone
jack I would give you 150 dollars if you
ask for it circa Kim I will give you 150
bucks BAM I wouldn't worry about it I
know that you'd be good for that okay
that's what we're looking for so in this
app you go and say okay Jack Murphy 150
bucks pick some other Twitter person I
might know John Rob honestly I'd give
draw and Rob $5,000 that I've been
looking for think of twice that man is
solid sorry
he's just I've known him for a while I'm
gonna for like seven years that's the
thing right I known him for seven years
and we've been through some stuff so
obviously there's gonna be a difference
okay now
Stickley at the end of the day the
economy is people engaging in
transactions with each other the part
that we care about the part we're trying
to solve when I'm talking about
investment capital that's a completely
thing so if I go to the store now and I
walk in and say hey can I get a look for
bread there's pretty much two things
that can happen
one thing is he looks at me and says oh
yeah you're married I know you you're
good for it put it on your tab
we're okay all right but now what
happens is he gets three credits in the
green and I get three credits in the in
the red but he can actually spend those
three credits with somebody else or
actually created kind of a money that
can move but murder he doesn't know me
so in this app what happens is he gets
to discover the people who he knows and
gives credit to who are in relationship
with me or people who I know who have
credit too so let's say he knows you
real well and let's say for example you
and he have a situation where he's
willing to give you $1,000 line of
credit and you're willing to give me
$100 line of credit
not 150 I give you because you're a
better judge of character so I walk in
he doesn't see me but the app surfaces
the fact that hey Jack ouches for this
guy to the tune of 100 bucks sucker all
right it's on Jack's tab so I get the
bread and it goes on your tab so I know
how do you five and you owe him five and
it's all kept track of in the data
infrastructure got it that solves the
problem and at that point we call n plus
one like you who I know and then n plus
two who they know and n plus three who
they know by the time you get to about
an n plus four and you know by the way
getting full credit for that distance
the farther somebody waits to be just
like the way your gut tells you I mean
if I were to say hey Jack I know you
trust me you give me a hundred bucks
would you give my buddy mark here alone
look would you be willing to give him
money
III think it's a good guy you might be
willing to say okay on Jordans I'll give
him ten and just not 100 but I'll give
him 10 so that kind of a construct the
math behind that and the computational
structure to make it so you can actually
do it fast and easy and keep track of it
it's not hackable and you don't get like
Fat Tony coming along and saying hey
Jack
you be a good idea oh yeah I know you
don't know bit too well but I think you
really would feel good if you gave me
ten thousand right you gonna be able to
solve those problems and K people
working through that but this is the
thing we got a lot of smart people out
there I've been looking at this kind of
thing for a long time and asking all the
hard questions and so the ability to
spin up a monetary system that can be
dropped into local communities or
the world and make it possible for home
ladies to get bread it's doable right
and I'm not saying it needs to happen or
it should happen or it's awesome but I'm
just saying that's the kind of thing
that we're capable of right now and it
allows us to do a little belts and
suspenders if the government mails
everybody a check and by the way by the
time that check lands people still take
that money great and and if they don't
or if they don't they've got a back-up
plan we don't necessarily have to go
crazy braids I mean this sounds
fascinating to me and you talk about
dumb bar numbers and communities private
communities limo order sounds like a
great place to experiment with something
like this liminal order being this thing
that we've built which is also not only
a men's community dedicated to
increasing our personal sovereignty and
our independence and autoregulation but
it's also become a very powerful sense
making apparatus and an intelligence
network yep and we have been for the
last six or eight weeks just poring over
every piece of information that we can
find anywhere about Corona and we've
been way ahead of the game and everybody
in our group has been way ahead of the
game everybody's been prepared nobody's
been surprised by any of this Holly and
it's you know for real right it's it's
been incredible because Jordan we talked
well before limo owner was ever created
and it's now nine months old with 200
members all across the country even
across the world and the guys are really
feeling the power of the network right
now because they're all at home safe and
secure and stocked and their loved ones
are taken care of and they're prepped
and they're they're ready and they're
totally unsurprised by everything that's
going on in fact the corona room we have
is slowing down in traffic now because
we've sort of figured out what we needed
to do and now that time is really just
to sit back and sort of wait and those
check it every one was a yep curves off
the curve we thought it was gonna be a
bright yeah and it is unfortunately on
the curve that we thought it was going
to be on and sort of about that and the
wuhan data together and your own take on
the virus itself I'm curious to get your
perception I know that the number of
reported cases are quite low it seems
the number of reported deaths are quite
low
and it takes some real thinking into the
future to be able to act in the way that
people are acting today do you what what
how much confidence do you have in the
numbers that are coming out of China how
much confidence do you have in you know
the the actual lethality of the virus
does it even matter what is your take I
mean obviously you're moving ahead as if
as if the virus in it of itself is
actually a real powerful dangerous thing
that we need to be concerned with or is
it I mean I'm not like a naysayer by any
means but I'm interested to hear your
your interpretation of the the
epidemiology and of the well it's
unfortunate I don't have to be there's a
lot of folks we're a lot smarter than me
so I'll just going to tell you what a
where the the people who I think are
well let me take a step back actually
before we go that because I think
there's a little order let me just sure
sovereignty mm-hmm that's crucial right
in times like this the ability to
actually to kind of be the rock and the
water flows around you and you're there
and then you can see what's going on
right you're not not just not panicking
you're actually getting frosty as things
get harder that's what's needed all
right that's what's called for that's
what what keeps things holding together
and as things get even hotter it becomes
more and more important so the little
order and and the many other folks
around the world who kind of discovered
the responsibility of that kind of a
practice are actually playing a vital
role in the way this thing plays out and
I'm gonna come back to the question you
asked to just I just remembered sure
it's a very important story to be
telling here I don't know it was you
know came through to me gosh I think
yesterday I actually triggered earlier
today so there's the United States and
Germany 1930s why mar Germany in both
cases you had a Great Depression you had
a financial crisis that blew the
financial system up you had a very
powerful economic depression that put a
whole lot of people out of work and with
real privation starvation in bed but in
the United States the fabric of
community the the people who are able to
say no no this is not a an
us-versus-them story this is a Wiis
story and we're able to figure out how
to deal with the problem and come
together as a community was strong and
we had just a lot of community fabric
back then and they rose to the occasion
and it actually became stronger as the
consequence so of course we came out of
the Great Depression into World War Two
and out of World War two as a very
powerful nation
at the base like with footings with a
solid footing now before Germany had
been handed a bad hand I World War One
wreaked havoc to both her psychology and
to their economy they left the
government government they were familiar
with the Kaiser and was stuck with the
Weimar Republic which was
well-intentioned ISM wanted to be just
didn't have a lot of legitimacy and so
that the depression the financial crisis
and the the economic crisis ripped right
through the political institutions and
hit the community institutions and blew
through those as well and you had a
complete meltdown of the basic cultural
fabric of Germany and of course that's
how you get Nazi Germany and the reverse
of that is also you get Venezuela right
it either goes towards radical and
thorat airiness or it goes towards chaos
and those are really bad results no I'm
not saying this particular context is
for sure going to have that order of
magnitude but nonetheless I want to have
the fabric of communities strong enough
to handle them if it is and I want to be
able to have the possibility of not just
fortitude not just standing but actually
getting stronger as it pushes against
this antifragility is this this is the
thing this is antifragility right it's
individuals who have already made the
commitment to choose how to take
responsibility for how they're gonna
respond to what reality is thrown at
them building the skillfulness and
discernment to perceive reality even
when a it's complex and moving fast and
be other people are intentionally trying
to throw dense information at them and
they still choose that the answer is we
not us versus them and they start to
build that community fabric around them
and they hold their you know they hold
their arms out and bring people under
their protection and then they weave
together and look at each other and say
okay we can take it all right that's the
the moral of the story that's the
beginning in the end of the whole thing
um now I forgot the question would
you ask yeah well we were gonna talk
about financial crisis but you wanted to
come back and talk about community and
so I think you really nailed it in terms
of the ante fidelity and the we the we
factor and just a commitment a
commitment to engaging in this way with
information in the world around us and
the people that we have chosen to
commune with this this is the strength
that we have and it's giving us power
and it's really been
markable to see everything was going
very well
but this Corona thing has really brought
the virus that was the question yeah
I've got the virus to the corona thing
has really brought us all together but
we're all are thinking about these major
issues and and the financial crisis of
2008 or nine was a huge hugely
problematic event for the United States
and as you told me before you know the
the financial sector destroyed the
economy and the economy strip-mine down
into civic society in many ways do you
but do we feel this is comparable are we
facing similar risks are we faced bigger
because it's big it's bigger than the
2008 financial crisis really houses yeah
explain that because they never solved
the problem in the 2008 financial crisis
they just get that can down the road and
now they can come back and kicked us so
they're panicking in a big way and we
got a couple of the things that are
going on right we've got a big ass virus
and it's happening and it's real enough
like I don't need to sort of it's not
the flu and it's not the Black Death
right somewhere in between and it seems
pretty straightforward that if you if
you should have handled it with your
with your head up and you kind of look
at it it's okay we're going to just make
the right choices in the right pace then
you can mitigate the damage pretty well
and we've already seen a bunch of folks
over in Asia to make those choices and
it worked out and if it looks like you
are complacent or stupid and by the way
a lot of 20-year olds are stupid and
you've seen evidence that there are some
of the bigger risk factors may actually
get real bad remember this with the
wheat the weak point the sweet spot here
at the sensitive corn is the
overwhelming of the emergency rooms and
one rate one suite so it's it's like a
tidal wave once we get too many of those
once the the cup is filled and now it's
water flowing out on the on your shoes
now you actually are in real trouble the
mortality rates skyrockets and so you
can look at Italy where you've got like
a five percent or a seven percent I
think the last time I checked which is a
real big number that's a lot of people
that's not a good thing and by the way
it's no picnic for young people if you
get it this is not the kind of thing you
want to just kind of go out there and
start licking doorknobs and see if you
can you know show off which is they're
doing actually we're still doing all
right they're dumb and hopefully your
choices suddenly have consequences again
which is a good thing from my
perspective
so it's real enough right but then you
got the the financial crisis and which
is super real like it's gonna be a big
question and it's interested because
well they didn't really fix anything
they did actually get really good at
dealing fires but they didn't decide to
go ahead and not have fires but they got
really good at putting out fire and boy
are they pulling out those tools these
days and boy is the market not impressed
so right and by that you mean like the
Fed and repo actions and the Fed Funds
rate at zero and yeah and would
potential fiscal stimulus oh yeah
exactly the whole kit and caboodle
things that thinks the back in 2008 they
had to figure out that to invent now
that could just kind of push buttons now
they're noticing there happened to push
the buttons really really hard to have
any effect because you know you gotta
keep taking the smack if you want to
keep having the feel but uh well that's
where it is but the but you know
carrying that analogy forward a little
bit you keep pushing the button and
eventually you're just dead eventually
do a yes got that we've got that going
for us that's a real thing are we doing
anything
is there anything contemplated currently
that you think is anything beyond just
pushing that button again I mean are we
kicking the can down the road again
oh we just do a huge financial bailout
and run it negative interest rates for
24 months all right let's look back to
that I mean I had a feel a little bit
more fuel to the fire and then come back
to that cuz I think there's a really
nice pivot point there so just to make
some of the difference it's difference
between now and then so we got a virus
we didn't have that bit we got China
didn't have that then right back in 2008
China is sort of the up-and-comer now
China is you know pretty pretty solid
bantamweight this is this who we're not
talking about a 12 year old kid anymore
and they're making moves right now all
right they're not standing still they're
actually looking at this same hmm looks
like the US may actually be looking to
give up some territory well maybe we'll
be happy to take it I mean obviously our
friends in Russia and everywhere on the
planet unfortunately in a situation
where the kind of the moral political
and sort of de facto obvious leadership
the United States is no longer so
obvious everybody's kind of watching us
to see if the old lions lost a step and
on top of that back in 2008 coordinated
action across central banks and
governments was trivial
everybody got on the phone and called
each other and
çb did this the Japanese bank did this
these days everybody's kind of waiting
to see what's the right choice to make
for themselves that's another difference
another difference is we didn't have the
crypto economy and nobody was playing
with possibility of alternative monetary
systems back then and as they are which
means that we have a little bit of maybe
some choice you know if there's a real
issue of what's the flight to safety and
it looks like the dollars maybe not as
safe as we thought it was going to be
there's some other options out there
there's people who might actually decide
to do it even still other options so so
far I have to say that I'm not
particularly impressed with the
creativity is coming out of the top in
terms of the financial crisis that's
happening right now looks like they're
just going down to point out the
playbook
now the PlayBook has a few more rows on
it we've got that a thing that got
dubbed helicopter money and I get I can
see their finger hover it over that
button right now and then they in fact
need to it may be the right thing to do
because with Mitt Romney's thousand
dollar check to just make people have
cash and helicopter money are kind of a
match made in heaven
but you know the poison is a cure that
may solve a couple of problems and may
solve some pretty important problems it
all creates a whole bunch of other
problems down downstream so you're
kicking the can down it's not the road
anymore is it you're kicking the can up
hill and it gets bigger each time it's
kind of weird to sofyan problem but we
don't necessarily have to take it so
much anymore we don't necessarily have
to be kind of sitting here looking up
and saying please don't us again
it's not a tea party issue either
because we can all talk to each other we
can all coordinate and we can build
stuff and we can actually have the
ability to actually choose to build
stuff that we like and maybe build some
solutions that we prefer to see and then
we can actually show up and say hey you
know what I think maybe I ought to do B
instead of a and if you don't do B we're
gonna kind of do B anyway and off
and that's a very different way by we
you mean the people I mean the people
right and there's a lot of that going on
by the way
I'll give you an example this is
happening in real time and I can't say
that it's I mean it's a little scary
because it has it's got some potential
so those at four mentioned 70 million
people are gonna be an extremist in
about two to six weeks well one of the
problems are gonna have is making merit
well one of the old solutions is the old
fashioned rent strike seventy million
people all at once safe buck off we're
not paying rent then they probably get
away with it now there's a problem to
that because there's a lot of us versus
them energy and that particular approach
right but there's also a possibility
that being a hey everybody look we don't
want to go there there's a lot of better
ways to solving this problem in fact
there's actually some pretty triplica
trivial ways of solving the problem but
if nobody's gonna solve the problem
we're not gonna be the ones to take a
hit we're gonna solve the problem
ourselves and you know that's it here's
the choice it's no longer a choice of
what was the how did it work back in
2008 it's like tells you win heads out
tells you lose heads I win right yeah no
no we're gonna have to go ahead ahead
have a fair coin and and we'll take take
our take our beds and I think we can
even go further than that
I think we can actually start engaging
those people and say you know what I
hear you and I see it and it makes sense
and let's actually build a better design
let's all work together there's no
reason for us to actually even slow down
or wait we can solve these problems and
then flip it around the way that ought
to be anyway and put the politicians in
the following seat and and there's stuff
to be done and I'll give you an example
utilities cable that's hard I can't make
the lights turn off that is that's a
serious problem we can we can work a
little bit on that there's some
solutions to it but broadly speaking we
need the utility companies to continue
to function and continue to give people
electricity so that's a little bit more
of uh let's concur ajar local mayors and
governors to be able to be thinking
clearly about what to do and we can
support them I don't need to be this
isn't it be conflict well we're all
working together and all the twist
makers need to be supported and getting
the information they need to make good
choices so you could imagining a
crowdsourced program of real smart
people who've got skin in the game they
want to make their make sure that the
air conditioner works in the summer and
they come up with a proposal and a plan
that's a lot better than what the poor
mayor could figure out on his own
because there's a lot stuff going on
that's another example
but it's a game it's definitely a new
game this is not 2008 this is a
different situation one of the ongoing
themes here is sort of the retreat of
the legitimacy of the federal state and
the increase in the power of the people
this is on trend with that you think I'm
talking to John rabe earlier about open
source political insurgency sanctuary
cities and counties on left and the
right immigration and gun control right
fascinating thing there does seem to
just be a continuing erosion in the
faith and confidence that people have in
the federal government and in our
institutions just in general of course
media media academia and everything you
see this as an event that is it mm-hmm
interesting is it born out of this trend
or is it just yet another trend point on
the path towards some sort of new
organization I mean we're obviously in a
period of transition here we don't know
where we're going yeah so is this is
this on trend or of the trend or how
does it fit into this hole well I'm
perfectly frank from my point of view
were about two years early which is not
a lot but I was expecting this to be
more in the 2020 20 to 2023 timeframe
it's the virus that precipitated I mean
all the things that are going on we're
definitely baked in but you know and
pandemics or stochastic it was for sure
going to be the case we were gonna get a
pandemic this one's kind of like a
little bit of the low middle of what we
were you might be out there and by the
way these are gonna bunch of nasty ones
that are hanging around ready to go at
any points we actually got really
believed after you extremely good at
dealing with pandemics that's just the
future has to have that capacity we just
have to be a whole lot better at it so
this is a good learning an opportunity
but my daughter's bought these fancy
were they called something someone's
like a rubberized ice cube tray with
really fancy ice cubes diamonds and
snowflakes and things like that
a little behold you pour the water in
the ice cube tray and put it in the
freezer you get a snowflake the topology
of the technological and socio
technological landscape that happened be
operating in is like an ice cube tray
and if you happen to be in a socio
technical infrastructure that uses
newspapers and televisions and like
roads like the interstate highways a
cutting-edge technology and aircraft
travel is brand-new and you've got a
certain number of people that's an ice
cube tray that when you pour the water
and you come back out and you get the
government that we're used to that's
what it looks like we've got a new ice
cube tray inside when you pour the water
and pull it back out it looks like a
network interesting interesting one of
the themes that I've been hearing lately
- is that the era I've been pushing this
one a little bit myself I'm wondering
your thoughts the era of indiscriminate
connection is ending and by that I mean
you know globalization NATO expansion
social media out there everybody reach
put everything out there Connect connect
connect and maybe now are we
tipping towards where the smart money is
on strategic disconnection and I think
that this is a theme that can be related
both on a personal level with social
media in your communities all the way up
to globalization and lack of trade
barriers and capital flows and such is
it do we have a trend reversal in the
making here and if so is it wise is it
unwise all right I just you know seeing
things I think I agree with you that the
old that old trend of indiscriminate
connection is definitely do a as on the
on its way out and what I'd say is as
with all things there's a choice it
could be bad it could be good I would
say there's something a strategic
disconnection feels a little bit angry I
might suggest something like discernment
and right relationship oh here we go
that nice yeah and that's the
possibility now you have to use
discernment you have to build a capacity
use discernment to sense what
relationships are possible and what is
the rightness of a given relationship
and that's what you're seeking and wow
that's not bad that's always good right
what's the exact and and and it's always
available and the right relationship
mean might mean turn around and walk
away but doesn't mean you have to be
angry about it it just means that's the
right thing right now yeah so part of
this trend would be like on
showing some of our critical national
defense industries precision tooling you
know medicine medical productions things
like that so that we're committed mostly
to taking care of ourselves self care
yeah
rather than committed to this notion of
indiscriminate connection thirty years
all the way to its natural conclusion
right it's ourselves literally ourselves
our physical bodies as individuals in
our minds and our souls and our
relationships and our families and our
neighborhoods and our communities and
our towns and our cities and our
nation's in that direction in that order
solid foundation how do we increase our
discernment because discernment is the
key element it seems in all of this
right and have we been lacking generally
collectively in discernment our
discernment capabilities extraordinary
is extraordinarily so so can you tell me
why our discernment capabilities have
been eroded and then how do we
individually community family community
and a nation level increase our levels
of discernment and then put that into
practice Jordan well first again the me
say I will do my I will never my level
best to share some things of value there
are people who are vastly better
position than myself to respond to this
question okay so so modest just honest
let's go with integrity first okay and
integrity is pretty simple like think
about when you're trying to build a wall
with rocks or bricks does it have
structural integrity do you have a solid
foundation or things stacked one on top
of the other in the right order and
imbalance and that's that's integrity in
yourself integrity is all of you
connected as all of you showing up and
it's all about in relationship with
itself in a strong way again poise is an
aspect of that very similar I said when
I said again I was thinking about my
basketball player or a dancer or a boxer
we've talked about this actually that
sense of being poised and
that sense of having capacity to connect
your present self in your future self
with continuity that your future self is
in relationship to your present self in
the same way that all the aspects of
your present suffering relation
continuity integrity continuing that
sovereignty I ability to maintain that
and increasingly diverse and challenging
context this is like what keeps the
instrument in tune now if you've got an
old one of those old-fashioned TV
antennas and the wind picks up the the
static was I called the father because
like then the Fonzie I remember the
static picks up you can't see the
picture anymore there criticals if the
aim we've got a very complicated antenna
all right so it's very easily to throw
off a lot of the things that get thrown
up or on the inside you get triggered
you get angry you're judgmental you
think you know the right answer to get
self-righteous you want to be right your
ideological
you're afraid you know a big part of
sovereignty is being in relationship
with that being able to allow those
things to come up and and yet at the
same time not have them become the thing
that's happening in front of you you
don't want the interior view to getting
in front of your lenses you wanted to be
behind and that reality come through you
and then let your interior process that
and digest it and make it metabolize it
and there's a lot of things we don't
want to perceive and most imposed if it
is that kind of thing so discernment is
then first just becoming a clear
instrument and being able to hold that
clarity in as many possible constants as
you can and then building your
attunement right this is a real skill
one of the things that really really
really has harmed us a lot is a
childhood education you know when a kid
is sitting there in first grade and
everything around them is feeling quite
wrong their body feels like they should
be doing something else
and they are required to not listen to
the signals coming from their body and
do something that is in fact I will tell
you objectively obviously stupid you are
breaking their discernment you're
breaking it you're not even betting it
you're just breaking it and you're over
coding it into something else all right
you're turning a human being into some
kind of a machine and machines don't
have very good discernment good ability
to repeat the same thing over and over
again if you're building that kind of an
object you're trying to make a tool then
that's you're doing a good job if you're
trying to build a human being with
discernment you're doing quite a
disservice and it continues to build
because it becomes a feedback loop right
as you get out of out of connection with
these signals you can very easily get
out of integrity right when you're
divided against yourself when one part
of you definitely definitely does not
believe something but another part of
you needs it to happen
and you sort of repressed parts of
yourself in order to have other parts of
yourself working out instead of
mastering discernment you master
repression and self delusion itself
 and then you build it into an
institutional structure where people
make a whole lot of money by being
really good at bringing out the P up a
lot of integrity and giving them stuff
they never needed in the first place
that's a pretty dysfunctional
civilization it's kind of the kind of
thing that we've built but the good news
is the trend is reversed and we're
heading back from the direction of
discernment okay how do you say I mean
we can take this tangent if you want I'm
interested in education especially I
spent 10 years turning around some of
the underperforming charter schools in
the District of Columbia I'm fascinated
by education running out hood and what
you said really hit home actually that
were we're building tools but in doing
so we're creating like a sense of
oppression within within them
and you wrapped up by saying that the
trend is changing I don't really know
that it's changing in our school system
or in early childhood oh right so like
these inputs that we're getting into our
system which to speak so callously of
our children but you know these inputs
into our system they're still coming
with the the flaws of the system that we
have existed currently right so oh yeah
yeah you firmer at the idea of a trim
tab the trim tab I am as a Bucky fuller
was talking about how when you take a
look at a really really big ship and the
rudder it's huge right is pulling huge
amounts while you can't turn the rudder
so you don't what you do is you actually
turn a much much smaller object all the
way out of the end which is called a
trim tab which changes the disposition
of the rudder and it begins to change
the fact that butter more less turn
itself so the trend is changing but the
trend is changing what you might call
the most subtle ways possible like just
in in the liminal order there's a few
people out there hundreds right now
millions who are beginning the process
of grasping the reality of what is
possible what's necessary but that
begins it begins things and then the old
system is just getting hammered right
we've got a big one going on right now I
just heard from my daughters that their
school's
looking to potentially simply be
canceled for the rest of the school year
yeah so they're having to level up on
how to engage in tell education that's
just a huge opportunity it could be a
terrible one they could make make a mess
of it but it could also be a really good
one
and what's really powerful is these kids
know a hell of a lot more about how to
do things digitally than any of the
teachers or any of the administrators
like for sure a hundred million times
more like they are a powerful force and
they're powerful force unlike our
generation which at least for me at
least was was raised on a personal
computer that was one machine that you
dealt with are they're interacting
networked continuously as a native
language so to be perfectly frank I
would more or less put them ask them how
to solve the problem and then support
them in doing it if I want if you want
to go there now
education so in terms of discernment the
baseline is actually extremely easy and
we do early childhood developments best
let's talk like an actual infant I
actually I'll give you a simple example
this is taught to me by somebody who I
deeply respect when my daughter was born
my youngest daughter is now 16 and a
half months we did something different
something we did not do it's the older
ones which was before anybody picked her
up you would put your hands out as an
offer
and when wait and of course when she's
really really small you might wait a
little while because she has no idea
what you're doing to see if there's any
obvious choice on her part did she feel
right with that you know grandma cannot
come in and just grab you if grandma
wants to pick you up first you let you
decide whether or not that's something
you're into and this isn't you know I'm
not trying to say that you're asking the
child to make a choice but you're trying
to do is actually allow the child to
have the time to get a sense of their
own sense right not throw them constant
because you know the body has all kinds
of things going on and if you're
constantly jerked around from one place
to another and things keep happening you
can't make sense of it so to go slow and
and listen and then you listen like for
me like I don't know a six week old or
three day old is trying to tell me in
terms of whether I'd they want to be
picked up but I'm gonna give to take the
time and force myself to actually build
my own discernment discern it's a
two-way street it's always relational
always built in relationship and lo and
behold my daughter very quickly learned
how to very trust your own instincts
unlike before more first grader was told
not to trust your instincts and she gave
very clear signals quite often she had
no interest in a particular individual
that's just the way it was you know what
yeah I'm not gonna override her
sovereign choice not to be in
relationship with this particular
individual it's certainly not necessary
she's gotten quite good at it here's the
interesting thing human beings are
actually naturally very very good at
this skill and if you allow them to have
the space and the quiet and you know
don't put devices in front of them and
don't jam their sensory you don't
overload their sensorium with things are
not prepared for you keep the home
environment pretty quiet children will
begin to fill those holes and then all
you got to do is listen really closely
and support them and then you bring the
opportunity to ask questions you put
them in context where they have the
opportunity to discover epiphany and
then become aware of what epiphany feels
like and and this is maybe the last
piece on this remember we talked about
how in the age of broadcast television
they had to sort of do one size fits
nobody and education is kind of had to
do the same thing yeah particularly when
teachers got radically disempowered and
just had it going to teach to the to the
program one gigantic huge and completely
maladjusted curriculum that maybe works
for 8 kids in the entire country all
right well now is we don't have to do
that in principle you could create any
absolutely bespoke
learning environment for every single
individual in principle we absolutely as
a civilization could do it from birth
effect before birth at the moment of
conception you could begin the process
of dealing with that individual is a
singular event in the universe and
giving them the resources they need to
become precisely who they're capable of
becoming this is absolutely possible
right now in the civilization that we
live in and the returns on that are
infinite well no in fact they're
actually infinite in the true meaning of
the term right what's interesting is the
school system seems to be trying to
solve for scale right like we have so
many people so we have to you know put
the most basic thing out there to try to
hit the common denominator right the
most common denominator for people and
you're saying effectively we're not
hitting that at all it's interesting to
me this fits with my general you know
trend thesis about indiscriminate
connectivity and sort of yeah this
disengagement is that we'd no longer
need as you're saying to engage in that
one size fits nobody system that you
were talking about which is really about
maximizing connectivity across the
country in the frame of the federal
federal government and their their ideas
for education and now you're talking
about creating a bespoke learning
environment that is really only possible
because of the technology and the
information systems that we have today
right so it's an interesting way that
the technologies has led us at first to
be out there everywhere with everybody
but now can lead us into smaller
completely individualized customized
experience as people from conception as
you say Jordan yeah it's very powerful
and and I mean this in quite seriously
because if you think about the kind of
ask the question well how could you pull
that off that's a lot of time it is and
the only people who are gonna be able to
pull it off for parents all right well
to make this thing work you're gonna
have to actually create space for
parents to do their job which is to
parent and you have to empower the
parents to actually be parents but we
could do it I
first and you can do it and the
resources are available and we have the
capacity and every done this right as
soon as somebody chooses to start taking
responsibility for themselves the
possibilities that live within them are
enormous indeed indeed I feel like this
opportunity I just said opportunity not
crisis this crisis is creating a million
opportunities we're about to see what
it's like when the entire country is
homeschooling
first of all right exactly every but
everybody is at home with their kids
during the days five five days a week at
least for a couple weeks it could even
be a lot longer than that yeah some
places have already closed schools til
the end of April so I can't see schools
opening up early compared to the other
schools so this is an interesting
disruption that has created an
opportunity and an experience a
collective experience that we've we have
not ever had
I don't has there ever been a time where
virtually every child is at home with
their parents for extended time where
they're ordinarily supposed to be at
squabbling summaries of human
civilization up until the 20th century
but but not another environment no right
right exactly um what what other we
talked about another opportunity you
said coming out of this which would be
like looking at new peer-to-peer mutual
credit systems other financial solutions
we're seeing now there could be an
opportunity for new education systems or
at least a new perspective or at least
having the door cracked open into
parents Minds that hey maybe when I see
I can homeschool my kid in 90 minutes
and they learn more than they were there
all day long and we have all this other
time to do all those other stuff this is
gonna creep into people's mindsets and
it could lead to long term changes and I
feel like I'm seeing it already just in
terms of people's attitudes towards home
schooling do you see any other
opportunities trend changes that are
coming out of this crisis slash
opportunity that we may not have talked
about you know it occurs to me there's
probably a really good Greek word let me
give me a second here all right we're
Google in things now all right it's
called Kairos you're gonna use the word
Kairos it's neither a crisis nor an
opportunity it is a Kairos and this term
is from
Griese sorry I lost the taps I'm trying
to find you yeah I have so many tabs
open now I've never had somebody tabs
I've been wondering my computer hasn't
gone up this is a moment mad a Kairos is
a moment it's a moment where everything
is is rich with possibility and it's the
moment where what did this was the epic
Greek language where kingdoms are won
and loss and a single toss of the dice
we were in a Kairos and choice
our capacity to make effective choices
is the beginning the end of it so what
kind of possibilities arise well the
perfectly frankly we don't know yet
because the bigger the bigger the
momentum but bigger the possibility I
was using a metaphor described this
earlier so think about the world we've
been living in is like a like a like a
steel ball and it's rolling on a table
and the table has a big groove in it so
the ball is rolling in the groove it's
just gonna follow that groove I'm gonna
move the ball out of the groove you push
it really hard it kind of climbs up the
side of the group drops back in that's
like trying to change the education
system in the 80s and 90s but
Kairos makes the groove shallower and
shallower and shallower at a certain
point if the groove turns into a
completely smooth surface then you've
got this big steel ball riding on a
glass table with no groove at all
everything is possible and that might
happen as our capacity increases
remember the possibility that lives
right now in individual human beings
stepping into their sovereignty into
their discernment and then coming into
right relationship with each other using
these new network technologies and
information technology capabilities the
possibility space of that is
possibly millions of times larger than
the world we've been living in I'm not
kidding
like the mathematical orders and orders
of magnitude more possibility we can't
even conceive of it the possibility
that's available this lateness sitting
unused right now and so as the Kairos
Rises our capabilities begin to build
and as the Kairos becomes more intense
our necessity mother of invention forces
us to step out of bad habits and old
habits and drop old institutions and
things they've been holding us back and
maybe we don't make it maybe we do but
if we do we've stepped into more
capacity and at a certain point that
capacity begins to lift off they
actually begin to look around and say
wow we are actually on the other side of
something we're in an entirely new place
and at this point it becomes like a
science fiction novel or perhaps like a
religious story because it's real it's
there the possibility is quite simply
there now I don't know what the ending
is I don't know what we are truly
capable of but I have tremendous right
and I know that one of your goals is to
design for emergence right like what
we're working on right now is trying to
create systems that will allow for these
new ideas to bubble up to the surface
and it's a very interesting approach
that you're taking which is I don't have
the answer but I am working on a system
that hopefully will at one point
generate the quote-unquote answer yeah
that's right none of us had the answer
that's not how this game works right
it's a decentralized agency I think you
were talking about as well - and I'm
also thinking one thing I'm really
struck by through all this as you
describe all these people putting
together websites and and curate and
creation is a huge topic we could get
into as well creating all this new
information doing the analysis all this
stuff nobody is paying these people I
mean I think to do so much of this work
nobody's cutting you a check to be
thinking about this right this second
and you know for me more or less the
same thing what I've noticed is there I
feel like there is a call to service
that has finished
and people are responding and that man
that gives me the warm and fuzzies yeah
well I think it's same very much connect
to that same story about community at
the end of the day service is what you
need like a call of services that in
giving you receive and the truly
terrible feeling of doing something to
get paid exclusively to do it to get
paid to prostitute yourself to be able
to make ends meet or even worse not to
make ends meet to beget a slightly
fancier car than you used to have yeah
the antigen to that is service people
being called into it and as they wake up
into that and they realize oh my god
that's what I've been yearning for now
that is the process that also didn't
solve the meaning crisis right right
which we didn't which we didn't really
get to hear as well but I for one have
found yes I was thinking about actually
um I have been placed in positions of
service my whole life and I wasn't even
really aware of what's happening to me
when I was a child I did a number of
these outward bound adventures right and
one of the pillars of their whole ethos
is service right I've been involved in
other communities where the whole
concept is service I ran charter schools
in the city of District of Columbia they
paid me but it was also service right
we're also helping people one of the
fundamental tenets of the limo order is
service to our family service to our
communities to each other to your
brothers and and also we've turned it
around actually done service for the
country as well in our homes in our own
small ways we've coordinated national
service stuff it in my world this is a
trend that's growing is this a trend is
growing in your world is this a trend
that oh and if so how do we foster it to
continue to grow
once this Kairos moments this moment of
crisis opportunity has passed us how do
we continue to foster this sense of
service because these are the
connections and the meaning that were
many of us are really lacking in our
life today
that's a really good question
see
well I think
I think a big part of it to be perfectly
frank is
to demoralize the distractions
interesting and I really hope that
people actually get past that like this
is that's really opportunity right the
opportunity right now for a lot of
people is I had to turn on Netflix and
watch a bunch of junk for a lot or to
actually just try to find a way to be of
service you can be working telecommuting
you're gonna find out pretty quickly at
about an hour a day it's about much work
you're actually really doing and that's
a lot of time you got left over that you
could do something with and you're
either gonna be entertaining yourself
which is to say numbing yourself on
occasion doing something cool and I mean
I don't need to pamorah those poor guys
to try really hard and some of the
stories are amazing but to demoralize
the distractions and you're just I mean
come on now tell my daughters that
boredom is the mother of creativity and
there's just a natural a naturalness to
this it's getting back on track I think
it's really getting back on track this
is not about trying to like
then something new or two you push
people it's just getting people back on
track and helping them not get pulled
off track now this is more of a moment
of clarity leading sobriety than it is
trying to turn people into something
that never were
interesting reference there to 12 step
and addiction stuff that because service
there too is one of the primary
solutions to that process you're right
that's a it's probably something pretty
darn deep there it really is
there really is certain mean if you
haven't done it it's hard to describe
but if you do take the time and energy
to put it into someone else in something
else it does come back X 2 X 3 X 5 X 10
X whatever it is yeah it is hard to
describe you have to yeah yeah the the
it's a disposition isn't it it's a
disposition to be able to allow that
coming back to come if you're holding
tight mind if you're trying to control
the situation and make damn sure it
comes back then it won't and it's not
serviced then but if you actually are
able to allow yourself to allow and to
be curious in many ways that huh I
wonder what it's happening here and then
but you will look back and you will at
least in my experience for a long time
now I will look back and say wow yeah
that was that was paid back a
thousandfold
it really was and if we can find a way
to coordinate this and just and draw it
out of people on a much larger scale
which I you know I think we're seeing
which is just you tell me these stories
about the people that are putting in all
this work and I see the work that other
people are putting in we're all sort of
drawn to this at this moment right now
because I think we're all collectively
feeling the the instability and
collectively feeling this
there's lay there is a call there is a
call to service and people are
responding currently and I really hope
that we're able to carry this forward
after the dust settles here or the new
structures are built or whatever they're
going to come out of this in the next
few years and that we can continue to
grow that sense across the country and
the world really and that's that's sort
of what I'm doing every day and it's
incredibly rewarding for me and I know
it's rewarding for you as well this
really seems like a good a good place to
sort of wrap a little bit do you have
any other any other pressing burning
things that you're working on are
thinking about or you know do you feel
like prognosticating a little bit for
the next few months or anything you
might want to leave us with because I I
feel like this is I'm in a good place
I'm feeling really centered actually now
whereas the last few weeks have been the
last few days for sure have been just
madness yeah I'm actually feeling pretty
sent at you I mean we could go on
forever there's a lot going on and yeah
that's it this is a very weird feeling
isn't it it's a feeling where I tell my
dad does the other day you know we were
walking in the ocean you can see the way
of coming and it hasn't hit yeah but you
can see it and when it hits you you
could feel it and this
since it doesn't have those
characteristics you had these little
moments where things pop through we're
like oh wow the grocery store shells are
in fact stripped bare which is something
happens like something in the world
physical happen
but this wave is coming there is a wave
that is coming there's an exponentially
expanding virus that is coming there is
a fiscal crisis that is coming but it's
not the kind of thing that we're good at
feeling and that's but that's quite
disorienting it's a bizarre feeling from
my experience I can find myself in the
thick of it like going I think I did 10
hours straight I've just one call after
another call after another after another
call and then I took off my shoes and I
took my 16 month old daughter and walked
in the spring flowers and there's nobody
around
like whoa I don't even work what is
going on like what world am I in right
now how does this happen how is it
possible that simultaneously we can be a
war and peace but yeah well I think
that's where we are that's where we are
we're simultaneously a war in at peace
and and I was gonna ask actually on the
way out like what are you doing
personally as a way to deal with the
chaos around us right now but I think
you summed it up best with that take
some time with your family get outside
put your feet in the grass look at the
sky
smell the flowers re-engage with nature
find that peace that is actually right
there at home with you even though all
around the world everywhere right now
total chaos madness yeah but but you
know but you know even those people in
Italy they're finding ways to come
together and to be centered and singing
on the balconies I've seen videos of of
Spanish people or a guy in Spain leading
calisthenics from the rooftop of his
building there's like a little bit lower
of a roof and all these other buildings
on their balconies all around them
people joining him in like this group
exercise program you know it's those
little acts of kindness and humanity are
ways that we can solve for this problem
of how to deal with all this nonsense
that's everywhere so Jordan thank you so
much for taking the time to talk to us
today I really appreciate it I know that
you've been on the go and you're in
demand and so thank you again for taking
the time there's a million things else
so we can talk to and I'm sure we'll do
it again sometime soon and I just really
appreciate it and thank you very much
and thank you for everything that you're
doing and you know carry on and I hope
that your wife and your and your kids
are good and that you're gonna have a
good time hunker down wherever you are
and a different time zone than usual
these days so thank you very much sir
thanks jack and blessings to you and
take care all right I appreciate it
thanks - right bye-bye
[Music]