welcome everyone for welcome everyone to
the QA first of all as always I'd like
to begin by thanking all of you for
watching the series and the comments and
all the support so today we're going to
begin with the questions from the
patreon supporters and I'd like to start
with the question from Matt gum bleep a
trans reporter his question is what do
you think the extent of the
phenomenological differences experienced
in cognition by biologically modern
humans from significantly different
historical concepts context for example
pre versus post Paleolithic revolution
pre versus post actual age are the
hypotheses that accentuate the
differences such as sapir-whorf and
bicameralism credible so let's sort of
answer that in Reverse that bicameralism
I take is a reference to Julian Jaynes
book the origin of consciousness in the
breakdown of the bicameral mind so I
remember talking to somebody about that
book and they once said to me it's a
book filled with a hundred really good
ideas and a thousand really bad ones
so James had the hypothesis that before
a certain period of socio-cultural
complexity the two hemispheres were much
more distinct in their functionality and
the left hemisphere experienced the
right hemisphere as an independent mind
or consciousness that would periodically
command or speak to the left hemisphere
and this was a experience of the gods
it's a very interesting idea he tried to
marshal some evidence for it in terms of
ways of rereading ancient texts I find
the idea interesting and it does I mean
it does line up with some ideas from the
world later work done by it's you know
what brain patients and stuff like that
however overall I would say I don't
think the evidence
for it is that convincing I think
there's good reason to believe that the
problem-solving we see in in even let's
say let's talk about the much earlier
you know the Paleolithic period the
projectile weapons that are happening
during the Upper Paleolithic transition
and the calendrical and very
sophisticated technology and the trade
networks I find it very hard to believe
that that kind of sophisticated
cognition was possible without the kind
of functionality we see today which is a
pretty continuous and complex
interaction pretty almost seamless
between the right and the left
hemisphere because of the kind of
problem-solving that was going on there
so generally I would put aside that the
James proposal the sapir-whorf
hypothesis is this is the idea that our
language affects our cognition in the
way we think and then and there are of
course there are different there are
different versions of the sapir-whorf
hypothesis there are there from weak to
very strong the strong version is a
which is sometimes called a form of
linguistic determinism is that the
language you speak really seriously
constrains the kind of cognition you can
have and the idea is like famously or
infamously because it's not really true
there's a lot of ways in which is
factually inaccurate but you know the
idea that the Inuit people have many
different terms for snow and so they
could perceive many different kinds of
snow that people who are you know
presumably people in other parts of the
world can't
so I mean Berlin and Kay and others who
did tests on that you can get in huge
variation in the way people cut up the
color spectrum the in terms of the names
they have for colors and so some
cultures of look you know we have like
eight basic ones other cultures have
four right so people cut up the color
spectrum with their linguistic
categories in very different ways but
that seems to have no impact on their
be on their ability to actually
perceptually distinguish between
different colors different hues
different shades and think about it this
makes sense you you see many many
different shades of red
you know something between scarlet and
chartreuse or whatever the colors are
and you don't have a name for it but
you're still capable of perceiving it
finding it familiar etc so there this
the strong version of the sapir-whorf
hypothesis has been one of the most sort
of empirically disconfirmed hypotheses
in cognitive science now of course there
are weaker versions there's there there
seems to be some evidence for example
that being multilingual as opposed to
armani lingual can have a significant
impact on work your ability to use
executive functions from working memory
etc and and that you know that empirical
data is still you know controversial but
it's it's it's a reasonable position to
take with respected sapir-whorf
hypothesis now i suppose i have
something of a weak sapir-whorf
hypothesis in this way where i think not
so much our linguistic categories but
what I would call our cognitive grammar
the fundamental categories that we use
in order to work out our ontology and
articulate our experience I think that
has a significant impact on the way we
can formulate problems and try and solve
problems and I've articulated that in
the series now to to to the core of
Matt's question does that would somebody
living in the pre XV world have had a
phenomenologically different world in
one sense no I don't think for the
reasons I've just articulated that their
perceptual experience would be
fundamentally different but of course
perceptual experience isn't all that
goes into the phenomenological field the
way you are sizing up situations and
formulating problems which could be very
much affected by
your cognitive grammar how you how
you're basically creating a salience
landscape I think is very deeply
affected by your cultural cognitive
grammar and in that sense what you find
salient what you attend to what kinds of
problems you formulate what kinds of
situations you size up that I think
could be different and in that way it
could contribute to a phenomenological
difference and so a question that
emerges our final question before I move
on to the next one or questions it's
implied by Matt's question is does that
make the phenomenology of the people in
that period incommensurable and
accessible I know that's very that's a
very difficult question it's hard to
know how to answer it I think of course
there might be some aspects in which
their relevance realization is fitted to
their time and place and so there will
be a degree of inaccessibility however I
do think and this is something I try to
do in the series I think it's possible
for us to reverse engineer to a very
significant degree that cognitive
conceptual grammar and Tron and I talked
about it in the series and try to make a
worldview viable for us again so that
it's not just something we're conceiving
of it's something that is reshaping our
phenomenological field and and therefore
I think it's possible to at least have a
significant bridging of horizons between
our current phenomenological mindset and
those of people in the past so I hope
that tries to kids at least the
beginning of an answer to a very rich
and profound question so the patreon
supporter Mike Cohen asks the question
are you familiar with the work of
Fernando Flores he calls ontology if so
how do you see this work impacting the
meaning crisis I am not familiar with
that work at all I'm sorry and so I'm
just ignorant so I'm not going to make
any pronouncements on that I'll move to
the second question which is are you
familiar with the integral work of Ken
Wilber if so do you see
this offering anyways forth for the
meeting crisis I am somewhat familiar I
do not claim any kind of significant
expertise in with Ken Wilbur's work I'd
also I'm familiar with some people who
have come out of the integral movement
and some sets of practices that are
associated with the integral movement
such as circling in so far as I have
seen some of the practices I think those
psycho technologies those practices like
the circling practice I think will help
to play a very significant role in
helping us reconfigure something
analogous to die or the old Socratic
platonic dialectic to come up with
something like a meta psychology that we
can collectively share so that we can
get a much much more authentic discourse
going between us and I do think that
this is going to be upon here an
integral part of responding to the
meeting crisis in that I think we are
going to need these collective psychic
technologies and the intelligence of
distributed cognition in order to
reshape and reorganize our ecology of
practices for responding to the meeting
crisis so insofar as I can see that
connection I can see that work I would
like to point out though I just had a
there a wonderful discussion with dense
talk the guy who invented circling and
although he was associated with interval
a guy made it very clear to me in a way
that I found very insightful and helpful
that his original and ongoing
inspiration for the practice of circling
is Heidegger and not Ken Wilber and I
found that very very revealing and it
actually helped me make much better
sense of the practice and then what's
going on in that and I'm going to talk
about a hunter in the series we're
filming some of those episodes right now
and so I think I'll try and make some
connections there at that time I have a
more general familiarity and
in depth with transpersonal psychology
in general with that's the category to
which Wilbur is often put I know the
work of Michael Washburn which I found
much more developmental and dynamic his
book the ego in the dynamic ground I
found really useful Jurgen Ferrara's
work on revision a transpersonal
psychology and trying to set it into
relationship to participatory knowing I
think is a really pivotal book and I
think though and that notion of
participatory knowing and the work that
fur is doing on that or gave her air
provisioning transpersonal psychology
and another anthology called the
participatory term I think that as I
tried to argue in the series it's going
to be important to responding to the
meeting crisis right so the next
question from the patreon supporter des
are discovering meaning for ourselves in
engaging in the modern world of work at
arts how does our societal work
structure impact or assist the meeting
crisis that's a very good question I'm
hesitant to answer it because I don't
want to treat work as a homogeneous
category there's many different kinds of
work some of it of course very
satisfying other other forms of work you
know drudgery and bordering on
exploitation and so I'm very hesitant to
pronounce as a whole I'll try and but I
will never let's try and undertake my
responsibilities gave at least provides
some response to an important question
and so what I would want to say there is
the degree to which it is I think
unquestionable that work has a very
significant impact on our identity on
our cognitive practices and habits and
on a communicative practices and habits
so it's quite possible therefore that
work could have a very dilatory as
effect on the kinds of cognitive
practices you would need to engage in in
order to start to respond
individually and perhaps collectively to
the meeting crisis one way for example
in which that may more broadly apply is
something I talked about in the series
the degree to which we're involved in a
system I guess for want of a better word
a capitalist system we can be subject to
a a series of constraints that are
reinforced at work that who had
seriously trap us into confusing the
having mode and the being mode I'm not
arguing that this is a necessity of all
work as I said I'm very reticent about
pronouncing on a very heterogeneous
category in any comprehensive way but
there are certain shared patterns for a
lot of people within the the the market
economy that we work in that tend to
commodify things and tend to lead to a
danger of sort of trapping people in
modal confusion and this of course was
one of Fromm's persistent concerns and
it's I could see that as being
exacerbated by people's work now on the
other hand I don't want to I don't want
to just be dour about this I've been
increasingly asked to come to workplace
situations and talk about mindfulness
practices and wisdom practices I've I've
been working with Peter Gosar and there
Ferraro and there's and Todd to put
together well basically it's a business
it's called a Safiya framework in which
we're going to go to and with you know
go to business sites and offer a series
of workshops on how to improve
rationality insight self-regulation
empathy and how to coordinate the psycho
technologies of practices with the
explicit goal of not just sort of
improving workplace culture but in a way
that has a take-home value for people
have done a few focus groups with people
on this and
got a lot of very positive feedback so
there are also aspects of the work world
that are responding to this and so
there's hope that there might more and
more be a recognition of needing to make
meaning cultivation an important
consideration for workplace culture and
ultimately that's going to be I think
more and more important as we get
increasingly interactive with artificial
intelligence
so keeping human beings human beings
capacity for meaning cultivation and
insight and self transcendence are going
to become much more valuable because
those are going to be the traits that
are going to be distinctively for at
least for some significant amount of
time distinct from AI so I'm not
prophesying who should I have no
capacity to do that that's ridiculous
but there are reasons for hope right so
you know irrational hope that because
there are some as I said there's some
indication for interest in this in
workplace culture and there's definitely
going to be a need for it in the future
so patrons to the supporter Clinton asks
how broadly does the salience of the
affordance of multiplying live at a
totally different universe than people
for relying on paying or requesting
favors of them and who can otherwise
only use technologies and users so it
depends what you mean by different
universes it it's it's it's plausible
because of the neuroscience we have
about the way brain the brain sort of
wraps so we even have in another
primates if the primate is like for
example using the tool the brain will
wrap some of the machinery for
constructing identity around the
machinery for using the tool and this
has to do with that transparency opacity
shifting another thing
as I've talked about and so I think
there's a big difference between
somebody who can use a tool in that way
they can sort of see through it and be
through it and identify with it and
people who are as you've there I end
users are on the outside and the the
technology doesn't form a sort of a
cognitive prosthetic for them in any
significant fashion and therefore I
think it stands to reason on the basis
of that argument that their salience
landscape would be significantly
different given the degree to which they
can both end well and internalize the
technology I've actually in fact when I
was asked to talk again within the
business world on issues around people
adopting new technologies I pointed out
that one of the problems that many of
the corporations are facing and many of
the companies are facing is that they
are often only paying attention to a
utilitarian way of framing the new
technology showing people what the
technology can do and how it can improve
performance and improve productive
productivity in blah blah blah and that
leaves out the whole fact that we are
naturally born cyborgs that human beings
seek to indwell technology and to
internalize it and therefore their
identity is importantly existentially at
risk when they come into a new
substantial technology and that needs to
be taken into account when you're trying
to introduce new and new technologies
and this is basically an idea that goes
back or at least can be made coherent
with some of Heidegger's arguments about
how technology tends to create a
particular ontology in a particular way
of dwelling in the world
so the next is from an anonymous patron
subscriber when you talk about providing
a top-down structure of cyclic
technologies for these wisdom
communities especially for more specular
ones I sort of picture this as just a
tool shed for them to draw from whenever
they want to solve some problem
meditation helps relax and send off
positive vibes after a hard day at work
or the view from above would help me
plan for the future and therefore making
for successful in your view would that
really be sufficient or what else is
needed for them to pattern themselves on
and participate in his new or foreign
cycle technologies without diminishing
their significance yes I think there's
more to it than the tool shed model and
I try to convey this and I'm going to
talk about this again later in this
series with this notion of an ecology of
practices and so it's very important to
think about these various psycho
technologies all of these psycho
technologies are you know affecting what
we find salient doing relevance you know
affecting our relevance realization
machinery and so in that sense as always
that very machinery that's making us
adaptive and improving our adaptivity
also comes with inevitable cost and a
vulnerability to certain kinds of
self-deception
so the psycho technologies have
strengths and weaknesses and one of the
things you need to do and one of the
things the top-down strategy can do is
to provide people with reliable vetting
reliable information science
science-based where possible and a lot
of this is possible at the be science
base about the you know the strengths
and weaknesses of various psycho
technologies and how you would need to
coordinate them together so to give one
example which I will talk about later
what I do there's three episodes on
wisdom so I'm just gonna gesture towards
this now but it's coming up there's one
important one Porten Porten psycho
technology you need is called active
open mindedness and what active open
mindedness does is it helps in
you're inferential reasoning so that you
don't fall into certain biases like
confirmation bias when you're seeking
evidence for your inferential practices
etc and what it tends to do is it tends
to shut off that more intuitive aspect
of your cognition so you're not
constantly leaping to conclusions in
that sense it really improves the way in
which people use inference and evidence
to alter their beliefs but it has the
cost precisely of really you know
constraining and and and restricting the
intuitive insight machinery and so you
can have a opposite and complimentary
cycle of technology of mindfulness which
basically tries to shut down the
inferential processing the the attempts
to fix you know an assign belief and
tries to open up the insight and
intuitive machinery and of course that
is very beneficial
of course reporting insight for allowing
you to tap into you know the implicit
processing implicit learning but it also
carries with it a cost
I don't argue for and in in my you know
in my academic work my publications I
think the idea that mindfulness is a
universal panacea for all aspects of
self-deception I think that's just
empirically false and so mindfulness
also blinds us in certain ways to things
that need our inferential processing in
order to be appropriately addressed and
so what we need right is we need to be
practicing the two of these together and
learning how to optimize the balance
between them and of course while you're
doing all of that here's a problem with
both of these these tend to both be very
sort of you know sitted cerebral sedate
practices and they leave off the
important role of movement which is a
very powerful way of accessing our
procedural and participatory knowing and
so you should have a movement so I could
technology coordinated with these two
more cerebral Psycho technologies I'm
trying to give you an example of what
this talk pounds
strategy looks like it looks about how
to coordinate and create a
self-organizing ecology of practices in
which you get you know checks and
balances and mutual constraints between
the various psycho technologies also
part of this top-down strategy and this
is something that came out of a really
excellent discussed Syria a couple of
discussions especially the second one I
had with Jordan Hall this whole idea of
sort of a meta psycho technology a
psycho technology for how to learn about
and coordinate and an engineer and
integrate in the way I've been
describing psycho technology we're gonna
you know this meta psycho technology and
I'm very interested in what this might
look like I think it's good it's gonna
need to be sort of something that we do
collectively accessing a distributed
cognition I think it being something
very analogous to socratic and Linkous
and platonic dialectic and one of the
things I'm working on right now is to
try and recover what that was as a
practice there's some just excellent
work being done on that right now and
then to put that into dialogue with
current practices like circling
authentic relating that are also trying
to get back to a way of accessing a
distributed cognition putting it into a
collective flow state optimizing it so
that we can get a place in which we can
deeply discuss I sorry that sounds
trivial I'm really trying to emphasize I
mean there's going to be much more about
it say about this but we've which we can
deeply discuss both the theory and the
practice of psycho technologies and in
this collective way create models and
templates for how various ecologies of
practices can be coordinated together so
that's how I would answer the
questionable how the top-down strategy
looks like something more than just a
toolbox that top-down strategy has to be
really informed by some good science and
I think it also has to be really
informed by a you know a general thing
about you know understanding and
responding to the meaning crisis
so we have another I want to answer I
want to answer Daniel starlings question
first of all Daniel great great to have
a question from you it was such a
pleasure meeting your wife and daughter
in that on that beach in San Diego I'm
so sorry that I remembered and said she
was from that your sister all right that
was some sort of weird Freudian thing I
might haven't been been projected on to
you and I I'm sorry about that but I've
really appreciated your support and it
was such a pleasure to to talk to you
you my email and to talk to her to meet
your daughter I want to take a look at
your question so Daniel who is also a
patreon supporter said how could your
theory of relevance realization be
falsified such that it meets populist
criteria of demarcation so that's a very
that's a very difficult question to
answer it's a very good question
one of the problems I would have with it
and I am and so I wanna go carefully
here is I'm sort of generally reject
poppers notion of falsification I think
of the work that was done by doing the
Quine all kinds of issues about how you
contribute any proposition into a
falsifiable proposition by just adding a
conjunction you know do it adding a
conjunction there's so I think in
concordance with many I think a
consensus in the philosophy of science a
falsification ISM the idea that science
progresses by falsifying hypotheses I
think is something I'd want to challenge
so we next move to another a theoretical
problem in that you know the argument
the argument for relevance realization
is supposed to be an argument pointing
towards sort of constitutive necessity
things that the system would have to
have and so in there's an aspect in
which the prob the the situation the
the notion of relevance realization
couldn't be disconfirmed that you
couldn't sort of pile up empirical
evidence against it because because of
some of the transcendental argument the
very ability to pile up the evidence is
going to presuppose relevance
realization machinery you're going to
get into a bit of this sort of
self-defeating position because if like
there's a sense in which if cognition is
not dealing with combinatorial explosion
if it's not dealing with able to find it
this right there's a sense in which you
can't be cognition so that aspect of it
I I think is something that has sort of
more of a transcendental argument it's
not as strictly transcendental because
it's built up from considerations about
actually empirical facts about you know
combinatorial explosion limited time and
resources the finitary predicament and
so it's not a full-blown content
transcendental now they I know the
petite or there but particular claims
about how the relevance realization
might be implemented I think those are
eminently falsifiable so I get that it's
I think it's quite possible this
confirmable sorry to be more more
consistent I think it's possible that
efficiency and resiliency might not be
the correct logistical norms or or there
might be other ones I have no clear
argument that what I'm presenting is
exhaustive so in that sense it is just
directly an empirical inductive and
abductive hypothesis the and something
that I'm going to get into in episode 32
the way that might be particularly
implemented in the brain in terms of
self-organized criticality in the firing
and small world network formation in the
wiring that might be that might be wrong
it might be that although I think in
some sense it's it's highly plausible
that it's gotta be related to small
world network formation but you know
that might be too crude to Vega model
there might be other
ways in which dynamical systems can be
understood that might be much more
purpose perspicacious and be much more
in comport with the empirical evidence
we're going to get out of the brain so
in this in one sense on pain a sort of
epistemic self refutation as long as
you've grant me certain assumptions of a
combinatorial explosion and finitary
predicament something like relevance
realization has to be the case but the
particular set of bio economic
logistical norms and the particular
implement in which that might be
implemented in the brain I think those
are all empirically dis confirmable
hypotheses it might be for example that
neural synchrony actually isn't doing
significant data compression and and
that's not how the system is trying to
generalize all of these strike me as
directly dis confirmable and therefore
empirical so you have to be very careful
and of course this is one of the tricks
that you tricks of the trade and when
you're doing theoretical psychology
about what is sort of what is something
that's open to empirical question and
then what is something that is in what
it is presupposed by empirical data that
is not in question such acts as
combinatorial explosion and the finitary
predicament I hope that sort of answered
your question Daniel and I hope we get
to talk again in the future so so I've
got a question from Twitter
Oh noir patreon the question is how
would you describe your personal meaning
purpose in one sentence so the the the
cheekiest thing I could do is my meaning
or purpose is to respond to the meeting
crisis and there we go that was done
that was easy and that would make me
like a real jerk right uh but there's
there's there's a deeper truth to that
in that for me trying to really
understand what meaning cultivation is
and what wisdom is such that I could
make a contribution to send so
pretentious and I don't want it to be
that's I'm gonna I'm trying to convey
that with this link that I could make a
helpful contribution to the reduction in
foolishness and the affordance of
flourishing such that people's sense of
connectedness to themselves into each
other into the world is enhanced that's
that's my meaning that's my meaning so
another patreon supporter been BR asked
do you have any relatively quick natural
hacks to make entering the flow state
easier natural as opposed to
electro-stimulation feedback or
pharmacologically and also something
quicker than decades of meditation yeah
a natural manner mental feedback
exercise to present to practice to
entering to naval enter in the flow
state so I don't know what how much that
means I don't think there's sort of a
sort of a quickened sort of dirty
magical formula you can you can do for
the reason that the problem that has to
happen and for to maintain the flow
state is right there has to be an
ongoing increase in the challenges and
demands facing you or else your capacity
for learning and problem-solving it will
overtake the environmental demands and
then you will fall out of the flow state
and begin to move into boredom one thing
I could recommend you could start taking
up that will very quickly start to get
you into the flow state is to take up a
a challenging movement practice for for
example for me in Tai Chi Chuan does
that precisely I mean a lot of the
Taoist practices and you don't you I
mean you can practice them for years and
they they are inexhaustible in their
capacity to teach you and transform you
but they also start to rapidly get you
into the flow state because these
practices I mean Taoism is basically the
religion of flow induction I mean it's
more than that but it's that's a lot of
the core of it so finding a movement
practice and why do I emphasize move
practices because they tend to give us
they're much more likely to give us that
clear feedback then that we need we can
tend to make them challenging just by
rearranging the fireman or putting
demands on our balance and movement
practices get the cerebellum to kick in
and having the cerebellum kick in is
really important for helping to increase
the chances that you're going to get
into the flow state so I would recommend
considering something like that as a way
of getting at least an initial practice
that can initially get you into the flow
State what you'll find though is that
the flow State
it has this wonderful dialogue right as
you're doing as the as the practice
engenders the flow state the flow state
starts to take you more deeply into the
practice you start to see things in the
practice and then that takes you in
deeper and so not only are you rewarded
with more flow you're you're you're
rewarded with a deeper understanding of
what the practice is doing for you and
through you so another patreon supporter
has asked the a Gordon gold is ask the
question do you have any thoughts on how
our transition from longer form linear
narratives to more choppy and fragmented
at mean culture impacts meaning-making
and a sense of personal identity
continuity yeah I do and it's something
that I'm currently working with on Chris
master Pietro were we're doing work
based on some really interesting work
done by Han and he's got a whole series
of books dealing with this kind of thing
especially I would recommend this but
it's not it's his work isn't that bad
it's not like reading corn but it's not
a book you take to the beach but the
sense of time is a particularly
important book so he argues that our
experience of time is is being
fundamentally changed a time is becoming
more sort of atomized and buzzing rather
than you know flowing in a cascading
manner for us and that goes back again
to that phenomenological difference
thing we were talking about earlier
right so let me give one really
interesting way in which you can see
this let's let's take it as a reasonable
because we have evidence for this that
music was one of the was a central
psycho technology invented in the upper
paleolithic transition that music is a
psycho technology that plays with your
salience landscape and your insight
machinery and your flow machinery right
powerfully music is a universal so let's
say that music is like really central
like this notice one of the one of the
things and I want to apologize I can't
remember the name of the person the
theorist is doing this right now I
apologize
anyways the argument this this theorist
is making is talking about the death of
melody that in our music because of the
proliferation of streaming and YouTube
and you know all of this and so
therefore the increased competitiveness
what's happening and think about how
this is like a kind of bullshitting
right the salience of the music is
becoming right more and more prominent
at the expense of any of any complexity
and cognitive and perceptual cognitive
processing of the music so we're getting
music in which right we're getting more
and more just hooks being linked
together more and more rhythm and melody
which is often contributed contributes
to a narrative sense to the music is
being significantly undermined and so
like if you listen to some current music
a lot of it a popular music of course
what I'm talking about right it's very
much hook there's very little melodic
change right
very rhythm heavy very repetitious this
is often accompanied by a significant
lyrical impoverishment so there's not
that much sense of a narrative
development within the lyrics and so all
of this is I'm trying to give you a
concrete way in which our experience of
time as being atomized
because when we engage in music we get
into a participatory way of knowing how
we are extended development in
developing cells through time that's
what music is that's what it triggers
that's the kind of identity it involves
and the way in which that is a
connectedness to the environment and as
we are removing the the melody and the
complex cognitive processing and getting
caught up in in the salience we are
tending to a demise that time and that
sense of identity in in in very
important ways and I don't I don't
believe anybody's done an empirical work
on this it'd be very interesting to see
interesting in an epistemic sense
probable not interesting in a moral
sense of course the impact that this is
having on people's cognitive processing
there and there and there and there
their sense of narrative identity and
which is a mess of course with their
sense of modal identity the agent having
a relationship I would predict that we
would see a significant impact on people
who had only been exposed to this kind
of non melodic music but that of course
is an open empirical question so I hope
I have answered your question in an
interesting fashion so one final
question from a patreon supporter
Anonymous
you mentioned that you struggle with
social anxiety disorder this is
something I've also struggled with as
well I just want to pause here and say
like I just I get this I understand this
I don't know you you don't know me but I
think it's important just to say here
how much of an impact on a person's life
this has and so I I don't want to do
something trivial but I I sympathize um
very clearly about what you've just said
and I hope you are finding some
successful interventions I'll return to
continue to the questions severely
impacting my academic career yeah I get
that because academia is already
a terrifically paradoxical place in
which you are put into competition very
competitive thing with strangers yet it
often requires a kind of epistemic
intimacy you have to be engaged in
discussion and debate yeah it's very
challenging I totally get that okay so I
was wondering how you suggest handling
it outside of the usual Lutz CBT
medication how this work could be
relevant to those suffering from social
anxiety disorder so one of the things
that helped me precisely because it
wasn't just CBT or medication and you
are already saying you know you those
definitely need to be pursued and was
was these movement practices that I was
talking about and I've also seen how
this is helpful when you're going into
things like the these collective
dialogue practices so when you're in a
move when when you get good at a
movement practice and you get you get an
increased self-awareness and of being at
home this in your body that gives me at
least and I don't so please understand
the kind of advice I'm giving you I'm
giving you personal advice I don't know
of any scientific work backing this up
but when you have this increased
self-awareness that of course can be
combined with meditative techniques CBT
techniques to help so it can magnify and
help your ability to interact with your
with your symptoms from and that's
something I found but in addition to
that what it gives what it gave me was a
sense of presence and groundedness that
was not dependent on the social
reinforcement I was gay I was getting in
the situations and it acted as a you
know so in the in the in the disorder of
course we tend to misinterpret ambiguous
action as negative or rejection action
from other people and having that sense
of how I was present
and grounded that was independent from
that evaluative machinery acted it acts
as it cos keep the hyper-vigilance and
the OV interpretation of the the the the
signals i'm getting from other people
also as you get into your body and you
activate that participatory knowing you
tend to get access to other ways in
which least that's is what i found i
want to keep qualifying it that way
other ways of connecting to people that
don't seem to be as quite as cognitively
penetrable by the anxiety machinery and
so i am able to sort of sync up and
connect to people in a way that isn't as
directly attacked by the anxiety
machinery so that for me has been
particularly helpful for sort of those
three reasons those practices the
movement minding breakfast has helped me
carry mindfulness into moving around in
the world and help to increase the other
the effectiveness of the other
interventions being grounded in and
being present through my body right
gives me a counterbalance that that
sense of you know disconnect and you
know being in no no not being properly
present to others or people being
inappropriately present to me and then
as I said thirdly by accessing the
participatory knowing I found that it
gave me another way of communing with
people and connecting to people that
wasn't as cognitively penetrable by the
anxiety and that also helps help has
helped me as a counterbalance alright so
so we're switching to some live
questions oh wait we have another
patreon supporter I like well would
would it be possible for you to create
some sort of resource or conglomeration
of your etymological points that you
think are important yes I think I'm
going to try and do that
I've also noted in episodes and
commentary where I have sometimes made
an etymological error and I've gone back
and tried to correct it or so I yes
very much like to do that and there'll
be some more of that going
I'll try and figure out how we could
make that work how we could make it
available to people because I understand
the interest because again and this will
come up and and and I'm going to be
filming one of these episodes soon but
it's not gonna be coming out till much
later I guess maybe January of 2020 well
good I'm filming an episode on Barfield
and that sort of ideological argument
and how it overlaps with some of the
work done from you know the lake off and
Johnson framer I'm gonna be talking
about that so yeah I think it yeah
and of course Heidegger who's also
brings this up and it's sort of
etymological arguments so I'm that's a
very good request I'm gonna try and
figure out in conjunction with that how
to put together so some of the animal
article resources although there you
should know that there are some very
good etymological dictionaries out there
and online and you might want to begin
by consulting them but I if I'm
interpreting you correctly you'd like
more than just this sort of etymological
dictionary you'd like me to perhaps
comment on that Edda model how that on
how that etymology is relevant to
particular issues in the series how it
pertains and so you want something more
than just the etymological dictionary at
least that's what I'm presuming so I
will try and figure out how to make that
happen so I want to thank the supporters
on patreon your contributions are
helping to fund solutions to the meeting
crisis and research on that both in the
lab and in outreach there are many
benefits including priority question
asking which is you've just seen being
enacted here early access to the videos
which I know some people are finding I
talked to some people about this and
they find that valuable you get them
released a day before they're released
publicly I know for some levels of
support
there's also the opportunity to talk to
to talk to me directly and so I think
I'm getting some feedback that there
people are finding these benefits from
patreon support valuable and and again I
want to thank people for that so a few
more questions these are sort of some
questions from coming in live one
question from Twitter I'm interested to
know how do you think automatic
automation and AI will affect the
meeting crisis that is a profoundly
important question and I want to at some
point in this series to vote quite a bit
of time to that probably towards the end
where I'd sort of do a bit of wrap-up
hmm there's many ways in which I think
it's gonna happen and first of all it's
I mean in just sort of a coarse way and
I don't mean an unimportant way by
saying that what I mean it's just at a
time of the sort of level of resolution
many people's economic lives are just
going to be dramatically altered and
that's going to have an impact on you
know their sense of meaning their sense
of connectedness but also and I want to
tread very carefully here there's two
ways in which the advent of AI is going
to impact on the moon crisis first of
all and this is something I said in a
discussion I had early on this week the
advent of artificial neural intelligent
isn't going to be like a digital event
it's not going to be no autonomous AI
then bang autonomous they are no it's
gonna be doing what it's doing it's
gonna be growing right and I strongly
suspect before reasons that go back
hundreds of thousands of years that we
will do what we have always done with
emergent technology we will cyborg with
it because we are natural-born cyborgs
other than oxygen in my naked body
everything else in this room and
everything else that's happy
is technology we are natural-born
cyborgs we will cyborg with this stuff
right and the computer you know
computer-human interaction research is
growing dramatically because it turns
out as I've mentioned right when you try
and do computer brain interaction it's
not as hard as we thought it was going
to be because the brain does this
wonderful thing because we're
natural-born cyborgs it redesigns itself
to try and optimize its integration into
the interface with these technologies
which is kind of science-fiction scary
right and but is that going to happen I
see that happening and so the notion of
what we are and our identity and we're
like think about how we identify with
this technology our clothing right right
and so our identity is going to be
shifted and altered in a fundamental way
room and think about you how your
identity is altered by this thing it's
gonna be dramatically transformed in
ways that are kind of unforeseeable as
we more and more directly side work with
this stuff what and what's that going to
mean so I think that's gonna have a huge
impact on the immune crisis then there's
another one and I want to tread very
lightly here and very respectfully but
the advent of general AR like you think
Darwin had an impact on our religious
sensibility towards our identity in our
existential place you think Copernicus
did you think Darwin did though that's
nothing - what's gonna happen if and I
believe it's much more when we get
artificial general intelligence it is
gonna impact on ours our religious and
spiritual sensibility in ways that are
going to make the Darwinian impact and
the copernica can the impact look small
what what if you what if you may meet a
human-made machine that is capable of
self transcendence and from that self
transcendence capable of acting speaking
and advising you in a deeply
existentially wise manner
well while being also able to put that
advice and that practice into something
profoundly X is aesthetically beautiful
what do you do with that what do you do
with that what do you do with the
notions of spirit and soul and I am NOT
and anybody who knows me I am NOT making
fun of people who have religious
commitments I don't do that but what I'm
asking you to consider is that this will
have an impact on our sense of who and
what we are that will be more profound
than the Darwinian and the Copernican
revolution and I think it will be
exacerbated by the point I previously
made that as that kind of autonomous AI
emerges in a way that challenges our
sense of uniqueness as spiritual beings
we will already be deeply cyborgs with
this AI so we have one or tweat like I
don't believe in any sort of simplistic
transhumanist utopia and which will get
the rapture of the cyborgs or some
 like that nor do I think the
light up of the lighter the you know
being a Luddite like people are about
Darwin's theory of evolution right are
things like that that's not an
alternative right I think what we can do
and what we should do is and I think and
I've made man I have a talker then I
can't go into this argument now but
please look up let's talk about why the
creation of AI requires the cultivation
of wisdom on our part I think we have an
additional important moral imperative
art to cultivate with
such that as we cyborgs and make these
machines they do not just have
intelligence but they have rationality
and wisdom and a capacity for
self-reflection so that they can be more
authentic in how they deal with their
own proclivity towards self-deception
and such that they might be much more
consonant with a new way of
understanding our spirituality that
won't be challenged by machines who we
would have to in all good conscience
call spiritual and to whom we would have
to enter into existential and moral
relations one of the things I'm trying
to argue and this is why this difficult
abstract material right now and
relevance realization is so important
because I'm going to use that to try and
argue for a sense of spirituality that
will not be put at risk by the advent of
our cyborg you know descendants and
artificial general intelligence oh so
apparently I've just reached 10,000
YouTube subscribers so thank you very
much for that benchmark achievement I
really appreciate it and I've really
appreciated the questions or I'm going
to started a little bit late so I'm
going to go another five minutes and
maybe take one or two more questions
that people might have and so a question
is just coming up now I'm really really
pleased I can't follow all the chatting
that's going on because it's so dense
but I want to assure people that I do
look at these the the chat later
and and I find it very helpful so thank
you for that thank you for your
participation and thank you for talking
to each other and thank you for talking
to me so one final question you've
spoken about sport and movement
practices do you see traditional sport
Western team sport specifically as
opposed to Eastern practices having
potential in the ecology of practices
that get the harnessed in the future
that's a really interesting question I
don't know if I'm competent to answer it
because I have looked at sports
psychology I'm not completely ignorant
about it but the area I know about has
to do on the coaching side and the
relationship between the coach and the
athlete and how that's relevant to
internalizing this age and therefore I
can I I don't like to comment where I
don't have any knowledge so I can
comment on that aspect insofar as
athletics western athletics depends on
the coach athlete relationship I think
that is a powerful way of training and
training in a way that you can put into
action how to internalize a third-person
perspective you know at least in this
constant in this context a more
sage-like perspective and therefore if
people could you know take use of make
use of that experience it sort of exact
it into a more existential project I
think that that that long you know that
long-term practice of internalizing the
coach in ways that you have to put into
procedure on participatory knowing could
be a valuable a valuable platform from
which you could develop internalizing
the sage you know as the child is to the
adult the adult is this age so I could
see via that important relationship in
modern athletics a potential way
in which Western sports could contribute
to responding to the meeting crisis in
the way it gives people real engaged
embodied in active practice in
internalizing something at least
analogous to the stage and that could
really help people on if they were you
know they explicitly go back and try to
exert that in cultivating the ability to
genuinely or perhaps that's wrong
adjectives running ever more
comprehensively and deeply internalize a
more profound sage figure and thereby I
mean you know contribute again to that
sort of top-down capacity to cultivate
an ecology of practices
oh that that question came from the
patreon supporter Andre stringer so
thank you very much for that Andre now
as you know I think there's also wet
some Western movement practices in
general outside sports that I think are
very important so in October I'm going
to go down to one of the retreats
offered by Rafe Kelly you know the
evolved move play and some of you might
have seen some of the two of the really
I think interesting I found them very
interesting interviews that I had with
rape
so Rafe has basically created an ecology
of practices in which the movement
practice of parkour parkour out in
nature it plays a central role in the
ecology of practices that he's putting
together for his community it's very
interesting at you do you do the parkour
out of nature then there's comeback and
there's something like a circulating
practice around the campfire so I think
that is also very important and I hope
to have more insight about how that
might operate after I've been there on
October and I'm really looking forward
to that all right so I believe our time
is up and I'd like to again thank you
thank you all the patreon supporters
thank you for the people who tweeted
thank you for all the people who are
chatting right now and again I thank you
for the subscribe
on the YouTube channel I'm not going to
get into specifics I am currently
working on a another series another
video series it won't be as long only
only 20 episodes and so I promise you
I'm very excited about this new series
and I have more to say about it soon
they're talking a little bit about it
and some of the interviews and so I
promise you there's going to be a lot
more content forthcoming on a regular
and reliable manner so once again thank
you very much I've tried my best to
answer your questions so take care and I
hope to see you again in our next Q&A
goodbye everyone