so as I've been contemplating these
videos and I've been thinking about the
the right bite size I've noticed that in
order to convey the bigger picture
there's a whole lot of smaller bites so
at this point I'm going to try to
proceed by grabbing the largest bites
that I think I can convey in say seven
minutes and then trying to put them in
an order where bigger pieces can
actually start to come together so what
I'd actually request is that in the
process if you happen to be looking at
these at all of looking at them that you
contemplate each piece as being
endeavoring to stand alone but it
definitely doesn't make sense
fully outside of a much broader context
and there is in fact a much better
context so today I want to talk about a
model that I call the the arc Heidi
Smith model in I don't think it's very
well known it's not as far as I know
published in any fashion and it's more
of a heuristic but it's useful and so
alright so here we go the premise is
that we can identify three consistent
phases in how human beings as
individuals and groups operate together
strategically I suppose that's not
really the best term but you'll get it
almost it's almost like a typology so
the first type is what I'm gonna call
the wild type and importantly the the
key context of the wild type is that the
wild type is optimized for adapted for
the niche of just nature so human beings
where the primary problems are
associated with survival in nature are
the wild type senses are received
evolved toolkit and is what we became
over two and a half million years and
what we very much were four to 250
thousand years
and we got good enough at it that we
developed a toolkit that I will call
consciousness that enabled us to move
into any new niche we could be in in the
African savanna it could be the Arctic
it could be Polynesians out in the ocean
and in a timeframe that is much much
faster than biological evolution could
develop an adaptive capacity that not
only made us able to survive in that
niche but very quickly actually made us
the peak predator in that niche and so
the wild type human has this capacity to
use a way of working together as a group
to achieve a capability of very very
rapidly building a toolkit that enables
them to enter into and become the peak
predator in any natural nation and when
I'm talking about consciousness I have
to be a little careful because that's a
really wide-ranging word that means a
lot of things to a lot of people so I
actually been something specific and
kind of simpler maybe a little bit not
intuitive and that is the thing that
happens when different people come
together and are capable of engaging in
a good-faith conversation the sort of
the synergistic value of multiple
different human perspectives working
together that generates something which
is much much larger than the sum of the
parts and so that's actually what I mean
by consciousness and maybe I should use
a different term for it but it is in
fact the content of most of our minds
right most of what we have in our minds
is the consequence of interactions with
other people that upgrade our sense of
what's happening in the world how the
world works and how we should be
responsive to it so culture for example
is produced by consciousness and
consciousness is generated in the
context of culture and so this complex
of a wild type human in a arbitrarily
large number of possible niches using
consciousness in the context of culture
to produce a culture that is adapted to
a niche is the first big piece so then
some
interesting happens when the nish shifts
from being nature to being consciousness
and culture itself
this happens when wild type groups enter
into conflict where they can't just
migrate further to resolve a conflict
and so my wild-type tribe and your
wild-type tribe have filled their local
niche and they're beginning to bump up
against each other as population
increases or as we maybe hunt native
animals to extinction and there's no
other place for us to go that if I move
this way there's somebody else there
this way there's somebody else there
that humans have expanded to fill all
available space and have begun to
actually fill the carrying capacity of
that space and now we're actually in
conflict with ourselves as our primary
selection requirement so stage 2 now it
emerges in stage 2
and I think this transition is probably
the most important part of this model
I'm going to call the domesticated type
domesticated type has the ability to
coordinate much much larger groups of
people than are available in the wild
type and it does this by taking
consciousness and culture and making a
move that simplifies both of them
enormous lis while maintaining a
substantial portion of their capacity to
generate synergistic capabilities and
also enabling them to scale so on the
one hand we move from consciousness to
narrative and on the other hand we move
from culture to society and in both
cases this basic way of feeling is that
is it the something that is very
informal in a very co-produced so
consciousness really has no content
other than the contributions of all the
people who are part of the conversation
and nobody has any particular priority
in the cover
narratives doesn't work that way
narrative actually in some sense lives
out there it's a formal narrative it's a
form of Mythology it's a dogma it's an
orthodoxy that you relate to as
something that is in some sense older
more foundational more real than you and
you have to alert it and understand how
to operate within it you don't really
have any authority over it and to the
extent there is any authority this
actually exists embedded in the
framework of society which is a more or
less formal it is certainly real it may
in fact be articulated it may not group
of individuals who aren't everyone who
have specific authority to relate to the
narrative so you name for example a a
priestly caste who has the
responsibility for interpreting and
maybe then updating the official
mythological or religious narrative or a
kingly cast who has responsibility for
updating and modifying the official
legal narrative as it were and this is
essentially the toolkit of domestication
and with this combination of narrative
and society domestication has the
ability to grow very very at scale in
comparison to the wild type so the wild
type seems largely bounded by our
natural what are called Dunbar and
limits so a hundred and fifty people in
a tribe you can have some second cousins
out to fifteen hundred people you have a
small kernel and say twelve that are
your close close knit group and this is
all largely biological that our bodies
are deeply deeply processing Dunbar kind
of signals that maintains that coherent
group of about that size but once a
group gets bigger than that the wild
type has a really hard time maintaining
the integrity of the group domesticated
has a whole set of mechanisms not
largely narrative in the police see
mechanisms in society it allows it to
scale and so you get large city states
and the thing is that in a in a fight
domesticated outcompetes wild most of
the time and over time as domesticated
continues to progress vert by virtue of
the ways that one can in fact get more
and more capacity using
and story and scale domesticated
effectively extinguishes wild-type and
so you'll have some territory and it'll
be sort of a little bit Geographic
expanding territory is now within the
boundary of the kingdom and now we enter
into the third phase
so if wild-type is distinguished by the
fact that it's misha's nature and
domesticated is distinguished by the
type that its niche is in fact
consciousness and culture this third
type which I'll call the feral type is
distinguished by the type of its niche
is narrative and society so it operates
within the boundaries of the kingdom so
as the kingdom clears out the wild type
in a sort of overloading and controlling
the wild humans that are within it and
keeping them domesticated and
coordinated within a social narrative
framework you then begin to see the
emergence of a niche for defection a
niche that begins to lose connection
with nature because it's now fully
intermediated by narrative and by
society it begins to perceive society
itself as being in many ways reality
narrative itself as being reality and
this gives rise to effectively two major
failure conditions that seem to always
show up in domesticated type no
domesticated types so far has figured
out how to be durably resilient to this
set of failure conditions one is
delusion which is a an identification
with a framework an identification with
a narrative with an ideology that takes
the framework takes the ideology takes
the story as actually being reality as
more real than reality so a confusion an
inability to actually perceive reality
directly and to connect with reality
directly and an increasing connection to
an addiction to and dependence on the
toolkit of the stories that you've been
taught and that you've mastered learn in
the context of domestication and then
the other is defection which is the
perception of society as being first and
foremost authority as being first
informed
a subtle or not so subtle conflict
between domesticated people so you could
actually see it as the vertical
hierarchy with a sense of people who are
on the lower levels of the hierarchy the
people above them are extracting value
they are taking an advantage they are
oppressing or being tyrants or even in a
peer-to-peer hierarchy a a growing sense
that is kind of every man for himself or
another sense you know if you're looking
around the table and you don't know who
the sucker is the sucker is you and this
actually emerges in circumstances where
and I'm gonna use a kind of poetic
language where justice is no longer
happening and I think justice can really
be neatly described here when when good
acts are not rewarded and bad acts are
not punished justice is absent so you
can figure this is almost like a loop
that there's a an action an individual
or group engages in an action that
action either shows up as being broadly
beneficial globally beneficial to the
larger community or it ends up being
locally beneficial to the individual of
the group in to the detriment of the
larger community
it's either I'm acting in a way that is
in my interests and our interests or I'm
acumen whether it's an hour my interests
and antithetical to our interests and to
degree to which the things that are both
local and global don't get rewarded and
things that are local but anti global
don't get punished we're now in the
absence of justice and it seems to be
the case that so far for a lot of
reasons that I'll have to talk about
other videos any domesticated
environment always ends up with gaps in
justice and when you have a gap in
justice what happens is you developing a
niche or some smaller group let's say a
cluster of gangsters a game which might
be a cabal or it might be a group of
bureaucrats who just recognized that
they can get away with stuff they're not
be punished and so and by the way if
they try to do good things increase in
that doesn't actually show up as any
benefit to them so in both cases the
feedback of doing good benefits me and
everyone and the feedback of doing bad
punishes me goes away and so as a
society begins to transition into a
space where if you don't know who the
sucker is you are the sucker and now
we're beginning to lead into
federalization it's almost like a an
infection and it goes to a bunch of
different stages that I'm not going to
articulate right now but what it does is
it eats away at the essence of what
holds domestication together and so and
domestication has very little capacity
to bolt and then ultimately the end of
the day police itself it tries it
literally creates police in attempts to
prevent these things from happening but
even within the police corruption starts
to seep in and in the relationship
between the police and the people in the
relationship and with the police and
other authorities and the relationship
until police and the gangs we just are
getting these almost fractal defection
patterns where the fabric of
domestication itself becomes the niece
she becomes the source and morality
eventually corrupts domestication went
in and inevitably at some point it
begins to collapse and this then
generates a cycle where the wild type in
nature is able to thrive and survive
under complex and chaotic circumstances
the domesticated type we use complexity
into complication builds an enormous
control structure to maintain
complication but by so doing as that
control structure itself begins to be
broken down by a lot of different forces
but in this narrative specifically for
allottee it gets transitioned from
complications straight through into
chaos which it cannot survive it goes
away we call that collapse and then the
wild type to degree which survives
emergence or just think about this maybe
just in the narrative of the fall of
Rome domesticated Rome begins to extend
into a massive control structure an
entire empire inside of that fair ality
begins to evolve and emerge and
eventually eats the integrity of the
system the system begins to collapse the
collapse begins to accelerate and
and whoever is able to revert back to
something like the wild-type Rico here's
in different places and you begin the
cycle again in this tape case in the
form of Western civilization so that's
that that's that's the story and for
those who want to continue watching I'll
just do a very brief you use the Game of
Thrones as an example the cool heads we
have a nice bit of poetic story did it
that isn't thick I think telling the
story so before the show begins we have
had a horrible collapse winter came
creatures from the north came down they
wreaked havoc we're in a wild chaotic
state something came together that
brought the people back into a space of
able to operate they form separate
kingdoms largely familial they
coordinated winter receded they built a
giant wall and then domestication said
it and you had this interesting gradient
where the north on the border with the
undomesticated wild is what historically
is called the March like what a marquee
is in charge of this is the border
between the domesticated and the wild
and them because the borders always
pushed on by nature they can't ever
quite become slowly domesticated and it
tends to be the most resilient to feral
T so it sort of holds the border you go
all the way away from the border you end
up in King's Landing as far away from
the walls as you can get and in the
center of empire in the center of
domestication and in some sense
precisely because it doesn't receive any
pushback from nature it is now the pure
place where the niche is in fact society
the niche is how to take advantage of
narrative and is the place where feral
tea emerges and where fir ality becomes
the dominant strategy so you see this
tension between the Starks who are still
maintaining the integrity of high
domestication in the context of holding
the wall against wild nature and the
threats of beyond the pale and you have
the Lannisters who are optimized for
pure morality and have mastered the
subtle art of understanding how to
destabilize the domesticated using the
tools of defection and by the way even
of delusion
and as we see looking of Thrones the
chirality begins to spread the high
domestic and eventually become overcome
duped deceived and destroyed by the
feral things begin to fall apart war of
all against all begins to emerge the
feral don't have the capacity to Rico
here into domesticated because their
fundamental strategy is antithetical to
society and narrative itself and winter
comes nature re-establishes itself chaos
begins to emerge and then whoever is
able to hold together at all
rapidly has to redevelop a concentrated
new wild type toolkit deeply innovative
and adaptive to the novel environment
and if they're lucky they begin to grow
up create the ground from the cycle to
begin and you least that's what I think
happens to the rest of the show and
that's all