[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
well dr. jordan pearson welcome to
Sydney on your Australian tour you're
talking to packed out houses and the
interest is extraordinary
and we've had the opportunity to talk
personally and I can understand why I
want to begin with something that
Churchill wrote in the 1930s and he said
this one of the signs of a Great Society
is the diligence with which it passes
culture from one generation to the next
when one generation no longer passes on
the things that are dear to it it's
heroes and their stories in its
religious faith it's in effect saying
that past is null and void it's of no
value
he goes on to say that leaves young
people feeling a lack of direction and a
lack of purpose and opens them to the
dictum of Karl Marx that our people
derived of their history are easily
persuaded have we stripped our young
people of purpose and we knee and left
them open to being bullied around well
there's two things about that that I
think are really worth worth laying out
the first is an analysis of the purpose
of memory now because people think that
the purpose of memory is to remember the
past and that's not the purpose of
memory the purpose of memory is to
extract out from the past lessons to
structure the future and now that's the
purpose of personal memory and so you're
done with a memory when you've extracted
out the information that you can use to
guide yourself properly in the future so
if you have a traumatic memory for
example that's really obsessing you if
you analyze that memory to the point
where you figured out how you put
yourself at risk and you can determine
how you might avoid that in the future
then the emotion associated with that
goes away so memory is a has a very
pragmatic function and cultural memory
is the same thing is that we need to
extract out stories from our past that
structure our future and we need that
because first of all if you don't have a
purpose let's say it isn't that your
life becomes neutral
in a meaningless sense it's that your
life becomes characterized by unbearable
suffering because the baseline condition
of life is something like unbearable
suffering and what you have to set
against that is a noble and worthwhile
purpose and hopefully hopefully your
determination of that purpose is
buttress to some degree by the wisdom of
the past because you can't conjure
something like that up on your own and
if you provide people with nobility of
purpose then they can tolerate the
suffering of existence without becoming
entirely corrupted by it and cultures
that don't do that
it isn't even so much that they die it's
that cultures that don't do that are
dead they're done they don't have a
story anymore and they don't have a call
to adventure and then well then everyone
suffers stupidly as a consequence it's a
very bad thing
so Churchill made the same observation
that many of the great psychologists and
philosophers made in the early part of
the 20th century it's like bring the
story forward and and propagate it and
make it the most noble possible story
and then you motivate people to do to
transcend themselves which they need to
do so yes he's exactly right in his
diagnosis just to stay with him for a
moment he's painted as the great
defender of freedom it's possible that
your country Canada and certainly my
country Australia would have not
continued as free societies had it not
been for that man courageously standing
at a time when so few did he wasn't the
inventor of freedom freedom as we
understand it and I want to unpack that
a bit something very very few people in
very few cultures down through the ages
and even today have ever really
experienced yes and partly because we're
afraid of it I would say I mean people
think of freedom as the ability to
implement your whim and freedom opens up
that as a possibility but sustainable
freedom that isn't what it's about at
all
it's about it's primarily about
responsibility it's about determining
which load you're going to pick up and
carry that's the proper definition of
appropriate freedom it's not grout
Dillman gratification of instantaneous
impulse it's self-evident that
doesn't work two-year-olds do that and
that's why they can't live in the world
they can't organize themselves across
time they can't sacrifice the moment for
the future and the more sophisticated
you get I suppose in some sense the more
you're able to do that and then your
freedom becomes the freedom to choose
the proper responsibilities and that's
not that's also not something that we've
been good at communicating to young
people if we talk to them about
responsibility we did generally do it in
a finger-wagging sort of way it's like
well you're breaking the rules you're a
bad person and and and well that may be
true because people break the rules and
there's no shortage of badness in people
but the the proper message for young
people is to say well no you don't
understand you you want to take on
responsibility you want to take on the
heaviest load that you can conceive of
that you might be able to move because
it gives your life nobility and purpose
and that offsets the tragedy and and not
only psychologically not only does it
all set it psychologically because you
have a purpose and and and something to
wake up for right and to face the
difficulties of the day but also because
if you face the difficulties of the day
properly you actually ameliorate
suffering not only in the psychological
sense but because you make the world at
least a less terrible place and that's
something right to move things away from
hell is something even if you're not you
know self-evidently moving forthrightly
to heaven to move things away from the
worst they can be is well that's a noble
goal in and of itself so and young
people are starving for that idea it's
very interesting to watch as I look at
it it seems to me that that Acton had it
right freedom properly understood this
needs to be seen as a negative and as a
positive the negatives is is a sort of
concept of freedom from right fear
addiction persecution Taron are tyranny
in a personal sense and then freedom to
be used to reach your potential but it
seems to me that what's missing is an
understanding that freedom exercised
within a framework of responsibility are
you doing what you ought will guarantee
ongoing freedom for yourself and for
your neighbors freedom exercised in a
way that confuses it with license
tends to destroy freedom in fact you
could even go so far as to say that
misunderstood freedom turns out to be
its own worst enemy well that's that's
the that's the difficult distinction
between freedom of the moment and
freedom of the freedom with everything
taken into account and I'm a real
admirer of the work of Jean Piaget and
Piaget is a developmental psychologist
and few people know the world's most
well known developmental psychologist
and few people know that he was actually
motivated in his intellectual pursuits
by the desire to reconcile science with
religion that was what his driving force
from the time that he was a young man he
wouldn't know that even necessarily by
reading his writings because it's
implicit rather than explicit in them
but he he he has a different model of
what constitutes morality than than
Freud Freud's model is combative it's
sort of the super-ego as tyrant so the
super-ego would be the strictures of
society the it'd the biological impulses
and the eagle crushed between those
right so the ego is this thing that's
crushed between nature and culture and
so it's a really it's a tense and combat
of model of the human psyche and there's
something about it that's that's that's
accurate because some of the
restrictions that are put on your
impulse gratification are imposed on you
in in a sense tyrannically but Piaget
his perspective was much more optimistic
and I think much more accurate he
noticed that as children organized
themselves spontaneously as they
developed especially within the confines
of their own spontaneous play they
didn't so much subsume lurk or inhibit
their dark and aggressive impulses as
make them sophisticated and transform
them into universally acceptable games
so for Piaget a game that a group of
children were playing that all of them
were playing voluntarily and that was
going well and that they all wanted to
continue playing was a microcosm of
society and and literally a microcosm of
society
the reason the children were playing
those games was to practice being
productive members of society and he
felt that the appropriate game tended
towards what he described as an
equilibrate
date so an equilibrate estate would be a
game that you'll play because you've
decided it's a good game but that you
can play with others because they've
also decided that it's a good game and
so that can work at the individual level
and at the familial level and at the
social level and if you get all those
things working simultaneously then you
have a sustainable enterprise and it's
it's predicated not so much on the on
the inhibition of impulse or on the
regulation of it but of the integration
of impulses into a into a pattern of
being that gratifies them on a
relatively permanent basis so you know
if you want to go to university and
become a physician I think there's a lot
of sacrifice of impulsive gratification
that goes along with that but if you
become a physician then it's a noble
enterprise people support you socially
and all the needs that you need to have
fulfilled will also be fulfilled by that
enterprise well that's a way better
model and so it's strange that the
maximum freedom comes with the adoption
of a discipline and then also the
adoption of responsibility that frees
you up and everyone else around you in
the long run and if you explain that to
people especially in this day and age
when they be fed a never-ending diet of
idiot rights and freedoms they're
immediately on board with it because
they know I know that most of the
meaning that people experience in their
life is a consequence of adopting
responsibility so they're starving for
that idea to be articulated opens up a
whole can of very very interesting
issues let's try and pick a couple of
but the first but if I do it's evident
to me and I'm an enormous encouraged by
this because you know I'm a passionate
Australian I want this country to be the
sort of place that offers opportunities
of the sort that I had when I was young
you know I've had my opportunities but I
look at my kids generation what's going
to be there for them if we keep feeding
the sort of thin gruel in reality the
people turning out in vast numbers every
one of your talks in Australia's been
over subscribed massively it tells you
they kind of get those more to this I
think they're being told oh yeah they
know well it's one of the things that's
so interesting about dealing with
archetypal themes you know archetypal
themes are archetypal because
actually speak of the structure of human
experience that's why they last and so
it's human nature and human experience
has a pattern you don't have the
capacity to articulate that pattern as
an individual in part because your life
is too short you just can't figure it
out but the the ancient representations
of those patterns are everywhere around
you and you you know some of them in
image you you caught on to them
automatically you you you fall into them
if you go to a movie for example because
movies always express archetypal themes
if you hear them articulated you think I
knew that I knew that I just don't know
how to say it that's that's the Platonic
idea of of learning is remembering your
soul already knows but it doesn't have
the words yeah and so when people talk
to me about watching my lectures let's
say they say they basically say one of
two things if it if it's not just a
simple thank you
they say one of two things a third of
them say quarter for them say when I
listen to you talk it's as if you're
telling me things that I already know
it's like yeah well that's exactly right
because that's what archetypal stories
are they're the description of what you
already know but that can be articulated
and then who you are and how you see
yourself and the way you describe
yourself or all become the same thing so
that's wonderful then you're not at odds
with yourself you know and then you have
then you're a functioning unity and that
makes you much stronger and more
indomitable than you would otherwise be
and then the other thing that people say
and this is more like 3/4 of them is
that they say I was in a very dark place
I was addicted I was I was drinking too
much I had a fragmented relationship
with my fiancee and I wasn't getting
married things weren't going where very
well with my family my relationship with
my father was damaged I didn't have any
aim I was wasting my time some variant
of that some combination of those and
they said well hmm I've been watching
your lectures I've decided to establish
a purpose I'm trying to tell the truth
and things are way better and I've and
so let's say I've done maybe eight or
nine large-scale public talks in the
last two months so that's probably
20,000 people and about half of them
half of them estate afterwards to talk
to me so that's about 7,000 people who
have said that to me and then people
stopped me on the street all the time
and tell me exactly that story which is
just wonderful like you can't imagine
how good it is to be able to go to
places you've never been and to have
people stop you on the streets
spontaneously and say look my life is
way better than it was it's like it's so
good and so and I've got like I don't
know 35,000 letters from people since
last August it's more than that I can't
keep track of them and it's exactly the
same thing like 3/4 the quarter of them
say well you've given me the words to
say what I already knew was true and
thank you for that I can see that in the
audience it's so interesting because I
can lay out a story people go like this
and say they're doing that all the time
it's like the lights are going on and
that's a really while there's almost
nothing better than that to watch lights
go on when you're talking to people it's
like that's just absolutely fantastic
but to get this response from people my
father I have my father's about 80 he's
83 I think 81 he's 81 and I put him in
charge of going through my viewer email
which is an overwhelming job but no he
we've had discussions about this
constantly he's overwhelmed by the fact
that so many people are writing and
saying the same thing it's like I have a
purpose man my life actually matters I
finally realized that and I'm putting it
into practice and I'm bearing up under
the heaviest load I can imagine and it's
really helping it's like God and that's
tens of thousands of responses now so
it's it's you couldn't hope for anything
better than that there's zero harm in it
right it's just people putting their
lives together they're not mucking about
with other people and I'm trying to make
broad-scale social transformations about
which they have no idea they're trying
to make their immediate environment
better and it's working it's like great
well great you say there's zero ha
minute I'd say as a form of legislature
that there's an enormous amount of good
enough huh a country is only there's
some type of the people that make it up
to the extent that they're put together
a resilient AV contribute don't have to
ask others to help them
the stronger the nation oh this is so
yes and rapidly like I I mean I think I
was thinking the other day some
journalist asked me why the audience why
people are responding so positively to
what I'm saying the young men for
example and I thought yeah that's a good
question says well I'm actually on their
side I'm pretty happy that I'm really
happy that they're not wasting their
lives I'm really sad to see that people
are disenchanted and nihilistic and
depressed and anxious and aimless and
and perverse and vengeful and and all of
those things it's terrible and then to
see people question whether that's
necessary and then to start to rise out
of it it's like it's so fun like last
night I was at after my talk it's
overwhelming
I don't usually think about these things
but I was I was after my talk last night
and so all these people line up and you
know they have their 15 15 seconds with
me and they're kind of tentative they're
excited and a tentative when they come
up to talk to me and then they have you
know 15 seconds of time to tell me
something I'm really listening to them
and they're hesitant about whether or
not to share the good news about their
life you know and I think it's often
because when people share good news
about their life people don't
necessarily respond positively you know
they don't get encouragement and people
need so little encouragement it's just
unbelievable and so there comes
something good and I'm like ah that's so
good you know somebody says well I'm
getting along way better with my father
I haven't seen him for 10 years and now
we get along great and then the power of
that you can't overstate the power of
that for individuals to get their life
together the individual is an
unbelievably powerful force and every
single person who gets their act
together a little bit has the capacity
to spread that around them it's it's a
chain reaction and so it's a lovely
thing to see and that's fantastic my
observation of atheists would be they
don't live like atheists they don't live
as though they really believe they're
just a cosmic accident and there's no
purpose well you are most of them the
best of them I have a lot of respect for
the atheists generally because
they've generally thought a lot more
about this situation and and struggled
with it more than the complacent
fundamentalists you know who wallpaper
over their doubts with with with over
statements about their belief the
atheists you know the word Isaac means
or Israel the word Israel means he who
struggles with God it's like well it's
not obvious that it's not the atheists
you know they're struggling away it's
like they're obsessed with it even and
so they have God more on their mind than
the typical person who's a believer and
so it it's interesting too because
there's been this little community
developed around my biblical lectures in
particular of people who call themselves
Christian atheists which I think it's
quite remarkable so if I lay out the
rationale for the Christian ethic which
is something like pick up your damn
cross and struggle uphill which is a
really good message they think oh yeah
well that makes a lot of sense it's like
well I don't need the metaphysical
baggage it's like well maybe you do and
maybe you don't but even to pick up the
the practical utility of that idea which
is overwhelming that's it
that's an excellent start so I was gonna
follow on that then so it strikes me a
lot of young people and I think this is
enormous livia their credit and guys the
heart I think of what you're saying
they're told that all morality is
relative
they don't live that way they're
actually looking for truth don't they
well if you live that way everyone hates
you you know but that's the creed that
oh yes yes but that's a good example of
how you who you are can be out of sync
about with how you represent yourself
it's like I was walking through the arc
with I was walking through these ideas
with the audience last night it's like
well how do we treat each other when
things work you know and how do you
treat yourself well first of all you
have to treat yourself like you matter
because if you don't then you don't take
care of yourself and you become vengeful
and and and cruel and you you take you
take it out on people around you and
you're not a positive force none of
that's good
so you suffer more and so does everyone
around you and there's a malevolence
that enters into it none of that's good
so that's what happens if you don't
treat yourself like you matter and then
what happens if you don't treat other
people like they matter
well you lie to them you cheat them you
steal you you you enter into impulsive
relationships with them they can't trust
you
that doesn't go anywhere they don't like
you you you end up alone at best and
maybe like incarcerated at worst like
that doesn't work and so you watch the
people around you who thrive regardless
of what they say they act out the
proposition that everyone matters and
then you have a functional society and I
think okay well if if if when you act
out the proposition that everyone
matters you have a functional society
maybe that's evidence that that
proposition is true it's like I think
it's I think it's true I think the idea
that the individual has a spark of
divinity within him or her I think there
isn't a more true way of saying that and
if you act that out well this is goes
back to the idea that you brought up
about potential which is also something
I've discussed with my audiences a lot
it's like we don't act like we live in a
material reality we act like we face a
landscape of potential an external
landscape of potential with an internal
reservoir of potential that's how we act
and then we call each other out on it we
say things like well you're not living
up to your potential
and persons go so yeah well I know it's
like well what do you mean by that what
do you mean by that
well you mean there's more to you than
meets the eye even though it's not
measurable right it's not tangible
it's just possibility but everyone acts
as that as though that's a reality and
we all act as if we all act as if we
make choices about what reality to bring
into being we punish ourselves for our
moral errors and and other people as
well we act out this this ethic that
puts us each at the center of being as
active participants in the world that we
want to bring forward everyone acts that
way and if we don't then things go to
hell instantly so it's like well what do
we believe this is the argument I've had
with people like Sam Harris the atheist
types it's like yeah you think you're
atheist now it's like you're Christian
judeo-christian let's say to the court
you just don't understand it you just
don't realize it and it's understandable
but it's not helpful this idea that you
put forward of a spark of divinity in
every human being
surely lies at the heart of the miracle
of Western freedom the idea that every
individual has Worth
and dignity and standing it's the idea
that killed slavery slavery is a
greatest human rights movement of all
times so successful that it obliterated
the idea that it was a right to keep
slaves let alone changed the law it
changed the way the world thought even
though there are evil people who still
keep slaves and and here's a rub it was
plainly led by people of profound
Christian faith there's no other way of
putting it off anyone who honestly
honestly and truthfully looks at the
history of that period can't get away
from it yeah but because it doesn't suit
the modern left's narrative it's
airbrushed out doesn't that inner self
say something profound about our
willingness to try and distort truth
it's a suit our objective c what what
what it what it speaks of you know it's
it's it's hard it's like the the
whitewashing of what happened in the in
the in the Soviet states now in the
communist states in the 20th century I
mean anybody who goes through that
literature with any degree of care comes
away traumatized right shell-shocked
it's just it's it's it's everything the
Nazis did on a larger scale it's
horrifying and yet I see with my
students you know 60 million people who
dared to disagree died minimum it was in
their own culture mm-hmm it was
something in their own society don't
know in the Soviet Union the estimates
range from twenty to sixty million and
in Mao's China the estimates are as much
as a hundred million
there are kids taught this in school in
universities why not very I see their
societies they this before preface
something the modern fight in it seems
to me in many ways is between what might
be called freedom and fear damper
fairness yeah and equality the quality
sounds terrific
yep but we've actually seen what happens
in societies where they set a quality up
as the ultimate goal they became
terrible place what doesn't that happen
I think this is it sounds good
yeah well that's I think that's also
part of the the whitewashing is we can't
understand how one of our primary moral
intuitions which might be fairness let's
say can transform itself into
something so utterly murderous when it's
played out on a large political stage
and I think because we don't understand
that I mean look there's reasons to be
on the left there are temperamental
reasons first so a lot of your political
preference is influenced let's say by
your temperament and a lot of your
temperament is influenced by biological
factors so there are temperamental
reasons to be on the left people who are
on the left end to be higher in
creativity and lower in
conscientiousness for example those are
the two best predictors but there's also
practical reasons to be on the left and
one of the practical reasons are that
human societies which tend to be
hierarchical like all animal societies
or almost all animal societies produce
inequality as they go about their
business and inequality is actually
quite painful no one likes it nobody no
rich capitalist walks down a busy urban
street and sees a starving homeless
person who's clearly mentally ill
suffering madly and thinks that evening
that inequality is okay no one thinks
that no one's for poverty right and so
we have this moral intuition that would
be better if the downtrodden were lifted
up and it's difficult to discriminate
between that and an equality narrative
and so I think part of the reason that
we can't face the the lesson of the 20th
century is because it's the left that
mostly has to face the lesson and they
don't know how to reconcile their deep
intuitions about the injustice of
inequality with the fact that when you
put that doctrine in at work into into
operation as a political tool you
instantly stack up millions of corpses
we don't know what to do with that and
so we just avoid it and that's well and
then of course we risk replicating it
which is not good that's not a good
tactical move well that's the problem if
we don't learn from history we're
destined to repeat it I entirely accept
and some Australians might be surprised
by this they say no I can't understand a
lefties perspective I think I can I can
understand the nobility of wanting to
ensure that everyone is respected as a
full member of the handover the human
family of our culture and our society
but this is where it gets so tricky and
it's where I think many young people are
starting to wake up they're being sold a
pup do you have that expression in
Canada
no that's all the pup no it's all the
DAAD mm-hmm see yeah there's no sound
idea right that many of the things that
sound attractive don't necessarily work
so perhaps we need to be arguing the
case for freedom and fairness which will
the produce at least a high degree of
equality of opportunity rather than
arguing for equality which history tells
us tends to severely erode freedom yeah
well it's it's a harder sale though
because but it's it's easy to appeal to
compassion immediately thoughtlessly
right and there and since that's such an
instantaneously positive moral virtue
and you don't need sophisticated
argumentation to buttress it it's a lot
more difficult to make a cold and a
little case that the the proposition
freedom first let's say freedom and
responsibility first lifts the bottom up
better it's a cold argument and it
requires rationality to parse through so
it's a harder sale I would argue though
it's not just rationality its history if
you bring rationality and honesty to the
study of history I think I think the the
case is actually quite compelling I
think it is too fact I think it's open
and sharp I think it's it's well there's
a book that I've just been reading that
I would recommend by a man named Walter
shy Dell and he wrote a book called the
great leveler which I really like it's
an empirical analysis of inequality and
he had his research questions were
something like well what what is the
phenomena of inequality - what can you
attribute it and what if anything can we
do to ameliorate it okay so the first
answer is something akin to what I wrote
in the first rule in my book twelve
rules for life which is well you can't
lay hierarchy and inequality at the feet
of Western civilization or capitalism
we're done with that argument that's
wrong animal societies are hierarchical
and they produce unequal distributions
and yet there's evidence for that in the
biological realm going back a third of a
billion years and that's happened for so
long that your nervous system has
primarily adapted to it so it's a deep
reality and blaming it on capitalism
it's like no
inequality is a big problem it's way
worse than March thought okay fine and
people tend to stack up is zero that's a
bad thing because it destabilizes your
society have to have people who are so
far down in the underclass that they
have nothing to lose by flipping the
game that's a bad idea and it drives
male-on-male homicide as well and that
social science evidence for that is
clear alright so we want to ameliorate
inequality to some degree because we
don't want people to stack up at zero
and destabilize the society and we don't
want young men in particular to become
violent fine
so then shy Dale takes another tack it's
like hit his observations he looked at
Neolithic grave sites for signs of
inequality and you see what people are
buried with and in one of his cases
there's 200 people in a grave and one of
them has a hundred and ninety pounds of
gold and the next richest person has
like four ounces of gold and then
everyone else has none it's like so even
in these Neolithic societies inequality
was the rule hunter-gatherer societies
are the same way except the inequality
isn't material because they don't have a
surplus inequalities everywhere
okay so then she'll asks two other
questions one is well how has it
generally been reduced pestilence and
war that's it so you can reduce
inequality if you demolish everything
because that just brings everyone down
to zero but the inequality is less and
then he does an empirical analysis and
asks a very interesting practical
question which is imagine that you
totted up the inequality coefficients of
the right-wing societies and you did the
same with the left-wing societies is
there a difference between the
inequality coefficients and you'd hope
yes because you'd hope that what would
happen as a consequence of activity on
the left would be that something would
actually occur to ameliorate inequality
you found no evidence for that
whatsoever so the left is sensitive to
the catastrophe of inequality let's say
but their compassion oriented doctrines
designed to ameliorate that on the
positive side there's plenty of
resentment on the left to that and I
don't want to sweep that under the under
the rug their compassion oriented
policies do not produce an
provement in in the equal distribution
of goods so it's a way bigger problem
than we think so so and and putting into
place these these thoughtless
compassionate doctrines let's say
putting them in place again it's just
gonna produce exactly the same outcomes
that were produced all through the 20th
century we must learn are going to bring
the wisdom of the past back to the table
of today if we're to find our way out of
the malaise it's affecting the West I
think to a better place
but before we do that yeah explore that
line of thinking let's go back to
freedom all of the great sages down
through the age I think you make that
point in this fascinating book of yours
a Bleakley at least and particularly
though the founder of Christianity I
think would would say to a person that
your personal freedom is the thing you
need to get right and sorted first it's
one by one and I'm thinking of young
Australians so I feel so passionately
about that as I say this you know it's
very easy not to be free very easy
addiction fear anxiety depression all
the things lack of discipline lack of
discipline of your whims let's go back
to a society which set equality as its
goal soviet russia and in the pursuit of
that equality killed 60 or 70 million
that's the estimate of those who
disagreed who had a different view who
lost their freedom that of those who
even announced their own suffering
because in the soviet union if you dared
to say that things weren't going so well
for you then you were instantly a
political you were you were political
criminal for announcing your own
suffering because the utopian already
arrived you understand yeah and so if
you were still suffering well obviously
there was something wrong with you
that's in the society like that well
your own suffering becomes criminal Amit
well exactly
yeah but let's come to Alexander
Solzhenitsyn
we know a lot about what happened
because of him he became an incredible
global figure when I was a young man and
I read his book The Gulag Archipelago
here is this man he describes the
horrors of being a political prisoner
because he disagrees he converted he was
originally a supporter of communism he
came to see how evil it was and how
oppressive it was he was imprisoned for
having a different view to the state
ordained insistence that everything was
terrific huh and he writes unbelievably
that lying on his prison bunk one day
listening to the guards beat up a fellow
prisoner the screams and the yells he
found freedom when he realized the
dividing line between good and evil
in fact didn't lie between captor and
captive in fact the jailers were captive
to to a system to a blind ideology to an
inability to trust ease so they were
perpetrating the very system that
imprisoned them not between Catholic and
Baptist erode not between woman and man
not between black and white but the
dividing line between evil actually lies
somewhere across every human heart
plainly you believe it's incredibly
important that we understand that comes
back to what you said I think when it's
framed we understand it well everyone
knows that everyone knows if they think
because all they have to do is think
about their own transgressions I mean if
you ask someone to sit for five minutes
and think okay well what mistakes have
you made in your life it's like that'll
come up pretty quickly and you can even
ask people what terrible unforgivable
mistakes have you made in your life to
like know about those two it's like it's
no one's no one's so naive you know
unless unless they've really wrestled
intensely against themselves there's
virtually no one so naive to not be able
to answer those questions so we know
that we've done things we shouldn't have
done and we know that we're not living
up to our potential I mean but are we
doing their children a massive
disservice by trying to imply that
there's nothing wrong with them though
you need for guilt no need for shame no
need to come it's really all this
because the problems the environment the
problem is that you've just got a fixed
society fixing institutions well and
then now we all that will disappear
psychologists
have been not all psychologists
obviously but the psychological
profession is its neck-deep in this in
this pathology has been beating the
self-esteem drum for 50 years
oh no you're okay you should feel good
about yourself like you're fine the way
you are it's like you think well that's
a calming message for people it's like
no it's not it's not at all and I watch
my audience this is like it's full of
people in the audience who think I'm
suffering a lot more than I think is
tenable a whole bunch of it's my fault
my life is not in the order it should be
I know I'm doing 50 things wrong it's
like what the hell's wrong with me
what's wrong with the people around me
this is really serious and some you know
well-meaning person comes up and says oh
you're okay just the way you are it's
like no one wants that message it's like
no I'm not okay the way I am I'm not
okay at all the way I am I know that and
so you know when I'm when I'm speaking
to to when I'm speaking now I say to
people oh you're nowhere near what you
could be that's that that's the positive
message it's like yeah you're a mess but
you don't have to stay that way as
you're a mess you know it obviously
you're suffering away like like so much
you can barely tolerate it it's like
that's okay you can do something about
it so yeah that's the thing that that
turns the lights on it's like you do
something about it so they're in a
freezing prison cell and the most
appalling circumstances half-staff to
death he finds freedom huh in himself he
finds something positive and something
to live for
by first coming to grips with evil and
understanding what it is
well the conundrum in then he said to
like and he underwent the Christian
process of Metanoia
which is to go over your it's it's it's
confession essentially and repentance
wasn't mediated by a religious structure
in Solzhenitsyn's case but it was
exactly the same process and he knew
that perfectly well I'm not making this
up he said when he was in the prisons
and decided that he was at least in part
to blame for his own imprisonment and
the imprisonment of everyone around him
that that was his fault or at least his
restore both his fault and his
responsibility that he was going to take
that on he said the first thing he did
was he went over his life with a
fine-tooth comb in memory and his goal
was okay I'm gonna remember everything I
did when in my life up to now where I
did something that I
to be wrong and not because of some
external Authority defining it as wrong
but in relationship to his own
conscience right and then he was going
to determine if there was some way that
could be rectified now to atone for it
right - to become at one with it again
and so that was part of the process he
undertook and the concluding consequence
of that was that he wrote the Gulag
Archipelago which is a absolutely
overwhelming piece that blew the
intellectual slats out of the foundation
of communism permanently right once
soldier but until now we say to be
trying to gloss over academia seems to
be full of people who want a soft pedal
right now and reinstitute this naive
view that if we just create the right
institutions everybody will behave
rationally we'll all be equal everything
will be okay they want to enforce it
yeah won't say that but that's what they
want to do they want to enforce it yeah
well I think it's easy and it's only a
few short decades since all of that
happened yeah well are we mad
well we're characterized by inertia and
ignorance it's not easy to it's not easy
to understand history it's especially
not if you read it properly you know you
read I had a client at one point who was
an unbelievably naive person you cannot
overestimate her naivety no matter how
hard you tried her parents taught her
that adults were angels literally and
she believed that in in a strange sense
when I met her she was in her 20s and
and and she had this extraordinarily
naive view of people and had been hurt
and if you're very naive and you've been
hurt by someone you often disintegrate
because it blows your world apart that's
what it's happened to her
and I said she had a university degree
and I said well look like I'm in the
liberal arts I said didn't you read any
history and she said well yeah I said
well did like didn't that disturb the
whole adults er Angels hypothesis and
she said well I read it but I just
compartmentalized it and that gave me
the key to what was wrong with her and
we successfully dealt with it but I had
her to begin her
have cure oddly enough because she had
to understand malevolence because she
had been touched by it right she had to
understand him because her naive
worldview had been shattered by the hand
of malevolence I had to read a book
called ordinary men by Browning and it's
a study of these Polish policemen German
policemen who were sent to Poland after
the Nazis had marched through Poland and
they were sent to police Poland and they
were you know decent middle class guys
essentially most of whom had been hit
maturity before Hitler had come to power
so they weren't indoctrinated Nazis you
know not like the Nazi youth types were
and they had to go to Poland and and be
policemen under wartime conditions and
they had a very humane commander and he
told all of them that they were going to
have to do things that would be far more
brutal in all likelihood than they were
normally prepared to do in their in
their Seville in the role as
non-military policeman but that they
could go back to their old job if they
wanted to
so was it top-down enforcement of an
authoritarian ethos and browning
documents their transformation from the
guy next door
you know the policeman next door into
people who were taking naked pregnant
women out into fields and shooting them
in the back of the head and it's a
brutal book because while these men it's
like it just ruined them to do that to
themselves they were physically ill
during the process of transformation you
know and and he does a very good job of
documenting how an ordinary person
transforms into a a Nazi murderer and I
had to read that I said but don't you
compartmentalize it this is about you
right
this isn't about someone else when you
read history you think well that's about
someone else it's like unless maybe
you're a victim and you identify with
the victims it's a very rare person who
reads history and identifies with the
perpetrators but unless you read history
and identify with the perpetrators then
you don't understand history at all and
so who wants to understand that and I
get my students I said look I've told
them this for 30 years here's something
you have to understand if you were in
Nazi Germany
the statistical probability is
overwhelming that you would have been a
perpetrator you think you would have
rescued Anne Frank it's like think again
those people are very very very very
rare they put their lives on the line to
do that they put their family's lives on
the line to do that you think you're one
of those people really it's like that
all that means is that you know nothing
you know nothing about yourself you know
nothing about people you know nothing
about politics or economics or history
it's a harsh lesson the truth about
Germany in the 1930s it was probably the
most educated society of the world and
seen at that point in time education
alone cleverness in inverted commas
alone intelligence alone are no social
right right right
so absolutely there's no substitute for
character so we don't wonder you know
this is its Pascal called about the
called
talked of the glory and the scum to
reach our full humanity it seems to me
we need to understand both intention
I'll call you the unbelievable scum that
lies in terms of our potential at the
bottom of every heart the extraordinary
nobility you call at the spark of
divinity I would say made in the image
of an eye of a mighty creator you've got
to hold those things in suspension if
you're if you defined your real humanity
and in fact you way through other good
places surely through the valley of
darkness in the first place that's you
think well if it's possible to be
enlightened why isn't everyone
enlightened it's like well you you don't
get to paradise you don't get to heaven
without harrowing hell first right and
who's going to do that like that's a
terrible thing to do it isn't even clear
that you can survive it no I mean it's
it's it's brutally damaging to come to
terms with your own proclivity for
malevolence and so people don't do it
and it's no wonder but but the funny
thing is and this is also something that
I think that people have been watching
my lectures have been attracted by
especially the young men it's like until
you know your until you understand that
you're a month
until perhaps you even developed that as
a capacity you don't have the moral
force to do good and so not only is that
dissent to begin with is necessary to
scare you straight right to make you
understand what exactly it is that
you're dealing with but you don't even
have the strength of character to be
good until you understand just exactly
what sort of monster you can be I have a
rule in my book rule 5
do not let your children do anything
that makes you dislike them yeah rather
it's a meditation on the monstrousness
of parents it's like don't underestimate
yourself
your capability to room your children's
lives you let them act in a manner that
makes you disprove of them you will take
revenge on them in ways you cannot even
imagine and unless you understand that
you're not going to be careful enough as
a parent and you're not going to set
proper boundaries don't let your
children annoy you it's a very bad idea
now you know that means that you should
try to regulate your proclivity to be
annoyed and you should try to be
civilized and you should talk to your
partner your wife or your husband about
your over sensitivities and foolishness
but having said that you need to know
who the monster is and it's you so so if
we're washing that wisdom out I don't
want to sound calm down a tree here are
more sympathetic and concerned for
what's happening in our family homes and
the environment in which our kids are
being raised and you and I I mean you're
very passionate in your concern for
these people so we don't want anyone to
think here we're trying to condemn them
far the opposite just the opposite but
if we're watching this out of the system
what then happens to our kids when they
hit institutions schools colleges
universities well we're gonna find out
because increasingly the elementary and
the school systems that our kids are
going through from say the age of five
to the age of eighteen they're
increasingly occupied by the postmodern
neo-marxist ideologies I think we have
to learn to identify what those are
that's a start I mean there's buzzwords
diversity inclusivity equity equity
that's that's a no-go zone equity that's
equality of outcome that's a
preposterous murderous doctrine
masquerading in in sheep's clothing
white privilege systemic racism gender
all of those none of those as individual
topics are necessarily off the table you
know if you can have an intelligent
discussion about any of them except
equity because that's just a no-go zone
but to see those those those concepts
emerge as a as a network of meaning you
know that you're in the presence of this
this pernicious postmodern neo Marxist
doctrine that's fundamentally
ideological at its core and people need
to see that and they need to understand
what that means and they need to stop it
now how they're going to stop it they're
going to make a million individual
decisions about that but at least they
could start by identifying it I've
suggested to parents in in Canada in the
u.s. that as soon as teachers talk to
their children about diversity
inclusivity and equity that they they
suggest to their children that they
leave the class because they're no
longer in the educational realm there in
the undock donation realm and people
aren't taking that I wouldn't say
they're not taking that seriously it's
not an easy thing to figure out and it
sounds very very radical to suggest you
don't encouraging your children to leave
the class but I think we're at that
point wonder why universities are not
offering high-quality courses in how
freedom was secured by Western societies
for its individual member people and how
it might be secured and how you secured
fairness from unfairness those sorts of
things are not there hmm
well some of it I think some of it has
to do with what we've been speaking
about is that to to to address the
problem squarely it is actually quite
daunting I mean the difficulties are
manifold inequality is real individual
malevolence is real to constrain it
inside yourself is extraordinarily
daunting to read history as a
perpetrator is traumatizing these are
hard things and then to think through
the problems of addressing something
like inequality
instead of reacting to it in a knee-jerk
compassionate manner in a and and
implement policies on that basis that
are going to be counterproductive that's
also extraordinarily difficult so
there's difficulty as part of it and
then I would also say well we haven't
talked about the resentment that drives
the discussion of inequality it's not
all it's not like everyone on the Left
is overwhelmed by compassion and that's
why all these brutal things tend to
happen it's that they're also
overwhelmed by the same sort of jealousy
that Cain had for Abel and the same sort
of murderous impulses that emerge very
rapidly as a consequence of that
jealousy he has more than me he must be
a perpetrator it's morally obligatory
for me to take him out that's an easy
message to sell I read about how the
Communists deep deep hula-hula caused
the Russian countryside so imagine
imagine it's Russia you're in a village
it's 30 years something like that
after the serfs have been emancipated
there's a few agriculturalists who've
managed to produce successful
agricultural enterprises and you know
maybe they have a couple of cows they
have some land they're able to hire a
few people and they're raising almost
all the food right and so and they're a
minority in any village because the
hyper productive successful are always a
minority so they're minority in every
village all right and so and and there's
people who are doing worse and then
there's a lot of people who aren't doing
so well at all and then the communist
intellectuals show up and they tell the
people who aren't doing so well some of
whom are just suffering because of life
but some of whom aren't doing well
because they've never done anything
productive with even a second of their
life and the communist intellectuals
come in and say you know those guys that
are doing so much better than you yeah
they actually stole all of that from you
and you're morally obligated to go take
it back it's like oh man
you know after after six cups of Mead
let's say or let's say ten or let's say
20 and I'm drunk out of my mind and I've
got my crew buddies with me and we're
all resentful right to the core because
we've wasted our miserable lives and now
we have an opportunity to go like down
the street to our wealthy neighbor's
house and to rape his daughter
and we can do it in the name of good
it's like well there's a story you can
mark it and that happened everywhere in
the Soviet Union and so they wiped out
the kulaks it's like great and then six
million Ukrainians starve to death
that's right brilliant
I'm a farmer the Ukraine was the
breadbasket of Europe that's what it was
then it became a region pathetically
unable to feed itself and yet the same
sort of worldview that gave rise to that
we're now being told you use the word
neo-marxist many people in Australia use
the word cultural Marxist I've got an
old friend who said to me what are you
talking about John you know free
capitalist Australia's not going to let
that happen here well quite as Airlines
took a nice step towards that the other
day and they adopted their language
policing policies these corporate these
corporations who should know far better
let these far left fifth columns into
their organizations they think they're
not going to pay for that I think
they're gonna stop with some demands for
the reconstruction of language not like
the demands for reconstruction of
language by the way are trivial they're
maybe the most important thing you could
possibly demand right I want to reshape
the way you speak
I want to reshape the way you think like
well that's ok as long as it doesn't
interfere with the bottom line it's like
it'll interfere with the bottom line you
let that fifth call them in it's a
warning to corporate people you let that
fifth call them in man you're gonna
regret it you're gonna regret it so and
things can turn on a dime you know a
very well-organized minority even if the
majority opposes them and they do a very
well-organized minority can have an
unbelievably pernicious effect on
organisation Margaret Meads made that
point societies change directions when a
small group of people decide to change
its direction that that's the way
history works it's come back this issue
of the redefining of language it seems
to me that there are two things that
people who want to reshape society in
brutal ways do the first is they start
the silence good debate either silence
it or shut it down whatever second thing
they do is they redefine language so
it's very hard to have a debate so
diversity actually I mean there's no
other way to put it in this country it's
rapidly coming to mean a stifling
conformity you dare not deviate from the
line and you see it with a whole lot of
other words that are bandied around a
quality being one of them yeah because
it's confused equality of opportunity is
confused with equality of outcomes well
the initial wedge was equality of
opportunity and then that flew and and
so well no no its equality of outcome
that's equity and that's I cannot
believe how rapidly that idea which is
the ultimate and terrible ideas I can't
believe how rapidly that spread and how
little people criticize it well that's
because it too uninformed analysis it
sounds good if you're feeling carelessly
compassionate because you got back to
the Ukrainian example in destroying the
leading-edge farmers you actually
guaranteed misery for everyone Oh people
were selling human body parts in the
Ukraine for food you know it was if you
were a mother and your children were
starving and you went out into the
fields after they were harvested and you
picked up individual pieces of grain
that the harvesters had left and you
didn't turn them over to the state that
was a capital offense right that's that
was and the the funny thing is that that
was in the glory days of the Russian
Revolution right that wasn't in the like
1950s that wasn't in the nineteen
thirties even that was in the 1920s that
was right when this started and I think
it was I think it was Malcolm Muggeridge
who was reporting on that for for a UK
newspaper whose name escapes me at the
moment he was pointing all of this out
you know and no one paid attention no
one paid attention towards the end of
his life he warned that the West is in
danger of eating itself out from within
and I wonder whether in fact he wasn't
being very appreciate and you and I want
to stop that happening for the sake of
our young people for the sake of
everyone we went down that pathway
already we've seen need to do it he
fired it that thing's history should be
like science in the sense that it ought
to be objective it ought to be told
truthfully it ought not to be used to
secure
some dominant groups preferred version
of society well this is also white see
what I've been trying to do about this
because I've thought this through a long
time ago well I don't want to
I think the group identity game ends in
blood doesn't matter who plays it left
wingers play a blood right wingers play
it blood and lots of it not just a
little bit you can't play the identity
politics game well so what do you do
instead you you live the mythologically
heroic life as an individual that's the
right place to work and that's the
message of the West is that we figured
that out we figured out that the
collective identity was not the pinnacle
statement that the individual not the
collective identities have no value
obviously family has value and and and
and your organization's have value all
of that that's not the issue the issue
is what's the paramount value what's the
metric by which people should be
measured and the answer is they should
be measured as individuals as if they
have a divine soul there should be
measured in that manner but it can't be
a selfish thing that is to say if I
recognize I have Worth and dignity I'm
obliged to recognize it so to you I
think you can't recognize that you have
intrinsic worth and dignity without also
doing without also recognizing in others
and and vice versa I don't that I can
recognize the worth of another person
without without stumbling on to the idea
that I also have to recognize that for
myself when did you think well everyone
would want that but what people don't
because you're also charged with the
responsibility of your own care as if
you matter well that's a big
responsibility like it's a lot easier to
assume that everything is pointless I
mean that's painful in all of that but
well you don't bear any responsibility
and no one lives that way no no well not
for long not for long well if not for
long exactly but you know and Voltaire's
biographer wasn't actually Voltaire
himself it was a lady who read he's one
of the many of her biographies of him in
the 1930s came up with that adage
summarizing his views that I may
disagree with you but I'll defend to the
death your right to say it there's a
couple of things implicit in that that
seem to be
important so I may disagree with you but
you have dignity and standing and Worth
and a right to put your view that's the
first thing I'm respecting the other
person oh you should crave it yeah and
the second thing it implies is it's the
idea on the table that's important for
two reasons one is we need to have a
debate about that not a tacher person
who put it there show some respect for
the second thing is it's only by honest
debate that you find the best way
forward that's that's the thing that
then that ties back to the discussion we
had about the purpose of memory and the
purpose of historical education it's
like look there's a another rule in my
book which is rule 9 assume that the
person that you're listening to knows
something you don't
well they do the person you're listening
to knows some things you don't you can
be sure of that now whether or not you
can get to them is a different matter
but if you do get to them it's a real
deal for you that's why you want to
listen to the other person's arguments
is because you're not everything you
could be you don't know the pathway
forward with as much clarity as you
could and it's possible this is one of
the wonderful things that I've had the
privilege of experiencing as a clinician
you know because people it's like I live
inside a Dostoyevsky novel as a
clinician people come in and they tell
me about their lives and I listen to
them and they tell me things that are
just absolutely beyond belief you know
and I learn from my clients constantly
they're they're telling me honestly
about their experience they tell me
things they wouldn't tell anyone else
because I actually listen to them but
part of the reason I listen is because
I'm desperate to listen it's like
there's a possibility I'm gonna do
something stupid in the next five years
it's gonna be like fatal and there's
some small possibility that if we have a
decent discussion that you'll tell me
something that will eliminate some of my
blindness so that I don't have to fall
into that particular pit and if you have
a good sensitivity for the depth of the
pit then you know you're pretty bloody
motivated to avoid it and so and that
and and that and that dialogue is it's
it's dialogic it's dial logos right it's
shared logos it's the way that we redeem
ourselves mutually moving forward and it
all depends on having the facts on the
time what's best you're able to
establish them not distortions affect
not what you wish would be the case
at least your best approximation of what
you think to be true and know what you
wish for no one because the new version
of this seems to be if I disagree with
what you say I'll paint it as hate
speech or challenging to my notions of
diversity and inclusiveness and I'll
fight to the death your right to even
have your say well that's where hate
speech laws are so pernicious it's like
and that needs to be taken apart first
question is there such a thing as hate
speech yes obviously people say terrible
things reprehensible things
quasi-criminal things even all the time
brutal and some of them caused a lot of
trouble so the idea that there's hateful
speech it's like yeah ok that's
self-evident no problem
well let's regulate it ok fair enough
because it's hateful you know maybe we
rather that there wasn't any of it ok no
problem
who defines hate well we'll worry about
that later it's like no he won't
that's actually the problem here's the
answer to who defines hate those people
that you at least want to have define it
that would be the inevitable consequence
of the legislation because sensible
people won't have anything to do with
that like people who are power mad will
gravitate to that domain to make an
ethical case to exercise their
controlling power over the language of
other people no and I've had journalists
say well what makes you think that your
right to free speech Trump's the right
of someone to not be offended and I
think that's really the level of our
political discourse ok so we'll run a
little thought experiment so I'm talking
to one person I'm talking to you and the
rule is I don't get to offend you ok
maybe we can still have a discussion
about something difficult but let's say
I'm talking to ten people and about an
important thing now I have to make sure
that I don't say anything to fight
despite the fact that this is an
important and contentious issue that I
don't say anything that offends even one
of those 10 people ok maybe I can even
manage that what if I'm talking to a
thousand people there's going to be
someone in that thousand people there's
gonna be someone who's offended at the
mere fact that I exist so it
an impossible standard it's like well
you can't say anything offensive okay
fine
then you can't say anything okay so what
you don't get to say anything because no
one should be offended well then you
don't get to think well what happens if
you don't think well then you can't
negotiate your way through the future
and you fall into a pit and so does
everyone else so that's where that all
ends up you can't say offensive things
equals you cannot negotiate your way
properly through the future equals
everyone suffers that's a bad that's a
bad strategy so and it's and it's all
covered up with well you know it'd be
better if no one was ever offended who
thinks that you know how naive you have
to be to think that now you have to be
pathologically naive which is the kind
of naive that you could have grown out
of
but you willfully refused to because you
weren't willing to see what was in front
of your face and then you impose that
blind naivety on everyone else
because you don't want to allow them to
upset your like rosy view your rosy view
of yourself in the world there's it's
just there's no end to how terrible that
is one of our very astute writers
recently made the comment that freedom
of speech is the most important freedom
because it's the freedom by which we
defend all about other freedoms it
strikes me that freedom of speech though
is most important not for the powerful
or for the elite it's actually for the
minority groups a free society surely is
one that allows those who swim against
the tide and have a different
perspective the right to do so without
fear of mob or state sanction I you've
had some personally well I gave a talk
and the University of British Columbia
about a year ago on it was called a
left-wing case for freedom of speech
it's like it's really easy to make a
left-wing case for freedom of speech
it's like well that's how it exists have
the opportunity to
make their suffering known right yeah
clearly I mean it's it's the fact that
that argument even has to be made
shows you how pathological the radical
left has become because it's clearly the
case that freedom of speech is not
generally in the interests of the power
elite right because they already have
access to to what they need to maintain
their grip on the world let's say if you
look at yes in that manner it's the
people at the bottom of the hierarchy
whose right to expression needs to be
protected yeah if you're in control of
the debate you don't need freedom of
speech right right obviously so it's
always useful for the dispossessed of
freedom of speech issue and then the
other issue that you wrote that the
writer that you described wrote wrote
brought to the forefront is the idea of
the hierarchy of rights now in our in
our conception of rights in Canada we're
not willing to assume that any right has
priority over any other right now that
doesn't work out because when the two
rights come into conflict with one
another which they do you have to
adjudicate their relative status and
what's happened in Canada is that
equality rights keep trumping everything
else and that's not good it's actually a
good reason why you shouldn't have a
Bill of Rights and we never should have
had one in my estimation but whatever
the freedom of speech you say well
speech is the the right to freedom of
speech is central because it's the right
by which you defend all the other rights
well that's why the idea of logos in the
West is the most sacred concept right
that because oh Christ
do you think about this psychologically
as Christ is though is the ideal of
perfection now this is independent of
any religious discussion or any
historical accuracy doesn't matter we're
looking at this from the perspective of
the analysis of a myth or a story what
Christ represents is the perfect
individual whatever that is
now you discuss endlessly what that is
but one of the things the West is
settled on is the idea well that is that
the perfect individual utters the
truthful speech that makes potential
into habitable order does that through
truth and that's embedded in the first
few sentences in in Genesis for example
when when when when God brings the world
into being so and and the idea that
truthful speech that brings the world
into being from formless potential also
characterizes each person that's our
form our fabrication in the image of God
that's the idea of the West it's a
unbelievably remarkable idea that
perfection individual perfection is to
be found in a relationship with spoken
truth God that's that's the great idea
well it's out of that arises the
observation that there's no there's
nothing more central to the hierarchy of
rights and obligations as well let's say
then freedom of speech yes it's
absolutely central that's why Christ is
the word made flesh the idea is that the
perfect individual is the person who's
well who speaks truth but also acts out
the truth of those words it's very it's
a it's a proposition whose merit is
virtually self-evident when you
understand it in that manner so yeah
people to see assaults on freedom of
speech especially compelled speech well
that's where I drew the line in in my
life it was like purpose well held
speech legislation in Canada perhaps
that's why the left is so determined in
this country to get Christianity out of
the classroom but don't tell us
something of the chilling there's no
doubt that's why they're determined I
mean people like Derrida I mean he
called the west FAL loco centric right
male-dominated logos centric it's like
that is the West
it's a logo centric well if you want to
take the West down you remove the idea
of the Divine Word from the substructure
of the society so you have to do that
it's like and this is the level at which
this war is being fought it's
fundamentally a theological war
interesting it is famous Waterloo
lectures blaze Patt the inaugural Blaise
Pascal lecture in 1978 Malcolm
Muggeridge said the West was in danger
of eating itself out from within and he
spoke at great length about this attempt
to about how the the West was abandoned
in Christianity and it had become a very
empty and soulless and financially
bankrupt place as a result but it
wouldn't be the end he said despite the
attempts to kill it in places like
communist
China and Russia there will always be
people who will fight through to the
truth of course we can see now three
decades on whatever that he was
absolutely right closer to four decades
on he was right well you know that
Christianity is spreading faster in
communist China than it did in Rome
during its most rapid period of
expansion in terms of proportion of
people transform it so Christianity is
spreading incredibly quickly in China
which is X would have guessed that right
I mean that's that's that just makes you
makes you shake your head tell us a
little more about your chilling
experience I mean Canada and Australia
culturally in many ways very like if it
can happen in Canada
presumably it's coming here oh it's how
it's going to happen here I think it's
absolutely inevitable it's not that big
a move from where you're already at and
the fact that well the Qantas airline
thing is a really good example the fact
that these things are happening and that
corporations aren't standing up in
outrage against the introduction of
ideas like equity it's like you guys are
all primed for this why not compelled
speech especially if it's done for the
best of all possible reasons I was
accused of denying the identities of the
oppressed it's like well for to me that
wasn't the issue at all the issue was no
look I'm not an advocate of hate speech
laws for the reasons I already describes
like who's gonna define hate not the
people you want to define it for sure
that's what's going to happen that's bad
enough but then to say well I have to
use the language of my detestable
radical leftists leftist foes let's say
that's not happening yeah so that's what
I said so you've got videos some of the
most wonderful Australians on our
corporate leaders and you know they're
generous philanthropic they thoughtful
they're contributors in the public
debate but I'd have to say far too many
of them seem I'll use the expression Pig
ignorant of the reality they're out
there playing with fire they're playing
with cultural forces that will destroy
the very activities that they would hold
up central to our wealth and prosperity
those cultural forces are playing with
them well it's a yes oh yes
so there's astute people can't realize
don't see they're being toyed with
they're being toyed with with with with
demonic forces in a sense and again I
mean that in a psychological sense Carl
Jung said people don't have ideas ideas
have people it's like you think about
that for about five years you know like
that
if you take the typical student radical
out of their demonstration and you have
a chat with them one on one you find out
that you know they're the daughter of
the guy down the street that you wave to
you know while she was growing up and
that eighty percent of her is sensible
person you know and ten percent is
resentful and ten percent is
ideologically possessed partly because
of the machination of her idiot
professors and so she's okay but if you
get ten of her together and each of them
are ten percent possessed then you have
the whole devil in the room right and
that thing has a will it has a
historical will and you better not be
thinking you're running the show
especially if you're ignorant of the
process and the corporate types who are
letting the radical left Fifth Column
into their midst and mostly through
their human resources their human
resources departments which should
probably just be shut down they have no
idea what they're messing with they
should know watch what happens to Google
I have to say I've been pretty stunned
by two or three of the senior chairmen
in this country who have said to me or
said two friends of mine in the context
of recent politically correct debates
here that they've been startled
themselves by what their companies
underneath of them have said hmm which
raises some interesting questions about
their need to get up to speed they're
not startled enough hmm
so I've seen many people have sent me
this sorts of training programs that the
diversity consultants are foisting on
the corporate world I mean it's it's
it's as if a woman Studies program has
been placed in the midst of the
corporate environment it's the it's not
only it's not only the the academic left
let's say made made manifest in a
PowerPoint presentation it's the worst
elements of the activist
McClendon the most appalling parts of
the university are making themselves
manifest in the corporate world at an
amazing rate yeah and the corporations
are guilty partly because well partly
because of inequality I would say
they're guilty and they want a wallpaper
over their bad conscience with with some
hand waving to to the Equality pushers
it's like well play with that at your
peril
so it's a very bad idea diversity
inclusivity equity that's a bad game if
you're going to be burned if you play it
and in ways you can't imagine so goo
radio ready freedom fairness respectful
debate a lot further that's right
responsibility let's circle back to
young people because the future is going
to belong to them before we know it
remarkable and very insightful and
engaging human being
Jonathan Hite is perhaps a leading
example of somebody who's seen from a
left perspective himself how dangerous
all of this is and how were endangering
young people by not being honest with
them not encouraging them to to explore
what they instinctively feel needs to be
explored going back to our earlier topic
and when leaving them without the
resilience that they're going to need to
confirm if you like a free and
prosperous society and I had a question
here relating to this which I just like
to read in his piece the coddling of the
American mind
Jonathan Hite outlines why Millennials
today are so fragile and lacking
resilience in life and in relationships
in university courses in the workplace
and what has led to this overwhelming
push to be protected from anything
difficult or uncomfortable or offensive
and he calls it the flight to safety and
I think you've used that expression he
outlines the core reason for this
fragility of mind and emotion he says it
stems first
from over functioning and overprotective
parents then schools now reaches into
our universities and of course more
people than ever go to universities in
the West so they form a much bigger bulk
in our community afterwards and it
leaves them tragically unprepared and
unarmed for life and relationships would
you comment on well I think it's good to
take a step back from that and think
about it in the broadest possible terms
there is definitely an epidemic of
overprotective parenting but it's useful
to ask why and my suspicions are is that
this is driven by very fundamental
biological and cultural phenomena that
aren't generally considered in
relationship to this issue we don't have
very many children we don't have 12 you
know six of whom die
we have one or two and that makes them
very precious right
we're unwilling to take risks with them
and no wonder and then we also have them
much later in life and so like if you
have a kid when you're 18 you're still a
kid you know you're gonna go out and
have your life right because you're so
well you're in the in the height of your
exploratory you're in the height of the
exploratory part of your life you're not
gonna over protect your kid because
you're still a kid but if you're 40 and
you have one child it's like all your
eggs are in one basket
and the probability that you're going to
take undue risks with that precious
person is very very low now obviously
there's some advantages to that because
great you would devote resources to your
child you know and foster their
development but the downside is that you
have every motivation to hover and maybe
you're also extraordinarily desperate as
a mother to maintain that bond with your
child because you've struggled so long
to achieve it it's highly highly
valuable
you can't take a risk well so these so
we might say well perhaps overprotective
parenting is a secondary and unintended
consequence of the birth control pill
and the fact that
now have children later in life could
easily be no if you have six kids it's
like what are gonna do hi helicopter
parent them it's like no yeah you're so
tired you can't even get off the couch
if you have six kids and there they
outnumber you right they're raising each
other they're competing and they're
taking each other down a peg they're not
there's no overprotection there but with
it with a single child landscape or dual
child landscape mostly a single child
landscape then you're gonna over protect
and then that ethos starts to permeate
the schools and it starts to permeate
the higher education institutions as
those children mature and then that all
reinforces it not good it's not obvious
what to do about it either
because if it is driven by demographics
in that in that sense it's a much more
intractable problem than we think so I
did some of that in 12 rules for life
you know I said look you what you have
to understand is that you're a danger to
your children no matter what right you
can let them go out in the world and be
hurt or you can over protect them and
hurt them that way
so you here's your choice you can make
your children competent and courageous
or you can make them safe but you can't
make them safe because life isn't safe
so if you sacrifice their courage and
competence on the altar of safety then
you disarm them completely and all they
can do is pray to be protected so in the
very act we're trying to do the right
thing by them although often with the
selfish motive right often with her
selfish motive we strip away the tools
and the equipment the understanding they
really need to make life work well
that's the that's the eatable mother
right that was for its great discovery
of the dark mother and the dark mother
is the person she's that witch in Hansel
and Gretel gingerbread-house lost
children too good to be true it's like a
house of candy Wow who could want
anything better what lives inside the
house of candy the witch that wants to
fatten you up and eat you right a
cautionary tale about overprotective
parents overprotective mothers about the
overprotective feminine it's like
they're psychoanalysts they were
so smart said the good mother
necessarily fails that's such a
brilliant phrase it's like you can't as
you as your child matures you have to
fail more and more as a mother right
until by the time you're 30 your child's
30 let's say 25 for that matter you're
not their mother anymore I mean
obviously you are but the relationship
has hit something like quasi Perce
status not entirely obviously but the
child's independent able to stand up on
their own two feet and take on the world
so now we say this thing at the
university student runs into some
difficulties with study or whatever and
brings their parents in to talk to the
faculty yeah they go off in color I mean
when I went to Queen's University a week
ago and there was a lot of noise and and
horror around that you know that the
people who were decrying my visit set up
coloring book stations so that people
could be comforted because you know the
evil professor was coming to talk it's
like and you know as a clinician and
hight knows this as well and all the
clinicians worth their salt know this
the worst thing you can do for someone
who's anxious is over protect them it
makes them worse the clinical literature
on that is crystal clear what you do for
people who are hyper anxious is
gradually expose them with their
voluntary consent to increasingly
threatening situations that cures them
it's exactly the opposite of what all
the mental health professionals so and I
use that term extraordinarily lightly
are trying to do to produce safe spaces
on the University campus like if our
safe is if a space needs to be defined
as safe you can be sure that's the one
thing it is not Jordan this has been
fascinating let me pay you a compliment
in some ways I think the most valuable
thing you can do for us is to model the
courage to speak your mind you do it
forcefully you do it courageously you do
it compassionately because the reality
is you only have to spend a bit of time
with you to realize that you actually
care especially about our young people
and what they're experiencing and
especially for our young men because
no boys model themselves are men who
they respect you're doing a great job of
modeling courage in the face of farm
well there's something I'd like to say
maybe in closing about courage people
say that to me and you know I don't
think it's exactly right doesn't there's
a line in the Old Testament the fear of
God is the beginning of wisdom and I
think it's more like that it's not that
I'm courageous it's that I'm afraid of
the right things so when I made my
videos it wasn't like that didn't make
me nervous
but I was less nervous about going back
to bed and not saying what I had to say
that I was about making the videos
because I know where this is going I
don't want to go there and so it's it's
not so much courage it's that it's a
matter of I it's it's it's less risky to
say something than to remain silent when
you know there's something to be said I
know that to be the case and so lots of
times in life it's like there's no
pathway forward that's going to shield
you from risk you get to pick this risk
or you get to pick this risk and I think
I picked the lesser risk and that might
be wise but I'm not so sure it's
courageous well I think it's admirable
let's leave it on that basis all right
thank you
[Music]
[Music]