welcome to meditating with John Becky
I'm a cognitive psychologist and a
cognitive scientist at the University of
Toronto where I scientifically study
mindfulness and related phenomena like
Insight flow mystical experience and
wisdom I've also been practicing the
past meditation at meta contemplation
and Tai Chi and Qigong for 29 years and
I've been teaching the pasta meta
anti-cheat professionally for close to
20 years this is a progressive course so
if you're joining us you're welcome to
stay but there have been three teaching
classes one on day three and two days
ago there'll be a teaching class
tomorrow as well on the day's other than
a teaching class however as I mentioned
yesterday there's great doubts there's
going to be a change to our schedule
I'll try to explain a bit of the reasons
and then we'll sit into a Q&A we will
have the teaching class tomorrow but
thereafter we're going to only do a
teaching class one day a week so Monday
will be the reason for that is we want
to try and extend the period at which
this community will be available to
people secondly we want to slow down the
pace because a lot of people are trying
to join they've seen the earlier videos
and they're trying to join a catch up
and we're going to slow down the pace so
it's easier for people to catch up so
the main change is starting next week
we'll only be teaching on Monday and
then they'll be the city there's a
second chain to the schedules of Urbino
sitting together this Saturday and then
going forward saturdays and sundays
they'll be no sitting so we will meet
Mondays through Fridays on 9:30 Monday
will be the teaching class the rest of
the days we'll be sitting there will
always be Q&A that will also provide
provide a little more time for Q&A
throughout the week okay so we'll put
this in the notes and all the nuts this
again tomorrow and on
and everything should be I think well
announced for everybody so I hope you're
keeping up your practice and again
continuity practice is more important
the quality of practice the quantity of
practice how I keep making that mistake
because the continuity is what
ultimately assures that you have an
intention to enhance the quality so
today we're going to sit just a reminder
of everything you've learned you've
learned how to center right back and
forth the torso side to side and then
also at the head and then you sink into
it you savor it you've learned to root
at the four centers front back and
center line where you're looking
listening loosening for listening
letting it flow and letting it go and
then sticking three feet into the earth
getting that sense of groundedness that
sensitivity and stability within the
sensitivity and then you've learned how
to flow your abdomen expand your
awareness across your interoceptive
awareness across and into your abdomen
and then enrich it by paying attention
to many different kinds of sensations
then you link that to your chest your
shoulders your torso following the whole
of the breath with your whole of the
torso focal awareness here peripheral
field awareness throughout the rest of
your torso like I said if you're just
joining us that it's probably too fast
of an instruction that's review for
everybody else please go back and look
at the more detailed and extended adjust
presentations and I also want people
through these exercises in those
previous classes that I mentioned ok
everybody let's get ready let's make
sure you've got a comfortable posture
remember you're never going to get a
perfect posture you're never even have
perfect conditions I mention to you I'm
continually wrestling with issues around
video veneers again I just want to
briefly say thank you everybody for all
the support and I'm going to keep doing
this as long as I possibly can it's very
important to me and I'm glad to hear
that it is helping other people so that
is motivating me to keep going so please
keep up the encouragement
all right so let's get all ready and
we'll begin when I say begin beginner
you
you
slowly begin to come out of your
practice trying as best you can to
integrate with your cultivated in your
practice with your everyday
consciousness and cognition
alright let's address some of the
questions there is a question from
sticking I think it's called I have a
habit of feeling guilty or being
obsessed with meditating in the right
way
should I just label it as guilt worry
and try to get back to my breath exactly
that's exactly right label it as trying
to label it with an ING word so you get
a sense more none of it of a theme but
if a process like worrying or feeling
guilty right just guilty if that works
for you yeah and then label it and
return to your breath you'll need to do
that you know probably several times if
this is a quite strong feeling with you
and and just accept that accept that
that's actually good meditation if
you're right I'm not doing it the right
way okay just I just right worrying back
to the breath whirring okay remember we
slowly slowly erode the change we'll try
and force or slam to change from Lars
Karl how do we know if we improve in our
sessions so what will happen initially
is you'll find that your breathing is
slowing down a little bit you're getting
a sense of a little less a a sort of
fragmentation of your mind it will slow
down a little bit you'll get a little
bit more a little bit more continuity on
the breath which we'll talk a little bit
more about tomorrow more importantly
than anything that happens in your
practice though is what happens in your
life this is what indicates right that
there's actual change having wonderful
feelings and wonderful experiences
actually be kind of misleading in
meditation in fact this this happened to
me and this was where I really got what
was happening
so I had been doing the three practices
for quite some time the Tai Chi Chuan
the past of the meta and I've had all
kinds of you know insights and you know
experience you know sort of powerful
experiences the Tai Chi ASIS it was
super hot and sweaty there's all this
stuff and but you know and but then
that'll feed comes and goes and it's
fades and then I was beginning to you
know just think oh well I'll just keep
through the practice and it didn't seem
to me like much you know pervasively was
changing and then what happened is
people started coming up to me and
saying what's changed what with the way
you talked and the way you think even
the way you're writing it has changed
I'm in an academic setting so you can
see why these would be with people with
notice so it's more when you notice
change in your life and when you start
to notice when you start trying to have
other people notice a change in you that
you'll start to get a sense that you're
starting to make progress on this so you
know in generally a little bit more
calmer a little bit more clarity a
little bit more centeredness all these
things will start to grow but those
markers in the meditation in the
practice are nowhere near as significant
as you having a moment of mindfulness
out of your life something is spinning
and you go oh and you oh it's just
spinning right it's and it's okay up but
right I can Center and root and I can I
can pull apart what's happening and all
what my mind is projecting on it but you
have that kind of insight that moment of
mindfulness in your life that's that's a
really important marker but more
importantly is what other people don't
go seeking it but when other people
start to notice a change in you that's a
very significant marker this that
disciple of Ross started getting fidgety
ten minutes in is this usual for
first-timers very very much the
tradition talks about as if you're
standing you know a waterfall or a
shower lots of people are worried that
they're kind of crazy because their
monkey mind you realize that how much
your mind is not your friend right now
trying to gradually and in true
friendship try to befriend it
so being fidgety attendants in very very
normal
jet-black meditation has brought my
attention to previously unconscious
muscle tension despite this new
awareness I may be able to wilfully
release attention do you have any
recommendations do the routine practice
on them as much as you can and then
accept those tensions are going to
release when the psychological factors
and cognitive factors associated with
them have been properly addressed and
that's not going to happen immediately
or what right away Michael Washburn
talks about this is body armor we we
tend certain parts of our body in order
to alter the powder of sensations which
alters the emotional experience which
alters our attention on our thinking so
this is ways in which we protect
ourselves from certain feelings and
patterns of thought and it's only when
those drop gradually come up and get
addressed in this practice that the
muscle tension will probably finally
alleviate I do recommend the way to help
that process speed up a bit is smooth it
up is to take up a moving mindfulness
practice like yoga or Tai Chi Chuan
Nicolas
although Nicolas you don't you ask
questions every time which I really
appreciate is it okay to eat you ditch
try try if you can write to label it as
itching and go back for a few times and
then like I said remember the principle
if all you're doing is suffering and
enduring
then break and scratch you'll find it
sometimes these itches disappear when
you break your meditation that they're
actually not genuine itches there's sort
of ways in which your mind your monkey
mind is trying to distract you from the
process in a couple of sessions I'll
teach you how to work on distractions
mark how though mark is good to hear
from you again how often should we
review the lessons do we have charts to
summarize the process no I haven't made
a chart that's a good idea
I did mention that I am currently
revising the meditation manual with
Christopher master Pietro and we're
hoping that that
I'm not what I might do is make you a
beta version once it's all revised with
you guys and then and then I submit that
to the publisher and I'll try and put
some charts in there I would maybe
review the classes be you know just just
an instruction parts or maybe once a
week just go over until you it's pretty
clear to you what you should be doing
remember it's a okay to talk to yourself
with when what you're doing is inner
coaching eventually that will fall away
Sondra Bianco to learn thai GOP Chong
have you done videos if not are there
some you recommend over others no I
planning to do some basic Tai Chi videos
and she come videos down the road
probably towards the end of this course
so that we have another set of practice
and some related practice that whatever
what I intend to do is once we're done
the meditation I want to teach our
related practices like some Tai Chi like
some cheek out like some lectio divina
so you can build up a dynamic system and
ecology of practices so that's coming
down the road I'll try and look up some
Tai Chi videos and see if I can
recommend any Nicolas again flow is when
we find the optimal degree of challenge
and ability could you clarify how we go
about finding that sweet spot during
find your flow part of meditation you've
if you find it I it's that's a that's a
difficult thing to say because it's
going to be a little bit different for
everybody but that sweet spot is where
you're like you're finding it it's
taking all of your attention to you know
and you're sort of zooming in and
zooming it somewhat rapidly to maintain
an awareness of the whole and the parts
and eventually that will become more
automatic like when you're reading like
I gave you the example of reading so
that sweet spot is don't measure it by a
sort of your sense of sort of success
just success measure both by how
challenging is this it should be quite
challenging for me and how absorbing is
it like do I have to give it all of my
attention in order to get simultaneously
or at least very quickly following one
upon the other the whole and the parts
so thank you very much for joining
everyone again as always I want to thank
of our adjacent please subscribe to this
channel to be notified of the next video
and to find other videos on my channel
that will point to up these other
practices point to other things that can
help you at this time point to the
overall at long-standing important goal
of cultivating wisdom and compassion we
will do eight we will be doing this
every morning at nine and thirty except
now Saturdays and Sundays there will be
a teaching class tomorrow
but thereafter the teaching classes will
only be on Monday and then we will have
city classes to the state of Friday the
one thank you for your time and
attention
see you tomorrow