alright everybody we are back it is Jack
Murphy and you are on the Jack Murphy
live podcast you can find me at on
Twitter at Jack Murphy live at the
website Jack Murphy live.com go to
website sign up for the mailing list the
book is Democrat to the plural go to
amazon.com pick one of those up today
but a but enough about all that I'm very
excited about the guests that I have he
is the senior tech correspondent at
Breitbart news and he has been on the
forefront of following social media and
online tech giants and their censorship
battles against everybody out there and
that's one of the things we're gonna
talk about today but first there's one
say hello hello Illume how are you hey
Jack good to be on the podcast oh yeah
fantastic Kalume Bakari is here with me
in Washington DC he is just back from
abroad and we've been trying to get this
one scheduled for a while so I thank you
very much for being patient and you know
setting this up with me the first thing
I want to talk about is just to like get
a little bit of a background on you
personally because I always find it's
like really interesting to know where
people are coming from what their
context is you know why they chose to
enter the field that they're in now I
mean you right now you're the senior
tech correspondent at a major global
media you know powerhouse and you know
people don't just wake up one day and
end up there so can you give us like a
little bit of a background on yourself
and a little bit of what you were doing
maybe before you got the bright part of
course I mean I'm I'll preface this by
saying I'm terrible about talking about
myself but I'll do my best so I did my
studies at Oxford back in graduated in
2013 then started off working in
politics actually for liberals real
liberals real liberals well I say that
like the party I work for the Liberal
Democrat Party in the UK is not what I
describe as liberal at anyway at the
moment but there were a little bit more
liberal back then they've always been
quite good on civil liberties and
protecting people against surveillance
and so on but right now they're sort of
like a social justice warrior and tybor
exit party
but that's why I was doing in 2013 2014
then I started working for a political
consultant
a very globalist which was extremely an
extremely boring office job where large
corporations paid us lots of money to
tell them what's going on in politics
political consultants is a lot less
glamorous and sinister than you'd expect
it's generally just people informing
other people about what's going on at
least that's how it was at the place
where I worked but at the same time I
was sort of very extremely online I was
always very into the dark corners of the
internet for Chan reddit the reddit is
probably mainstream and for Chan's eyes
and I was seeing all these sort of new
cultural battles happening in the
Millennial Generation well anyway you
you got involved in this just because
you had personal interest or yeah I was
just curious at all these sort of
controversies that were erupting on
social media I mean these on these web
sites and communities in 2013 and 2014
and the biggest one that that sort of
led into my Breitbart job was gamergate
in 2014 so when I saw that starting I
thought well you know this is going to
be big because they've been a whole lot
of previous sort of social justice
warrior versus anti social justice
warrior contra buzz it's happening in
the year leading up to that and it
seemed like there was this big battle
about to take place and no one really
understood it because no one was
following those communities know most
following reddit and fortunate back in
those days right could you could you
give just like a 30-second summary on
what gamergate is because I think
probably more than half the people are
listening to the podcast you say
gamergate they have no idea what that
means but to me gamergate is like the
shot heard around the world that sort of
got us to where we are today you can
almost trace back so much what's
happening today back to gamergate so
could you just like sum it up real quick
absolutely so short answer is it was a
battle between online gamers and
feminists and left-wing journalists over
political correctness and media bias and
lack of media ethics in games journalism
which sounds like a very niche sort of
topic that would n be interesting to a
few people but you have to remember that
gaming was like it's the hobby of the
millennial generation millions and
millions of people play video games
and while at the same time you had
things like campus censorship going on
when someone sent it on campus that
affects maybe 200 students who might
have gone to see the talk but if you
insert little correctness or get a video
game censored that would affect
potentially millions of fans and that's
what that's also why we see
controversies happening over
Ghostbusters and Star Wars and all these
pop culture phenomenon because you know
it does matter to like millions of
millions of people who enjoy those
things and don't want to see them
politicized and censored right and these
are multi multi-billion dollar
industries this isn't just like some you
know backwater thing of course so that's
why it turned into a big thing and even
though so many people thought well this
is just like a niche hobby it'll blow
over in a few days actually that
controversy ran on for over a year and
people still talk about it today partly
because so many people were involved
with billions of gamers but also because
it was the first time where I think you
saw the dominance of left-wing
Millennials being challenged on social
media so up until 2014 when gaming it
started the left and left-wing activists
sort of dominated social media it was
like their playground it was where they
publicly shame people they called people
out was called call out culture they got
people fired from their jobs over jokes
they saw on Twitter over tell me about
it yeah well you know you know you know
it's better than anyone exactly and they
were able to do this sort of virtually
unchallenged by anyone else but you're
in gamergate you saw all these sort of
people who didn't believe in pleaser
correctness because games have never
really been very politically correct you
know you go on an online game you're
trash-talking people there's there's no
sort of language curds and also people
coming in from 4chan and reddit which
obviously anonymous place is known for
you know they're trolling cultures they
didn't malodorous
either and they all sort of flooding
onto twitter and the mainstream social
networks and they suddenly started to
outnumber all the left wingers why did
they float onto social media why where
were they before and was there a trigger
that kicked them you know made them sort
of appear on the mainstream social media
powers
well when 4chan get it Zach gets its act
together and starts getting organized
and you know and read it to to some
extent they can be very disciplined in
the kind of
they do and there were certainly an
anonymous posters on 4chan encouraging
them to go onto Twitter because they
were saying that you know that's what
the journalists are that's where you'll
get mainstream attention don't just stay
on 4chan understand these communities so
you sort of unmask they sort of behave
in this sort of hivemind manner and you
know flooded onto social media so it was
very very sort of like both calculated
and organic I'd say right so it was like
an emergen thing but at the same time
there was some people sort of leading
the way and directing it and I think
based on some of the conversations I've
had recently with Jordan Hall and John
rabe in particular you know the
emergence of these collectivized
networks online these collective
intelligence networks online is
something that's shaping our culture and
our politics and everything today and
gamergate may have been one of the first
times at the the resent the resistance
wrong term the insurgency the insurgency
sort of made its way into social media
and started to have serious impact yeah
in the mainstream definitely and you
know with that without saying too much
there was certainly certain individuals
who appeared to be anonymous on 4chan
who were making lots of posts at the
time saying you need to be on Twitter if
you want to influence things yeah that
certainly some people I know if we're
doing that and it was very effective
yeah it really was and in fact you know
one of our Mutual's it's Mike Cerner
which he sort of cut his teeth on social
media emerging out of gamergate I think
isn't it right yeah I mean gamergate
made stars off a lot of people you think
of some of the big names today like SOG
enough a CAD and Mike zona but they got
huge followings during gamergate because
it turned into something that wasn't
just limited to games it was more like a
generalized backlash against this
culture of political correctness this
culture of public shaming that was
coming out of left wing right I think I
think I remember the tag line was free
speech in games journalism right
something like that yeah but so what
would that what would somebody from the
left's say was the real issue around
gamergate cuz that's that's not what
they would say they wouldn't say it
wasn't about free speech it was about
what oh yeah the narrative from the left
was that this is a huge harassment
campaign led by bigots who hate
progressive values and hate feminists
and women and minorities
and yeah actually it was in in some
cases a dress rehearsal for 2016 because
he saw exactly the same narrative
emerging about Trump supporters that
they're coming from these dark corners
of the Internet to harass journalists
that they're all hateful bigots they're
all deplorable
so it was like a test run because the
only way that the left can respond to
these emergent movements that come out
and challenge them is to sort of smear
the entire movement and cast it as
illegitimate right
anybody who participates in it is
obviously a terrible horrible rotten
person and forget about whatever the
principle is that they're defending it
really just comes down to social social
you know exile and personal attacks and
smears like that indeed yeah so that's
it that's very fascinating you know the
gamergate gets a gets a lot of attention
in the circles that we run in I don't
know that there's been a definitive like
gamergate book written or something that
really tracks the way that this has had
an influence I think even on the
election and who's in the White House
and you know moving forward as a as the
beginning of these online insurgencies
and these collective eyes intelligence
networks that that don't necessarily
have a leader I do remember very clearly
back then people would say they say
mockingly like I am the leader of
gamergate and everyone would be saying
that because there was no leader of
gamergate right I think you're right
yeah I know of Jonas we're trying to
find a leader because that's the perfect
way to take out a movement you know you
find it's like classic alinsky tactics
you know you find the leader you isolate
them you personalize them you destroy
their reputation we've seen it happen
again and again and there was a book
about gamergate i believe brad glasgow a
fairly unbiased journalist has written a
book about gamergate okay
but that's the only one I know of there
being some you know promised books about
gaming it could never happen I heard
those were misses and in terms of
political ramifications you often hear
left-wing journalists who were involved
in trying to smear game I get talking
about how if everyone had just listened
to them back then the Trump movement
never would have happened because that
was that was they sort of agree with
what I was saying it was a kind of test
run and I also got an article about a
year ago pointing out of this a fairly
big overlap between hard
all gamers people who play games a lot
as you know serious hobby not just as
casual thing and Trump supporters
because you think about all the
unemployed and it unemployed white males
without a college degree in the Rust
Belt you know their biggest hobby by far
is video games and they're also the
demographic that put Trump into the
White House so you know there's some I
think there's there's some room for for
research and analysis there about just
how much gamers did support Trump I
think the left might have a point about
gamergate putting with Trump in the
White House oh I agree I agree 100% and
if it wasn't for if it wasn't
necessarily the individuals or the
demographics involved in gamergate that
did it it was sort of the technology and
the the networks and the emergent
systems that came out of it which led to
the the red the red insurgency as John
rabe calls it fighting against the the
blue church which is the turn from
Jordan Hall which encapsulates all the
social justice were warriors the media
the universities deep state
now all these institutionalized forces
that are pushing the same top-down
narrative that is now infected with the
social justice warrior mentality and so
that that battle is playing itself out
over and over and over again on a daily
basis and now and now the resistance has
its own its own sort of decentralized
collective a network as well and we're
gonna we're gonna get to that definitely
but so you're you're you're doing
political consultancy and you're you're
digging into gamergate and 4chan and
reddit and you're and you're reading up
on this as just as a hobby because it's
interesting because it's the cutting
edge of culture at the time and so how
do you how do you parlay that into you
know riding about tacit at Breitbart
well it occurred to me that no one on
the right who had you know the most
track record of criticizing feminists
and little correctness and the cultural
left had really clocked on to gaming it
they weren't sure what it was about
obviously the young millennial reporters
a place like BuzzFeed and Gawker and the
video game and it didn't know what it
was about and they were attacking it
relentlessly but there were no
journalists
on the other side presenting a different
view and challenging that narrative so
as it was all kicking off I sent the
breakdown up the story to Breitbart
bright but initially you know what's
going on but I sort of explained it to
them and then they started covering it
and that became a very big deal and that
was how I ended up working for Breitbart
cuz I venture started writing articles
for them as well
got it got it so were you trained in
journalism did you study that in school
were you on your high school newspaper
or was was this something that you've
sort of evolved into it's something I
evolved into my background my academic
background is history in politics and my
professional back was politics well but
you know there's a fairly you know a lot
of overlap between journalism and
politics especially these days so it
wasn't it wasn't too difficult to to get
into journalism and started to learn the
ropes laughs so you just started sending
bright bright information and then
eventually they hired you on to write
about the subject basically yes and then
the widest subject about tank censorship
and the social justice warrior movement
and the opposition to it great and what
year was that
that was 2014 2015 I joined right but
formally in October 2015 or just when
right but tank was set up got it okay
which brings me to the first time that I
ever saw your name which was and and you
know I'm sure you were doing work before
this and and you know I'm not certainly
the sole purveyor of what's out there in
this world but they were the first time
I saw your name was around the taxidermy
article on the alt-right and I think
that that was right around that wasn't
it a bit later I think it was it was the
summer of 2016 when the old riot was
sort of something that everything
everyone the media was talking about at
the time right so tell me tell me about
now this was like a seminal article I
remember people didn't know nobody knew
what all right was what all right meant
what the frame with the the term meant
who was under this umbrella did anybody
actually pick up the umbrella and you
know the banner and run with it it was
this amorphous weird thing that you know
people so when I first heard the term
alright my perspective on it was like
okay I used speed I was Democrat don't
want to be a Democrat anymore because
they've gone crazy I never wanted to be
part of my grandfather's
you know good old Grand Old Party GOP
Republicans I never saw them as my
people and so when I heard the term
alright I thought okay this is something
that I could get with because it sounded
like a cool name first of all and it
seemed to me to signal that you know not
Democrat not a Republican but certainly
now finding myself on the right side of
Center and so I even tried out the term
alt-right myself and once I started to
learn more about what it meant you know
I definitely shucked that but your
article that you think you did in
conjunction with Maya innopolis right
your article was a taxidermy of people
that sort of had taken on the name all
right one just tell us a little bit
about the impetus for the article what
your thought process was in writing it
and we can also talk about some of the
ramifications of the - well at the time
we wrote that article I believe it was
around April 2016 alright was just
emerging and as you said lots of people
were claiming it and it didn't really
have a clear identity and the point of
the article was to explain what groups
and what individuals were claiming the
label now at the time it was a fairly
broad mix of people who claim the label
obviously six months later I'd say by
the time of September November 2016
around the election it would it had been
entirely claimed by this sort of you
know white supremacist white nationalist
racists right at the time you wrote the
article it was it was they were part of
it they were trying to claim the label
but they hadn't quite captured it by
then and you know we pointed out there a
lot there were lots of white
supremacists who were claiming the label
and no one really wanted everything to
do with them there are also lots of
4chan kids claiming the label at the
time lots of people like yourself who
would just didn't see you know the
traditional conservatives didn't see
themselves as liberals but you know
wanted a term to describe themselves
what ultimately ended up happening
unfortunately was that the white
supremacists with the assistance of the
media I think you put all the focus on
them did end up claiming the label and
we're now at the point where old white
is obviously something that I don't want
anything to do with that you don't want
anything to do with it's just synonymous
with white supremacism now and no one
supports white supremacist
except for a fringe minority of lunatics
right exactly very very teeny tiny
minority that only exists mostly in the
eyes of the media and then they're
entirely propped up as a way to smear
anybody who is whose right of
progressivism basically yeah and you
know it's interesting that the main some
of the mainstream media said you know
the article was an apology for the
alt-right actually no you know we
clearly condemned the white supremacist
faction that were in it at the time that
hadn't yet taken it over
actually Bloomberg I think Bloomberg
Businessweek published they published
its annual list of articles they wish
they had published and that article was
on there so you know well hey well I
guess Bloomberg Businessweek or
apologist for the ultra-right to then
really sing as they said their data
published that article too you know it's
not know wasn't a perfect article I mean
I think we were far too nice to Richard
Spencer and one of the problems with the
Opera at the time is normally knew a
whole lot about the people and the
individuals who were in it and we're
still learning about it I think if we if
I went back and did it today I would not
be so nice to Richard Spencer who is a
lunatic racist second yeah and but it
was a genuine attempt not to excuse the
movement or apologize for but just to
describe what was going on and that was
the point of it right it was it was a
way to describe this sort of Amorphis
group of people that had been bubbling
up as you had been tracking from
gamergate from other various parts of
the internet and disaffected youth and
disenchanted Democrats and a whole list
of other people I mean there was what I
mean how many different slices did you
guys put in the article there was a
whole yeah we disliked Ford separate
subcategories intellectuals meme
warriors like the Fortran kids and white
supremacists crazies yeah exactly so
that was that was something that really
exploded onto the scene and and
continued to garner a lot of attention
was there any negative fallout for you
from from writing that article some
people trying to in the media try to
describe me as a leader of the ultra
rights yeah
pretty crazy I mean on the one hand they
were they were describing it
increasingly correctly as a white
supremacist movement
what it turned into but I don't see how
white supremacist movement can be led by
you know half half Pakistani ethnic
minority but that's what some people
were saying right but you know I think
it's been pretty clear since then that
the old Roy that we described at the
time and the old right that morphed into
a white supremacist movement later were
two different things yeah definitely and
interestingly it is the you know the the
propped up you know white nationalist
folks that have really just
disintegrated and fallen out of the
picture completely a hundred percent and
all those other folks that you outlined
are still going and still going strong
and liberals and and the meme warriors
and and disaffected Democrats and
whatnot they're still out there and in
fact that name the alt right gets thrown
around so much and we all get kind of
called all right people have called me a
copy all right just for attending a
rally where I was like taking pictures
of people right I'm taking pictures and
periscoping and they said I was alright
just cuz I was standing there that name
gets thrown around so much in a way it's
almost as if we did win the branding war
because everybody's calling us let's do
it alright anyway and there's really no
shaking it at this point and I think
though that really to anyone that has
been paying attention at all that term
the alt-right has lost has lost its
power in terms of being able to slander
you except when it comes to talking to
people who are completely ensconced in
the progressive sjw's or mentality and
and anybody that doesn't think like them
is is alright and so they use it as they
attack but if you're anywhere outside of
that group I think people know that the
that term alright when they gets thrown
around doesn't really doesn't really
stick anymore and it doesn't really mean
anything so yeah I mean that there's a
correct definition and there's an
incorrect definition and the correct
definition at the moment is someone who
believes in white supremacy someone who
believes he's a bigot someone who you
know will hurl epithets at minorities
you know in you know in a hostile manner
and you know genuine racists and you
know you and I condemn that you know
everyone I know condemns that ever and
Breitbart condemns it and
unfortunately as progressives are just
using this as this blanket term to smear
the right as they've used other words
before like racist and sexist and
misogynist and so on and what they do by
doing that as they devalue the power of
the word devalue the definition right
do you remember was a Steve Bannon that
said that Breitbart was the platform for
all right is or my putting words in his
mouth was that something that was said
um I I i think something along those
lines yes yes yeah I think I remember
hearing that and I'm sure it was before
this evolved definition came into play
and it was really in reference to this
disaffected group of people that embrace
technology don't want to be a Democrat
don't want to be a Republican and
looking for alternative ways to move
things forward but yeah the one thing
you'll never have in mainstream media is
at the definition that was used back in
early 2016 and what the old quite turned
into later in the year were two
different things right never and I even
I you know I wrote a very long essay
about my exploration of the alright and
what it meant because I early like in
late 2015 maybe I might use that word to
describe myself oh my god man that
sounds cool but then I started reaching
out to guys like Richard Spencer and
other idiots to ask them what their what
their ideas were and and what they had
in mind for government or policy or what
their visions for the future were and
the more I learned about it the more I
realized they were insane and I wanted
nothing to do with it and I wrote a very
long essay about it and it gets read on
my website you know a couple hundred
times a month but that's not going to be
enough to to change the change the
mainstream narrative but it does help
anybody that wants to learn about me
understand that process and lots of
people went through the similar
exploration and evolution and have
learned now to stay the away from
all of those people so yeah why don't we
talk a bit more about why the old Freud
isn't saying I think this isn't explored
often enough you know the way I see
increasingly see politics and I think
the way it's always historically been
philosophically is that politics is
about you know how much how far do you
embrace human nature and how far do you
try and contain it because a society
that just lets human nature run wild is
a isn't
society's not civilization its barbarism
the definition of civilization is
containing the worst aspects of human
nature that's the point that Thomas
Hobbes made in the Leviathan but a
society that goes too far towards
controlling human nature is a tyrannical
society that's what the Soviet Union
tried to do so I think what the
alt-right want to do is they're they're
saying all these negative aspects of
human nature like racism and bigotry and
ethnic tribalism are good things and
should be embraced I think no
right-thinking people agrees with that
at all
I think be the pragmatic way to look at
it is that yes racism and tribalism do
exist and when you bring groups in a
close proximity there will always be
people inside them who try and create
conflict and divide that's one of the
reasons why you have to be very careful
about mass immigration because you know
it will lead to at least in the short
term a lot of conflict and strife and
the way societies then try and control
that conflict and strife is bypassing
hate speech laws and cracking down on
freedom of speech so it in Everett and
control those negative aspects of human
nature so I think the way to look at it
is not the way the old right looks at it
which is all this ethnic identity is a
good thing you know that's this that you
know that that's that's Cupid and it
leans towards barbarism it's not a
civilized no no civilized person would
believe in that but you also can't look
at it the way the left looks at it was
that well let's just have open borders
and you know if there are negative
aspects of human nature like racism that
starts showing themselves we'll just
create an author or tearing society and
control everyone's speech no one wants
to live in a society as well you have to
make a pragmatic view you have to have a
limited immigration you have to
acknowledge that the dark side of human
nature without embracing it but also you
know take that into account when you're
making policies yeah I think that that's
a really fundamental divide there which
is acknowledging the darker side of
human nature I think we see on the on
the Left people are more interested in
perfecting human nature where they think
that there's some sort of end goal
outcome where we can have a the perfect
human being and the way that they get
there is by coercing all of us into this
into this position and it also go
and and if you have limited success in
America then that means something is
wrong right because everybody is perfect
ability or at least the same in some way
and so if people have different outcomes
and that means there's something
societally wrong then we have to
continue to change it and I find on the
right people have an acceptance of the
darker side of human nature and and
understand that there is good and evil
in the world and there's never gonna be
a way to eradicate all that from from
society and so you begin to focus on
yourself in the way that you can improve
yourself and improve the people around
you and to do the best that you can I
find myself on the edge of this
discussion in a number of ways one of
the ways is like through sexual norms
and mores and sexual practices like on
to the right of me there are people that
will say advocate only exclusively for
like you know monogamous relationship
within the context of marriage and have
sex solely for the act of procreation
and then on the Left we have very far to
the left you know hedonism and people
just willy-nilly running around and
engaging in their most animal desires
I'm somewhere in the middle and I feel
this tug and I've always sort of felt
the tug which is to the extent that I
have urges as a human being whether they
be tribal relationships or whether they
be one smash somebody on the head or
whether it is to have sex with many
people as I can or whatever like I've
always been conscious of to the extent
I'm like exist as a human being that has
urges and then my job is to sort of rein
those in and I think that that's an
interesting sort of battlefield and and
I'm in the middle of that and I find
myself wandering through that
perspective in that lens both looking at
politics sexual practices are sexual
dating and mating markets and all
aspects of human life and I don't really
have an answer there I just I know that
I feel the tug from both directions
where I can see that our society will
benefit from curtailing certain
behaviors but I can also see how from a
personal perspective you can really
enjoy certain things and to what extent
is your personal enjoyment the foremost
guiding light in your in your
decision-making versus what might be
better for society at large so you know
this is a very fascinating battlefield
for
of ideas there for me yeah and the way I
look at it is you know what's publicly
encouraged versus what's allowed in
private I think you should allow the
maximum number of non harmful behaviors
in private
yeah so what semadar for public policy
and in what's encouraged in public is a
different matter
I think if governments the government
shouldn't clamp down a private behavior
but they should encourage certain
behaviors that are beneficial to society
like though like Viktor Orban and
Matthias salvini in Europe are doing a
lot of things to encourage families and
procreation partly because it's well
mainly because it's very good it's good
for society then you don't have to
resort to mass immigration which creates
all the problems we discussed earlier so
I think there are certain types of
private habeas it's fine for the
government to encourage I think banning
private behaviors is a different matter
right but one of the other things that's
interesting here is that you know we're
talking about human nature earlier and
the dark side of human nature and the
good side of human nature you can't
really create good policy unless you
have an understanding of human nature
and we do have more understanding of
human nature now than we've ever done
before thanks the cognitive revolution
evolutionary psychology and all these
new fields the problem is some of the
research being done and the conclusions
being reached are so dangerous to the
left and their ideology that sort of
based on you know outdated social
science in the 60s and 70s which means
that we can't really have an honest
conversation about human age and that
really harmed society in general what
subjects in particular anything well
you're just talking about you know
sexual relations that's that's some way
you base need to have two studies of
human age you know the male and the
female but the left won't even let you
have that discussion because in their
view there's no such thing as innate
maleness through innate female a suit on
you can't even develop that
understanding to the point where you can
start building policy on the basis of it
right right
that's fascinating that's fascinating I
think that the way that I discovered
where I was politically speaking is when
I started to understand what was
happening in our dating and mating
markets and the way I saw the ideologies
of the left and affecting just human
relationships on the ground with people
in there too
and whatever and this sort of the
dissociation of their being maleness and
femaleness and the limiting factor of
the knob that keeping people from
actually studying the differences in
embracing the differences but were there
any other elements of like new research
and and new science that you think are
gonna be inhibited by the left where you
know I think that people have always
thought that the right was the science
deniers but it seems to me that people
on the left are the science deniers
these days or any other subjects that
you think are gonna be affected by that
I mean there are still some science
denies on the Left I'm sure there are
still a few people out there who believe
in like you know the earth four thousand
year shells and so on but I think the
that's that's not even that's not really
a harmful belief in my view because it's
it's it's nowhere it's not an academia
it's on the mainstream media it doesn't
really do much damage to society I think
we where you have have this mentality on
the Left where you have to clamp down on
all this on you know studies of innate
gender differences that does do damage
to society because then you have money
being wasted on trying to get more women
into stem when actually all the research
shows that it's maybe it's you know the
difference we mail and female
preferences that causes those imbalances
in industries or never governments try
and correct it in Scandinavia just
doesn't work I mean it wasting tons of
taxpayer money so you need to have that
honest conversation first before you can
like start correct start correcting some
of those bad policies right I'm this is
a good Segway actually actually sorry go
ahead
no I was gonna continue with that the
topic about the the Scandinavian
countries in the way that they've worked
to eliminate sort of structural
limitations or you know social norms are
browned career choices by men and women
and they've made it the most open and
egalitarian societies in the in the
world but a funny thing happened there
what happened this is like fairly well
known on the right now I think what
happened is that the the gender gaps and
industries actually started to expand
because when you give men and women you
know as much choice as possible and and
as little judgment as possible they'll
just go with
preferences and their own preferences
are you know different right well like
like what so like more more men finding
themselves in Tekken and in stem and
more women find themselves in sort of
like caretaking jobs or like school
teaching or yeah essentially that you
know engineering like the gap is
extremely wide even in Scandinavian
countries and it just keeps on expanding
and you actually see much lesser for gap
in poorer countries in the developing
world because in those countries you
have less of a choice you go with the
job that makes you the most money which
might be you know information technology
it might be at the hard sciences you'll
just go with whatever gets you a job so
you see the gender gap in industry so
they're generally much less divided than
in the West right yeah I've seen studies
that show that a women or be more
inclined to go into jobs that pay more
when they need more money right it was
and when they need when they when money
is less of an issue when childcare is
paid for or health insurance paid for
education is paid for then they are
freer to make choices that they want to
make that suit them personally and this
is a this is a good way to segue into
Google and into James d'amour as an
introduction and then into the way that
social justice ideology left-wing blank
slate ISM the perfectibility of man the
Equality of everything in all outcomes
has infected our technology companies
and I love talking about the James Moore
story and we can talk about that briefly
and then move into some of your more
specific work on the matter because this
is the thing that I really wanted to
talk to you about today and this really
terrifies me I mean it this scares the
 out of me okay because Google
YouTube Facebook Twitter these are the
most powerful forces that we have in in
the world today and they are actively
working to control manipulate our minds
and so do you familiar with the James
Moore story can you talk us through that
or oh yeah very familiar yeah please do
so James d'amour for those who don't
know was a software engineer at Google
fairly high up in the company had you
know great reviews for his work from his
colleagues he authored a
internal memo in a when was it I believe
around August 2017 in which he
criticized the company for its lack of
political tolerance towards viewpoints
that did not align with progressive
values and he specifically pointed out
that the issue of women in stem was
generally a verboten topic you either
believed in the feminist line which is
that it's all due to sexism it needs to
be corrected or your get fired or just
generally blacklisted in Silicon Valley
now this was an internal memo is meant
for to start an internal discussion
inside Google what ended up happening
was the memo was maliciously leaked by
an opponent of James to more to the
media which published it and actually an
interesting interesting detail of the
way they published it I think it was
Gizmodo or one of the old Google
publications that published the whole
memo they didn't include the footnotes
racist ripped out of the research and
all the science and all the data yeah so
it looked like this was all just James
d'amours opinions when actually was you
know backed up by a lot of research in
the footnotes so yeah it was leaked to
the media at smart a wider outrage and
James d'amour after accusing Google of
firing people and being hostile to
people who expressed contrary political
viewpoints was vindicated because Google
ended up firing him and around that time
I started hearing from more people
inside Google describing really crazy
social justice warrior type behavior at
the at the world's largest and most
influential tech company like you know
crazy stuff you know they're camped
Hamptons in the men's bathroom because
some men men straight that's one of the
things they do at Google well we later
heard that Google allowed a what was it
a yellow winged dragon kin I might might
have gotten all of those details right
but a spined wingless dragon kin to give
a talk and living as a plural being so
the kind of crazy stuff you'd find on
tumblr or in like
the feminist Club at Berkeley it's all
happening on in the world's largest tech
company right but this is these are just
like little they're they're shocking but
they're just little tiny minor incidents
compared to well the more pernicious you
know devastating terrifying you know
from the future control your mind all
the information and got it and like hurt
us into the desired outcome that's going
on over there and also in terms of the
employees I mean there was some stories
about google employees being threatened
with violence because they support
Republicans there was stories of people
teams being cheered for getting rid of a
white male or being booed for having too
many white males so you know we're gonna
ramp on political intolerance rampant
racism and sexism within these companies
and you know frankly I think that's so
that's a legal issue for them I'm no
lawyer but that sounds like
discrimination to me yeah
and and I like the way that you hold no
punches on that I mean it rampant racism
in sexism I mean there's absolutely no
question about it right yeah I mean one
of the stories republished was that uh
Google's management teams were handing
out flyers to to various apartments on
white dominant values and what to avoid
so you should avoid praising praising
meritocracy you should right you should
avoid talking about equality of
opportunity because these are all white
dominant values and they're bad right I
got that same memo and a my former
employee the District of Columbia public
charter school board they handed that
around for everybody and in there also
was things like reliance on data right
all right do being overly reliant on
rational thinking and on on on on logic
right because that is the tool of the
white supremacist to use logic and to
use data I'm not kidding I mean this is
in documents passed around through the
HR department
that's that fed and fueled their you
know sensitivity seminars and their
equality and inclusion and diversity
training and whatnot and that place even
went so far as to write on the board
while they're brainstorming how to set
up their policies they wrote too many
white people right like I work that was
one of the first things I discovered
when I got there I was just stumbling
through they gave me like the my
predecessors computer and I was just
going through the files and
stuff in the subject on the email said
whiteboard I was like oh cool I like
whiteboards maybe this is how I go and
procure one I open it up and there's a
picture of the whiteboard on there right
in the middle is the big thing too many
white people right yeah and the same
things happening at at Google and you
know they're obviously inadvertedly
saying because that they're saying that
it's a white value to believe in logic
they're inadvertently saying all non
white people are illogical it's pretty
exam pretty racist in another way right
exactly and it's terrifying to me to
think that a company whose job is
basically to mine and manage data thinks
that mining and managing and relying on
data is an inherently white supremacist
thing to do which is all of it is
absolutely absurd which goes to show you
that it's not actually a
well-thought-out position it's really an
emotional position but let's let's get
but let's wrap up the James to more
story and just get into your work that
you've done with the Google with Google
and YouTube and understanding what's
happening there James James d'amour got
fired and then he filed a complaint with
the National national labor board a
nation national labor Review Board and
in and in the response from the national
labor review board they they wrote and
it's been it's been interpreted a few
different ways but the way that I read
the words clear as day was that simply
even discussing gender differences at
work is now constitute sexual harassment
and harassment is grounds for being
terminated so they have basically
normalized the practice of firing
somebody who's even going to say
something as simple as generally men are
taller than women generally women get
pregnant and men don't generally men
take more risks than women generally men
are more competitive than women just
even saying anything like that is enough
to get you fired and have the national
labor review board back up the employer
in terminating you because that is
harassment and that has been resolved
this James the more Google memo thing
which which blows my mind because we
can't even talk about things that are
obvious this is this is what true
tyranny is is we can't talk about things
which are obvious to our eyes to just
looking at each other this is not not I
read this long story and we have a
different
take on it it's not like all these
flavors taste different to me no no this
is like with my own observable you know
with based on observation with my own
two eyes I can see these things are true
and everyone else can but they deny and
talking about it is now harassment I
guess law constitutes getting fired yep
facts don't care about your feelings but
HR departments don't care about your
facts that's a good that's absolutely
right so by the way III think it's
highly unlikely that decision by the by
the NLRB was an independent one because
my sources told me that Google was
heavily lobbying the NLRB ahead of that
and you know one of the big stories in
DC for the past few years has been the
increasing dominance of money from
Silicon Valley in DC politics you know I
think I believe Google's been the top
donor top political donor for a few
years running now that doesn't surprise
me we're gonna get to that because it's
interesting they're also spreading it
around a little bit in ways that you
wouldn't necessarily think off the top
of your head based on these
conversations but let's continue on with
the Google story you've obviously
developed some good sources at Google
and you've been getting some great
stories on it there what what have been
the big stories that you have picked up
on in the last 18 24 months coming out
of Silicon Valley what have you seen
what's been the most atrocious and
appalling things what's gonna scare my
listeners more than anything because
this stuff is terrifying and really the
more attention we put on it the better
because this is this is our future and
it they're consolidating power in ways
that we've never seen before and it's
really important that we all know what's
going on well I think the one that got
the most attention just because it was
so such like a visual reminder of
Google's biases was the one-hour
recording we obtained off
Google's All Hands meeting right after
the 2016 election and you essentially
had all the entire leadership of Google
sundar pichai the co-founders Sergey
Brin and Larry Page all lamenting the
election you had one Google executive
crying onstage because she was
remembering how Hillary had lost a few
days prior
you had them talking about how to deal
with the problem how to deal with
populism how to ensure populism and the
Trump movement became a blip in history
and didn't grow into something bigger
you had them predicting World War 3
got out of hand and this is all like the
these aren't low-level employees is with
the entire leadership team of Google
every all the executives you can think
of were up on that stage and we had the
entire video of their reactions to the
election so that got a huge amount of
attention in the media even the the
mainstream media admitted it was a huge
scoop the one that I found most useful
and I think tells you the most about
where Google and where other tech
companies are headed is a document we
obtained called the good sensor and this
was an internal research document from
inside Google that described how the
company and admitted how the company had
shifted toward censorship because this
is not something that Google generally
admits publicly but it was admitted in
this internal briefing it admits that
Google is becoming the good sensor it's
becoming a more censored platform and it
looks at all the reasons why that's
happening and what would what will
happen if it continues in that direction
one of the things it points out is that
in order to maintain global expansion to
break into foreign markets it has to
continue censoring because that's what
foreign governments are looking for and
so money yeah money mainly so so what
okay so first of all I want you to
explain what you mean by censorship and
second of all please and talk about this
interesting dichotomy between what
appears on one hand to be a totally
ideological driven policy set of
policies that are meant to extinguish
the differences between men and women
and and ensure 50/50 you know employees
across the board and every in every
position you know equal this equal that
but then at the same time it sounds like
they're willing to also compromise on
other ideologies and other ideas that
they have other other values that they
have in order to just you know return
earnings to shareholders and drive the
stock price up so yeah further let's
deal with the definition of censorship
there are a lot of people especially
free particle free market libertarian to
say that only the government can censor
I don't think that's true at all in the
modern world because you know we don't
go to the town square to speak anymore
we use these online massive online
platforms
to become the new public square and
actually the Constitution in the First
Amendment does apply in in the public
square we just haven't got to the point
where we legally been able to legally
categorize these places which are public
squares as public squares so in my view
when google decides to delete a search
results word or delete a YouTube video
aband someone from YouTube that is an
active censorship because YouTube and
people have become the new public
squares and that goes for Twitter and
Facebook as well yeah and they've been
Supreme Court cases in the past where
privately owned public squares have been
compelled to allow certain types of
speech on First Amendment grounds you
know they did it for shopping malls in
the 1980s you know if you do a shopping
mall then I think you need to do it for
a tech giant as well because you know a
tech giant is a much bigger public
square than a shopping mall oh right
because the shopping mall is private
property
but yet you're sort of in public and so
they deemed like free speech was
required there yeah they did they said
you know political activists do you have
the right to hand out flyers that even
the shopping mall doesn't want you to
got it so that's that's that deals with
the censorship question and the
definition in my view but what are they
what are they actually doing to censor
besides the ones are there right
Deepti monetize the platform kick off
but like what's going on behind the
scenes this is this is what I'm more
even more worried about the stuff that
you can't see yeah well the scarier
thing is when they adjust their
algorithms and adjust search rankings
and you're unable to detect what they've
actually done like I couldn't tell you
all the search results that Google has
manipulated well that YouTube has
manipulated I can tell you that some of
them certainly have been because one of
the throws we released I think late
December January was we got our hands on
a partial list of YouTube search
blacklist and that's a file they keep
with so-called controversial search
queries that they manually adjust so
they insert a search term into this file
and what it does is it caused another
algorithm to kick in that elevates
establishment new sources and the search
rankings and pushes down non verified
non-establishment sources so they did
that for
search results related to abortion and
abortions and the result was that lots
of pro-life videos got kicked off the
top 10 search lots and lots of
pro-abortion videos from places like
BuzzFeed and Vice went up the search
results so they've dead already doing it
for our for political terms right had
you've confirmed this from sources were
inside these organizations and oh yes
there was in a leaked discussion thread
from inside Google that was leaked to us
and actually one of the employees one of
the Google employees in that discussion
group said well this is this is a
smoking gun this is political censorship
so I did not use the word smoking gun
that's Google as an employee's
description of what's going on here so
even Google's employees can see what's
happening and see what's going on and
some of them were very concerned about
it which is why they talked to us right
and what did they what would they say
was the justification behind making such
adjustments like this
well the Joseph gage was very clear in
that case because it actually the
abortion term was added just a few hours
after Google was contacted by a
left-wing well you know I say report it
was really a left-wing activist posing
as a reporter at Slate complaining about
the prominence of pro-life videos in the
in the search results and just a few
hours after that Google adjusts its
search results and pushes all those
pro-life videos off their top 10 results
so you can clearly see the motivation in
that case 100 100 percent politically
motivated there also other search terms
on there like David hog the anti Second
Amendment activist Maxine Waters a
democratic politician they're all on the
list as well which means that you know
see more establishment new sources pop
up in your search results for those
people so they're actually assisting a
democratic politician there right so
this is one of the things that scares
the out of me the most which is
that I had to tweet the other day where
I said imagine a future where
intersectionality is burned into the
algorithms that control everything
around us and basically that's already
started to happen right I mean these
algorithms are what shape so the biggest
challenge that we have is filtering out
information and filtering out bad
information finding the right
information
you know there's we just live in a world
of information overload and so being
able to search specifically for things
that you want to find
important and it's a path towards the
truth if you're if the gatekeeper is
keeping you know these things from you
and hiding information and hiding data
from you then they're effectively sort
of shaping our view of reality I mean
this would be like if the the library
maybe they did this in the past you know
they probably did you know we act like
today people are less trustworthy than
they were before but imagine this kind
of stuff has been going on for a long
time but it's like imagine you go to the
library and you're like I want to learn
about car is in the library it's like
nope no such thing as a car we don't
have any cars here you can ride this you
know we can teach you about horse and
buggy we can teach you about bicycles
but no cars there's no cars here no cars
don't exist I mean that's that's
basically what we're talking about right
right and we have no idea exactly how
Google has changed its algorithms we
know that based on the leak we know that
both group YouTube and Google does it so
Google doesn't remain in its main search
engine as well for controversial
political results less often according
to one of Google's trust and safety
employees than YouTube does but they
still do it occasionally no there's been
some interesting research about how this
could have thanked elections as well I
mean if Google changes its results for
certain political candidates they can
swing undecided voters by huge margins
like you know 30 40 % according to some
research right which sounds a lot more
effective than me more ears and quote
unquote Russian in the imagine Russian
influence and whatnot right I mean that
sounds really powerful yeah well exactly
because you know when you see a meme
from a Republican you know it's from a
Republican when you hear something on
cable news you kind of have an idea of
what their biases are so your critical
faculties are engaged but when you
search for something your critical
faculties are not engaged cuz you're
thinking you're seeing that you're
seeing information that you searched for
it's you doing it you don't you didn't
really have a sense of the bias that's
led to the results that were appearing
on your page right so it's pretty sure
it's it's secret its covert and it's
sealing off all kinds of information
discussions people connections networks
all these things you could be
potentially having all the things that
were promised at the end that the
Internet promised yeah the really crazy
thing that should get people fired up is
how far the Internet's come
it's additional initial founding ideals
you know these companies used to talk
about ending censorship they used to
talk about you know democratizing the
information landscape and now that that
talk and those values are out the window
I mean Twitter used to call itself the
free speech wing of the free speech
party now Jack Dorsey claims world you
know that was never an official company
logo company motto Google's Eric Schmidt
used to say that we know will end
censorship within ten years around the
world now Google's building search apps
to appease the Chinese government would
sense it such terms so it's been a
complete 180 turn from what these
companies used to say they believe now
do you think that that that their
initial impetus these initial sort of
ideals that they had do you do you think
that they believed them was a cover was
a cover for these really dark horrible
things that they're doing do you think
that they evolved over time did people
get to them did the deeps did the deeps
take it to them I mean I'm being all
dramatic about it but seriously I mean
you know anybody at the CIA could watch
what's going on here and see how
powerful it is and you know they could
think I'm sure could get involved you
know we know already that the
intelligence community and and Google
and Twitter and everybody else are
already working together you know where
how were they sincere at the beginning
what changed and were they always this
evil or did did something happen like I
believe that like something happened to
us as a as a country as a culture 2000
10 to 14 somewhere in there something
really happened this is not the world
that I remember growing up and all the
way up until my mid-30s I'm 43 right
like the world is a completely different
place and what happened well it's a
complicated to answer because there are
so many things happening to change the
policy of the tech companies I think in
terms of the relationship with the
intelligence community with governments
at least here in the US the tech
companies are bigger predators and the
government is I think the tech companies
want to get their hands on government
data because data is central to their
business model hmm I don't think the
people who work in government a very
tech savvy they're certainly not as tech
savvy as the people who work in Silicon
Valley I mean if you're a young talent
programmer you don't want to go and
for some boring agency in DC you want to
go to the west coast and work for Google
or Facebook and Twitter right but did I
imagine this or don't the intelligence
community's already have like backdoors
into all these networks and they're able
to scrape data and such that they want
no oh well yeah the NSA has been doing
that and the Australian intelligence
community which is part of the fie bias
network so that that'll potentially mean
that all these all the other countries
are part of it UK USA have access to
Australia recently got a law passed
saying that tech companies have to
decrypt their devices to let the
intelligence services in so absolutely
yes that is this thing that's happening
in terms of the bigger question about
what's causing all these changes at tech
companies they're seeing obviously
pressure from these intelligence
companies but they have actually credit
they have been resisting those they have
been resisting giving the the Intel
communities backdoor access obviously in
Australia they're now being compelled to
but you know there are so many other
incentives affected them to the now they
get threats from the Democrats if you
don't do something about hate speech and
fake news we're gonna regulate you
Democrats are much keener to do that
than the Republicans are Republicans
don't have this robust haven't grasped
the fact that the left has fundamentally
changes tactics in the past five to 10
years they now look less to the
government to to impose the values and
society and they look to intermediary
organizations like corporations and tech
companies and they're very aware that if
they pressure these companies enough
they'll do what they want because the
companies know that the Democrats will
regulate them they won't hesitate to do
that so in the back of your mind is a
tech company you have to think well if I
don't ban you know Alex Jones who this
Democratic congressman is really angry
about then I might it's gonna raise the
likelihood of regulation in the future
so you got that happening in Europe
governments read more gung-ho about it
they sort of every politician um
conservatives to Labour say that these
companies have to kick hate speech off
their platforms you know that's a big
incentive for these companies to sort of
do as they're told and you know as I
said in that lead
think that the good sense Google admits
that you know if they want to continue
the global expansion they have to
cooperate with these authoritarian
regimes I didn't I did I did a piece
recently on just how far this has gone
so you have Netflix now deleting
deleting an entire episode of their
comedy platform because the Saudi
Arabian government complained you had
Facebook sending its VP's to Pakistan
ever complained about blasphemy on the
platform your book had dragonfly which
was Google's attempt to work with China
by censoring a search app so yeah in
terms there's a huge disconnect now
between the values that Silicon Valley
used to talk about and still talk about
and what they're actually doing in
practice they're caving in to all these
authoritarian intolerant societies
really interesting to me that capitalism
and the the pursuit of profit has always
at least to me been hailed as sort of
synonymous and go hand-in-hand with free
speech and freedom of thought and
freedom of ideas because the freer our
idea market is the better ideas will
come to market and therefore we can make
more money and everybody can be better
off it's is it irony is it irony that
the the never-ending pursuit of the
profit and growth because our market
valuations are driven so much by growth
that growth demanded by Wall Street is
going to lead these companies towards
less free speech and more authoritarian
controls and actually a reduction in
like general freedom globally has led by
our quote free free markets yeah I mean
that's a whole that's a garbage argument
in my you this idea that free markets
and all the liberal values go hand in
hand it's a simple case of and you know
conservatives especially traditional
conservatives need to understand that
it's simply a case of incentives you
know if you've got a huge market that's
very liberal like say you know in
Pakistan and companies that want to gain
access to that market will adhere to
their values I mean it's exactly the
same way in the West I mean companies
never used to wear rainbow flags or you
know display rainbow flags and their
officers because they knew that
you know Western societies hadn't quite
reached that point of Tolerance yet now
you know now it's a good thing that gets
them you know points with trendy
Millennials so they do it but you know
if they get into a country like Pakistan
of course they won't do it so it's a
case of incentives and when you have all
these illiberal societies that have
booming demographics that there's a huge
consumer markets so these companies now
have an incentive to go into those
societies go into those markets and
abandoned their values in the process
and engage in censorship in the process
meanwhile you have demographic decline
in the West so the markets that actually
do you believe in liberal values are
declining and they're actually try the
the trend now is to have them be be
replaced by immigrant communities you
know from the Middle East and these
these societies that don't actually
believe in liberal values at all so
that's not fixing the problem either so
all the incentives for these global
corporations now trend away from liberal
values so in the free market I don't
think will on current trends lead to
more more liberal values and more
freedom that was argument I was making
you just call it garbage I appreciate
that
so one of the things that I've seen is
that corporations and at least in my
experience in the past and everything I
seem to have read before when a fresh
crop of graduates entered into the
corporation the the graduates were
expected to adopt the existing company
culture and adopt the existing set of
company ideals
it seems to me today that companies are
responding much more quickly to the
incoming graduate sort of ideas where
they're bringing off of college campuses
where they're getting this education and
radical feminism intersectionality and
even if they're not taking courses in
those areas those areas have affected
the culture on campuses through policies
and procedures in title 9 and
orientation practices and all these kind
of things that are outlined in my book
Democrats a deplorable and all these
kids are graduating and then they go
into the tech world and then they start
making demands of these corporations and
the corporation's are responding and
turn to these employees have you seen
have you seen anything like that do
people talk about that I mean I would
like to really
or this responsiveness to the corporate
corporate set of ideals and principles
to the incoming crop of Graduate ideals
I mean I can't imagine an IBM in 1950s
if there's a bunch of new radical kids
coming in they were gonna shift their
entire corporate practice around but it
does seem to have been the case and this
has happened so quickly and so rapidly
within the last 10 years right
do you have you seen that in your in
your experience and talking to these
people in Silicon Valley do they ever
talk about how it's these new kids man
and we gotta like adjust to what they
want and they're demanding it from the
ground up that there's certainly some of
that going on it's hard to see how far
they're actually responding to them
because you know they're a constant
demands within Google for example for
Google to be monetize bright but and you
know just remover all our ads even they
even started building a dossier on us
like a spreadsheet of all the examples
of hate speech they could find in our
comments and our headlines they actually
couldn't find any headlines they had to
go to the comment section where actually
we do moderate comments but yeah but
certainly there's pressure from below
but it also feeds into the legal
framework because obviously these
companies have to worry about
discrimination lawsuits and you know
Google's facing a sexism discrimination
lawsuit at the moment in addition to
their political discrimination lawsuit
that James the more filed so that they
have to worry that not only do they have
these new graduates coming in but you
know the activist type employees can
also be very litigious if they don't get
what they want so there's that incentive
they they're facing as well but at the
top of the companies I think they're
actually being pretty cynical about
things you know they're they see that in
the West they have to give in to these
radical activists who are intern
connected to the Democrats into the
media and and could potentially file
lawsuits but outside of the West you
know in you know really sexist countries
like Saudi Arabia in Pakistan
they are also cave in as the political
cultures there which are radically
different to to what social justice
warriors want right so what's the
unifying motivation for them it's just
profit profit profit right that's what
it seems to be yeah yeah well I guess
you can't really fault them for that I
mean that's what they were set up for
that's what they're chartered to do
that's what they're actually legally
required
so you do you think that their their
behavior in the United States at least
is in line with their fiduciary
responsibilities to shareholders because
I think some people would argue that
companies taking on these social justice
positions and whatnot are actually
contrary to their fiduciary
responsibilities do you think that this
is actually in line with those
responsibilities in that they're
supposed to be honor and integrity and
honest and make money make money that's
the whole number number one job right
well I think it's very short I'm
thinking on the one hand because they're
they don't anticipate the backlash
they'll get from non progressive markets
I mean this is the mistake the NFL made
and certainly I think people should be
fired ever what happened at the NFL
because they lost an enormous amount of
money over all their political posturing
and you know the the kneeling and you
know all that stuff right I noticed the
kneeling is but the fact that management
seemed to be encouraging it that was the
real issue I mean I'm not I'm fine with
you know you couldn't kneel or make any
political gesture you won't let just
free speech but when the organization's
supporting it that's a different matter
then you're gonna piss off your
consumers so I don't think modern
corporations in the West get that
because they're part of the globalist
metropolitan culture and they just
fundamentally don't understand middle
America which is a part of their market
so you're saying they're just wrong not
evil yeah I think that they're calling
it wrong but also you got to place some
of the blame here on Republicans because
as I was saying earlier if we're talking
about you know fiduciary
responsibilities a company CEO will
think well if we have all these
regulations coming in from Democrats
it's going to harm our profit margins so
better do what they say if the
Republicans were better at thinking up
their own regulations their own
proposals for how tech companies might
be regulated if they don't adhere to
Western values if they don't protect the
free speech of their users protect
consumer rights business rights because
you know if you have one of your
Facebook pages banned you know if you
spent two years or three years building
it up and investing money into it that's
a huge blow to your business and the
analogy I use is that you know it's like
a landlord selling you land
and then not in your house down two
years later without getting any
compensation that would be an outrageous
business practice that would fool people
to be up in arms in normal circumstances
but social media companies allowed to
get it away without equivalent said this
and I live in fear of that almost every
single day honestly yeah and you know
there's plenty of ways Republicans could
start talking about proposed legislation
to protect consumers protect businesses
protect free speech but they're not and
that means that if you're a CEO and
you're thinking about profits and
regulation you're gonna be thinking more
about what the Democrats want them what
the Republicans want I was going through
your articles preparing for this I think
I saw one that talked about the
influence of their new money in
Washington DC and at first glance you
might think that they would be heavily
fit you know focused on the Democrats
but it turns out that they're actually
spreading that money around a little bit
isn't it right oh yeah the sundar pichai
the Google CEO recently admitted that
the company gave money to the National
Review Institute interesting thing about
that is that they didn't disclose it on
their transparency page and pitch I
tried to claim that donation was in 2018
it was actually in 2017 so it was off
their transparency report for a full
year after it was actually made which is
very curious they also gave money at the
American Enterprise Institute the
Competitive Enterprise Institute
all these company all these are DC think
tanks that have been advancing arguments
against regulating big tanks saying
everything's fine just you know build
your own alternative Google we don't
alternative Facebook which is ridiculous
demand to make obviously right it really
is but you know like this is normal
business practice right to spread the
money around to all the different places
that might be able to help you and you
know lots of lots of big rich people
give equally to the Democrats and to the
Robo kings because really all they're
looking for is like you know some
influence on whoever and no matter who
ends up in power but yeah it's a normal
behavior I wouldn't know most really
acceptable behavior mean there's been a
problem for years American politics but
certainly normal behavior field
corporation I think it takes a lot more
significance with Google and Facebook
and big tech because of the amount of
influence these companies have over our
lives our businesses and basically every
aspect of what we do in a modern society
well you mentioned the argument you know
go build your own network
or whatever go start here on this that
that seems to be the response you're
saying from like typical conservative
think-tanks in Washington DC but on my
corner of the internet I'm mostly
associate with conservative types none
of us are saying I'm saying that right
we're we're all making the public square
argument and we're all making sort of
like the public utility argument what do
you attribute that that divide that
division I mean I've always believed in
free markets I went to George Mason
University I've got an undergrad degree
in economics from among the most
libertarian universities in the country
and and I can always see the free market
answer to the problem in many
circumstances but in this one it seems
to me that they have a mass so much
power and have so much control and have
shifted this idea of what public is that
I can I can see that some sort of
regulation would be helpful it certainly
I'm speaking just personally yeah would
really help me if I wasn't afraid that
my you know twenty five thousand
follower account on Twitter wasn't gonna
be shut down or even worse like not
being able to use PayPal or any of the
financial transaction providers so guys
like Gavin McGinnis get kicked off Alex
Jones get kicked off there's the names
are so there's so many names now you
can't even remember all of them and
we're all making the argument and not
not to build your own internet argument
so what do you see where did that divide
come from I mean these are all these are
all people off sensibly conservative but
they're making very very different
arguments I think it in some cases the
generational thing because you know
older boomer conservatives grew up in an
era when the trendy thing was to support
free markets and deregulation and there
was a big case to made for that in the
80s and the 70s when there was too much
government you know that's when they
solidified their political values and
it's kind of just a knee-jerk response
to oppose regulation of business for
some of them the other reason is because
of this you know the swamp this culture
of corporations pouring money into DC to
influence Republicans against regulation
and to influence Democrats in favor of
regulation that they want so there's
that aspect to it as well I think many
of the Trump supporters
don't come from that world they're
opposed to that world which is why they
supported Trump and I think that's why
we're seeing that divided I think if we
look like someone who sort of
personifies this new brand of
conservatism which is very skeptical of
corporate power it would be Tucker
Carlson we're sort of you got more like
ben shapiro and charlie kirk
representing the older school of
conservative thought where you don't
regulate corporations at all right so
between the Democrats and the
Republicans somebody like me that's
interested in free speech online but you
know I just add to that I think we are
winning the argument cuz I've been
hearing from those people you know more
and more talk in favor of regulation in
favor of taking a look at the power of
these companies so I've I think the Pro
regulation side is winning the argument
slowly despite all the money that
Google's plowing into a DC Pro
regulation but then there's gonna be
like multiple different flavors of
regulation right also like the
Democratic flavor of regulation would be
different than a Republican flavor or a
populist flavor or Karlsson we'll call
it the Carlson flavor of regulation you
know the the Democrats aren't gonna like
regulate Twitter to save me are they no
no they're not they'd be regulating it
stop fake news which obviously in their
in their view means conservatives and
Trump supporters that would probably
raise constitutional questions but
they're it's it's it's a more
complicated game they're playing because
they'd be willing to impose other kinds
of regulations say to protect privacy
which be a good thing but they'd also
say well that also be talking to these
companies and we know that Chuck Schumer
talks very closely with with Facebook we
know that Obama and Zuckerberg a big
pals that also be pressuring these
companies to voluntarily since the Trump
movement more I think all that face even
more regulations on on other matters
right and in the kind of regulation we
want is more clarifications on what a
platform is versus a publisher and what
a platform's allowed to do versus a
publisher because the big issue we're
seeing is platforms claiming the rights
of publishers to kick off anyone they
want to edit and manipulate their pages
however they want but also claiming the
legal immunities of platforms which I
meant to be neutral just a place where
everyone can go and talk right so if
there
decide what's good and what's not then
then they also need to assume the
responsibility of deciding what's good
and what's not right I mean they should
either just step back and let the yeah
marketplace of ideas take care of itself
or they have to be responsible for all
the content on their platform right
exactly and they increasingly are
assuming at least moral responsibility
for corners on their platforms but not
legal responsibility and that's that's
the real issue they're behaving like
publishers but they have the legal
immunities of platforms right and this
is only getting worse and it's spreading
to I mean we had Tim Cook a couple
months ago come out and basically say
that like if your app runs antithetical
to our morals whose morals a corporation
if your app is antithetical to our
morals we're not gonna let you on our
marketplace YouTube says the same thing
Twitter says the same thing we're seeing
PayPal do the same thing I didn't dig
into it but I've been hearing is this
true that people are having just like
their accounts shut down at like normal
banks like Bank Chase Bank now it's
happening - and that's for behavior
conducted offline like outside banking
like I went down the store did this
thing I talked to somebody I said this
thing and I come back and my bank
account I shut down because of it
presumably that's what's happening I
mean I believe it was the leader of the
proud boys African Cuban by the way who
first had his pride was shot down by
Chase Bank by Chase bank's online
payment President had his entire bank
account shut down his personal bank
account so it's getting quite terrifying
now you can be included from the entire
financial system for having the wrong
politics well you know I've already felt
what it's like to have my career taken
away from me for even just being in a
picture where people from the halt right
where and for I wrote an article about
you know about feminism and their sexual
practices and I also wrote an article
about challenging sanctuary cities after
that alleged which turned out to be not
a rape but a statutory rape in in
Montgomery County about a year and a
half ago or two years ago I wrote about
those and I got fired from my government
job I've had my reputation you know
totally trashed I got banned from
coaching Little League you know my I'm
basically totally kicked out of polite
company at this point and so all I have
left happily and I'm enjoying it at this
point is to be the sort of renegade
outside the system where I'm producing
my own con
and monetizing my own thoughts my own
actions I have my own platform but I do
have risks right like I do accept
payments and that and that is a pain
point for me somebody hosts my my
website somewhere and that is a pain
point for me yes I've taken crypto yes I
have you know Bitcoin accounts and I'm
and I operate in that world but there's
no way to be completely insulated from
big tech big finance big media cutting
you off completely is there I don't I
don't think there is yet no not
currently I think crypto has that
potential but it's no any of that yet
and until it is I think you are you
can't just hold out on that hope of some
technology coming and saving you you
have to take matters into your own hands
and start getting involved in politics
and pushing for the the kind of the kind
of technology you want to see right well
ironically the deeper you get involved
in politics and the more you speak up
about it the more likely you are to have
have your head chopped off yeah pretty
much yeah so the catch light it is a
catch-22 and it you know I I generally
like to think the tone of my podcasts
are positive and they're uplifting and I
can give guys some some tangible things
to walk away with but like tech
censorship you've called it global
tyranny right the mafia that's taken
over left-wing mafia that's taken over a
big tech in Silicon Valley it's
producing a wave of dissidents basically
around the world these things are
trending negatively right yeah we
there's been no there's no turning point
I mean I'm setting you up for our
concluding comments here which are what
what could an individual will do and or
what what I'll what does it look like
for the future what do you see for the
next couple years and do we put our
heads in the sand and run away is it
time to fight even harder now am I am I
like a guy like me am i more risk moving
forward you know what what does the
future look like I think what needs I'm
I'm not I can't predict what the future
will look like I think or comment that
well I think the trend now will be
towards more global tyranny more of
these companies keeping into foreign
governments I think the only thing that
will stop that is if we see more
political pressure
coming down he's coming to stop them
doing that like we saw with Google
dragonfly which was actually halted by
by the combined pressure of left-wing
and right-wing politicians it is
possible to stop these companies doing
what they're doing but if you want to
fix the censorship issue there's the
left doesn't want to fix it you won't
get bipartisan support the only way the
only thing you can do is you know raise
your voice protest
soompi the laurel luma chained herself
the HQ of twitter that got a lot of
attention but also you know just call
your Congressman and write letters and
keep the pressure up because you know
politicians do have to pay attention to
what their voters say otherwise we'll
get voted out and that's that's one of
the one of the things you can do well I
would say that the one of the biggest
criticisms that I have a Donald Trump so
far is his lack of attention to this
matter and it seems as though that he
has no concept of the power of the
collective intelligence network that got
him elected at least played a part in
getting him elected right we can't just
say a hundred percent but it seems to me
that he has not tackled this issue
head-on and come to the defense of the
people that came to his defense and
helped propel him into an election and I
think that that sentiment is spreading
amongst the Mogga community especially
in the new media manga community because
I think that they feel it and they see
it and they see their friends getting
deep platform they see their friends
losing their money and they see their
friends families at risk they see their
friends like with Gavin having to put
his kids into hiding and stuff for a
little bit like yeah where you know that
I want to think that I can I can work
with a politician or getting above in
politics to make things better but if
freakin Donald Trump isn't gonna do it
you know who is I mean he has done it
occasionally he spoke about the
Covington kids which I initially thought
he wouldn't do but he did get on board
with that but yet the tech censorship he
could be doing a lot more he has spoken
about it he has raised awareness and
Brad Pascal his campaign manager talked
about this a lot he seems to understand
the issue but you know I mean just a few
days ago we had Donald Trump's own son
Trump jr. getting a post blocked on
Instagram and then Instagram going back
and saying well it was a mistake I'm
sorry about it but it was happening to
the president's own son so it needs to
be more than words at this point and in
the case of USMC
the new trade deal it actually was
making tech censorship worse because it
gives them even more legal immunities or
more ability to claim those but you know
at the same time Trump is surrounded by
people in the White House who don't
believe in his vision who are sort of
like hidden agents for globalism and you
know especially you know Jared and
Ivanka you know they're basically
liberals so you know it's kind of hard
for one man to come up with all these
policies by himself when so many of his
own advisers the kind of work secretly
working against his agenda so you gotta
take that into account as well but I
certainly think this is a way bigger
issue than say CNN bias and it needs to
be a priority for the Trump
administration and they need to be
thinking of policies and executive
orders and ways in which they can fix
the problem right I agree 100%
well Illume thank you so very much for
coming on I really appreciate it I mean
these are as important issues that we're
facing in the country and worldwide as
anything else you've done a tremendous
job at Breitbart you're doing fantastic
work you're one of the hardest-working
and best insourced
journalists that I know and so I really
appreciate you coming on where can
people find you how can they get in
touch with you what's your social media
presence like you can find me on Twitter
at libertarian blue that's the main
platform I use until I'm kicked off as
you can say for now and you can no but
you find me on Breitbart as well just
look for Alan Bukhari and the author
page all right perfect thank you very
much thanks for coming on guys the Jack
Murphy live podcast stay tuned we got a
lot of great guests coming up go through
the archives there's a ton of great
stuff in there you can find me again on
Twitter at Jack Murphy live go to the
website Jack Murphy live.com sign up for
the mailing list all my best content
right now is going out to the mailing
list because I don't trust social media
I'm not gonna put my best stuff out
there I need you guys to come onto the
mailing list so that we can have our own
private conversation that's unobstructed
by social media and I don't have to be
afraid of getting banned for saying the
things that I believe are true go to
Amazon in the same breath go ahead and
pick up the book Democrats are
deplorable we talk about a ton of those
the same issues in there as well we've
been tracking this stuff now for a few
years and it's going to be influential
coming up in the 2020 campaign as well
too so again
Illume thank you very much for
everything it was great to see you again
and hopefully we can do this again soon
great to be on alright bye bye
[Music]