hey everybody its Eric Torborg
co-founder partner of village global a
network driven venture firm and this is
Metro stories a podcast covering topics
relating to tech and business with world
leading experts hey everybody welcome to
another episode of venture stories by
village global I'm here today with a
very special guest
Daniel schlotkin Berger Daniel is a
civilization designer interested in
social architecture and if you listen to
the episodes of jordan green hall and
jim rut you will love this episode then
welcome to the podcast thanks for having
and good to be here I want you to sort
of give people a bit more of who you are
and what you spend your time thinking
about so I want to ask a couple of
variations of a similar question and you
can answer whichever one you feel most
inspired to jump off from the first
variation of it is woody how did you
sort of when you define think about the
work that you do what sort of threads it
together what sort of the underlying
thread that you just keep pulling or an
another very that's looking back and
another variation of the question is
looking forward what are the current
questions that you are most wrestling
with you are spending your most time on
trying to trying to figure out and hope
that you know many years from now when
you were retrospectively looking back at
the the work that you've done
hope you've you know taken a stab at or
or made a dent in in in terms of your
contribution sure I think one way of
talking about the central thread is how
do we best help improve humanities
wisdom the way that we individually and
as various groups and all the way up to
collectively make sense of what is
important and meaningful what's going on
what the what a good design our strategy
to serve what's meaningful without
causing other problems is and how do we
make choices and coordinate joyce's
effectively towards a better world of
the initiative world and so basically
all of the
sources of unnecessary suffering and
particularly human induced unnecessary
suffering kind of all or intolerable to
me have always been and there's a lot of
them right everything from the animal
rights species extinction factory farm
stuff to environmental devastation to
untoward that could have been solved for
other reasons that have economic
incentives and whatever to to the
escalation of those with increasing
population and technology and
globalization and fragility that looks
like catastrophic and existential risks
and given that they there are so many
that they're really unsolvable at the
level of each particular instance I have
been interested in not just how are they
interconnected but what is underneath
and driving why humans are behaving in
ways that generate those problems and
that don't solve them and so you know
you use the term civilization design
which is if we look at say species
extinction species extinction whether
we're talking about the decrease in
whale populations or cutting down of
old-growth forests or whatever and
whether we killed the theme for the
direct commoditization of it or we
killed the habitat land it was because
nature was worth more dead than alive so
we had a perverse incentive situation we
can see a lot of situations where war is
great for GDP and not war would be bad
for GDP we're sick people are better for
GDP where addiction is better for GDP
where and GDP as a whole in an aggregate
or particular groups and so we start to
look at Oh underneath lots of problems
in the world is perverse incentive
economic but also political etc so
issues associated with differential
power and the ability for some agent to
get ahead at the expense of other agents
or the Commons and then everybody
playing those types of games up
ratcheting their capacity to get ahead
at the cost of more expense being
externalized and you're not just talking
about short term versus long term GDP
you're talking about this fundamental
misalignment at times between what's
best for long term b2b or what's best
for long term you know civilization well
interestingly what is best for long term
consideration and what's best for others
often times correspond because I might
have a situation where what seems like
the rational best choice for me in the
short term that ends up damaging the
Commons or others also damages my
possibility space in the long term
because now I live on a ecologically
devastated planet or now I've engendered
more enmity from the other groups that I
won the battle but have not won the war
and I deployed the asymmetric technology
now they reverse engineered and are
gonna deploy it back so we have these
situations where every agent doing the
thing that seems like the rational best
choice in the short term just focusing
on them creates the worst possibility
space for the whole over the long term
so this is an example of the like
coordination failures that are
underneath most of the problems in the
world I don't want to cut all of the
trees down and I don't need to but if I
don't the other guy's going to so me not
doing it doesn't leave a forest and then
he's gonna use his increased economic
power to beat me in some other important
ways so now we actually race to cut it
down as fast as possible or do we see
tragedy of the Commons type scenarios or
we have to race to build the AI weapons
before the other guy so arms races
tragedy of the Commons are examples of
multipolar traps where no one is
maliciously doing the bad thing and yet
everyone's racing to do the disruptive
things I think they start codecs called
this Moloch yes the meditations on
Moloch is required reading yeah and so
you know you asked me before we started
talking how I discovered your work and I
mentioned I would crypto Rabideau would
let me do the gaming rathole and I
discovered you know a few years ago sort
of this literature around progress and
and Tyler Cowen and his book stubborn
attachments and how you know improving
economic growth and GDP and
technological progress was the you know
highly correlated with so many things
that we we care about you know in firma
tality healthcare I mean so so many
great things about the world and you
know I read things like you know
Geoffrey West scale where it said you
know says that economic growth is
inherently unsustainable you try to
innovate your way through it but you
know that you'll reach some limits but
then I read things like Andrew McAfee's
more from West's where it says hey
you know we've now decoupled resource
consumption or resource usage from
consumption and I don't know who to
believe right now that no to believe but
who's right which do we get to innovate
through it is the only way out is
through or do you have to sub you know
have this radical Reformation of how we
how we run our economy more Charles
Eisenstein stuff and so that's my
question to you then how do you think
about that yeah so let's talk about
limits of growth and upper bounds and
that kind of question so obviously the
growth of the materials economy and the
domain of atoms is different than in the
domain of bits and we would be silly to
not acknowledge that fundamental
difference and there's a third
difference in terms of the physics of
the materials economy the domain of
atoms the domain of energy and the
domain of bits all have fundamentally
different scarcities and different
thermodynamics Associated different
conservation laws so we have two
different accounting for them we have a
finite amount of atoms of various types
and of course via better mining
technologies whatever and turning the
atoms and the molecules for better
chemistry type technologies we can
modulate that to some degree but we also
have upper bounds on that it's also
important to realize that it's not just
getting the atoms that's what do we do
with them after the fact which is the
waste management so for the most part so
far humanity's had a linear materials
economy where we take resources out of
the earth in a way that are not renewing
themselves which is a ultimately causing
net depletion and then we use them for
some time a period of time and then we
put them back into the earth in a way
that they can't actually be reabsorbed
properly so toxicity net accumulation
the depletion and accumulation in the
ecosystem where the ecosystem before
humans doing a materials economy had
closed-loop process as the the animals
the plants the fungus is that everything
in an ecosystem are made of the same
atomic ingredients and can be fully
recycled and so anything dies and it
becomes food for new things and the food
for new things doesn't try to figure out
how to mine and get like savings
accounts in very effective ways because
they don't have to Lin evasion so you
get these kind of clothes we process as
this issue
part of the antifragility of how
Ecology's work so obviously we have to
move from a linear materials economy to
a closed-loop economy that's pretty
straightforward where we take
responsibility for closed-loop on the
atomic cycles so we aren't producing
accumulation on one side or depletion on
the other now we can keep cycling them
so we don't have a situation that once
we've used it it's gone right but we do
have a situation where we start moving
from increased growth of the number of
atoms in measuring growth or progress in
terms of the number of atoms to that the
atoms are being put into continuously
more interesting forms the forms are
defined by design that is stored in a
pattern of bits and obviously the bits
don't have a similar type of fundamental
limit to them than the atoms do so atoms
we have to think about closed-loop
accounting on now to be able to process
the old stuff into new stuff atomically
takes energy energy has a different kind
of conservation to it which is that we
get a finite amount of energy bandwidth
every day we can use it more efficiently
solar and you know other types of things
but we don't have an indefinite amount
of energy so we have to be cycling the
atoms within a limited energetic
bandwidth and we have basically
unlimited amount of bit pattern limited
only by the energy and atom needs of the
computational substrate but then the
bits are only useful in so far as they
can actually be put into form and or
there is limited human attention to be
able to engage them as types of software
and so human attention becomes another
fundamental scarcity that is part of
this equation and so when people look at
things like the fundamentally non-rival
risk nature of software
you can't abstract that to the domain of
energy or atoms right like you really
have to think about these in the
accounting of them differently the
moment you think about attention as a
scarce resource to compete over
monetizing everything gets evil and
 and hurting as we see in the
world with all of the problems
associated with social media type
dynamics and marketing because
monetizing other people's attention
which is obviously at the heart of the
idea of marketing right but not just
marketing propaganda in a government way
and every the desire to control other
people's behavior for personal benefit
the benefit of the corporation or the
political party or the whatever it is
but if I'm if I am a political party or
at Google or Facebook or I'm an
advertiser on there and I'm a
multi-billion dollar kind of
organization employing tools of radical
asymmetric advantage to be able to use
the most effective hyper normal stimuli
to cause addiction entrapment to you
notice all the stuff Tristan Harris and
those folks talk about to people there
is a kind of asymmetric information and
narrative warfare for people's attention
and you notice that there's no
definition of consciousness you can give
that's meaningful that doesn't require
defining attention or a definition of
choice so attention is very fundamental
to what it means to be human and what it
means to have any kind of sovereignty
so using asymmetrically powerful tools
to capture and direct and split test
optimize how effectively you were able
to capture and direct someone else's
attention is trying to put any degree of
free will or choice they have under your
control for a purpose that benefits you
and not them and again as an asymmetric
type warfare so we have to stop thinking
about the attention economy that way and
so now we can start to look at why we
think of it that way and what would it
take to change the macro economics
underneath that so are there fundamental
limits of growth yes can we create more
efficiency to where those limits are
extending but still bounded yes and so
you will get to a place of diminishing
returns on the increased efficiency
where we don't have increased resource
per capita multiplied by increased
population on a linear or an exponential
curve forever we'll get diminishing
return and so we do have to think about
planetary boundaries in a intelligent
way and do we do we have to think about
that in a way that sort of top debt like
do we steer the market a little bit or
that you know do we have to get involved
or will the market sort of figure that
out on
or solve problems on its own agency we
don't have a market so every Adam Smith
type arguments about the self-correcting
intelligence of the market even though
it wouldn't have been true then and
super not true once you have bank
bailouts and you subsidize oil companies
and you have monopolistic kind of
investments in military manufacturers
and things like that so that there's no
self-correcting nature of a market there
also when you think about fundamental
like theory of why a market would self
correct you have this idea that humans
are going to be sense making what they
actually want that provides a good
quality of life and that that expresses
itself as demand and the demand is kind
of the environmental niche if we try and
reify this with evolutionary theory
refight area of markets devolution in
theory the demand causes an evolutionary
nation which different providers of
products and services that there is a
demand for emerge and so the variations
and how they make their product or
service are kind of like mutation and
then some of the companies will succeed
in to that survival selection and some
won't and then a couple companies that
have different IP or a different
approach or different market segments
might merge and so that's like mate
dynamics where you get combinatorial
dynamics so the idea is that markets are
like evolution and so there is this kind
of correcting increasing complexity type
dynamic and of course that people
competing against each other to provide
the best products and services at the
best value to rational agents will pick
the rationally best choice is what
actually increases the quality of life
for everyone this is a cute idea that's
obviously silly because there was a meme
going around on Facebook that said that
the smartest people go to the best
colleges to go work at the biggest tech
companies to figure out how to engineer
addiction for children more effectively
and we call this meeting meaningful
demand and the self-correcting nature of
the market the moment that you can
manufacture demand the intelligence of
the whole thing's broken and it's
important to understand that supply and
demand will have a cemetery between them
on aggregate
meaning the company that's supplying in
the collective body of all of the demand
but there is no coordination or
intelligence of the click
body of all the customers but there is a
coordinated intelligence on the supply
side so it's really the supply supply
side against a single customer that is
an asymmetric dynamic that doesn't have
the same good for both of them there's a
lot of times where the person doesn't
need to buy the new that now they
feel like they need to buy for status or
addiction or whatever type thing it is
it won't actually increase their quality
of life in a meaningful way but we can
use the supply side can use asymmetric
manipulation tools to get people to want
to buy it and also confuse them about
what the best product or service is
because people aren't actually seeing
what the best product or services
they're saying what the best marketed
one is we can also then use our market
dominant position to squish smaller
competitors that have a better product
or service so it doesn't have a choice
of actually emerging on and on so the
self-correcting nature of a market is
not a real thing anymore to the degree
that it ever was a real thing and I
there's actually a deeper argument as to
why it never really was but even in this
situation the asymmetric ability to
manufacture demand that actually breaks
the intelligence of demand as the basis
of selection is actually a fundamental
broken kind of situation not to mention
then that government's the whole idea of
the nation state or government is to
bind or regulate the most predatory
aspects of where there would be perverse
financial incentives so it'd be very
profitable to do crime extortion so
we're gonna make a law not to do it
would be profitable cut down all the
trees so we make laws to say no we're
protecting state parks but as soon as
the regulator is supposed to regulate
economic interests but that individual
regulator is nowhere near as motivated
to be effective at that personally as
the economic interest is motivated to
break their ability to be effective at
it this is the libertarian Public Choice
critique of this kind of liberal
democracy structure representative
liberal democracy then you end up
getting a situation where market forces
capture the regulating forces through
campaign financing through paying all
the lobbyists through getting
compromising information on
representatives through whatever
they capture them and then have them
actually serve their interest and now
you don't even have the checking forces
of market competition because you
actually have the regulator doing the
opposite of regulation because obviously
the regulator will always be something
that we want to try and capture the
market in now it's a 210 so it's
important to see all the places where
the idea of the thing right the idea of
what a healthy market would be and what
a healthy constitutional republic would
be and how they would work together you
will see like in this nation the
founding father said again and again
things like this system only works with
a comprehensively educated public that
understands the history of what
governance systems failed and which one
succeeded in why so that they don't get
compelled into those things it is
educated enough to not be susceptible to
propaganda that if you don't actively
engage yourself in civics you're
consenting de facto to be ruled on and
on there's quotes funding for other
quotes I think this one is Jefferson if
I could either have perfect news and the
route trash government or I could have
perfect government and trash news I'd
take perfect news right because if
people will comprehensively educated
they could reform government not the
other way around
yeah though we don't we don't have that
and so what you can see is that internal
vested interest forces cause predation
to the structures that were designed to
be the best structures they could be and
so we've had radical institutional decay
to where markets incentivize predation
and extraction more than they
incentivize meaningful production of the
things that most matter and
representatives don't represent the
people they represent the financial
interests that get them in place and
governments don't govern for the good of
the whole they pay attention to what
will get them reelected on for your term
cycles and how they figure out to make a
lot of money on the very small salary in
so I don't know if I actually answer
your question I said that the underlying
myth that there is this thing called a
market and it has self-correcting
properties is is really important leap
gibberish and we have to acknowledge
that if we want to think sanely about
things that so here's to take a stab at
alternatives or even characteristics of
alternatives that could emerge in
maybe the medium term and so you
mentioned the attention economy the
problems of that like what's an
alternative to that or for exactly and
you you've talked to in previous talks
about how you know when we talk about
regulating a market people get concerned
start thinking about communism and
that's not really talking about but
you've also talked about how you know
it's not democracy is all sorts of
failures with it like you all this isn't
that we currently have aren't up for the
task or that don't meet the the problems
that we currently face so what does or
what could yeah so fundamental principle
that we have to factor is that any game
can be gained
the moment you define what the success
criteria is and what the laws and the
whatever there will be places where you
can violate the spirit of the law while
meeting the letter of the law there will
be places where you can figure out how
to externalize some cost to something
that wasn't accounted for in the model
well being able to benefit it the thing
that was accounted there will be some
place where you can figure out how to
have plausible deniability or hide
culpability to be able to get ahead and
so it's an important thing to understand
there is no such thing as a perfect
social system and there never will be
and meaning when we think about a
perfect social system when we try to
imagine what that would be what we're
usually thinking about is okay how do we
remove all the perverse incentives from
the system such that no one ever has an
incentive to do something that is
for anybody and how do we make sure that
the system of incentives predisposes
everyone to make the most on the
considerate positive choices for them in
the whole in the near term in the long
term and what we're actually asking is
how do we remove choice and make a
system that predisposes everyone's
choice in a particular way and as long
as there is the reality of choices the
reality of the possibility of people
making choices that are intentionally
benefiting the whole but wrong mister
mistake theory or not intentionally
benefiting the whole or even
intentionally damaging this this is an
important concept I'll come back to the
more tangible in a moment but I think
you'll find
that if you try to define meaningfulness
like the meaningfulness of existence of
life you won't be able to find any
definition that doesn't bind the concept
of meaningfulness to the concept of
choice and so insofar as we are we would
seek to make a system that actually
compels people's choice to be a
particular way so their choice is no
longer actually choice it's the result
of the causation of social engineering
we're actually trying to make a system
that debases the basis of meaningfulness
so and i can also say that there will be
no matter if i have a system that tries
to look at a bunch of metrics not just
GDP but i'm gonna look at a bunch of
things that are metrics that are
uncommon terrible so I'm gonna look at
co2 and nitrogen affluence and
microbiome of the soil whatever all the
things I can and factor them into some
complex system optimization waiting
function there will always be metrics
that matter that aren't included that we
don't even know exist yet the unknown
unknown set is never factorable into the
thing and so there isn't a perfect
system
this is Asimov science as the ever
writing of wrong there is only
progressively hopefully better systems
where the failures in the current system
get acknowledged and improved but that
takes humans that have a kind of general
intelligence beyond the system dynamics
to notice what's wrong with the system
and make choices that the system is not
predisposing to make good choices
independent of system predisposition and
to then also work to improve the system
so we want to make the best systems that
we can we also want to develop humans
that make choices not just influenced by
but beyond the influence of the current
types of social coordination systems so
the reason I say this is because what
that means is that there is no answer to
a civilization that doesn't totally suck
that doesn't involve the comprehensive
education and development of everyone to
be good stewards of human choice and any
attempt to do something that doesn't
involve that will always end up being
some kind of propaganda for a system of
control and so that's fundamental it's
also important to understand that no
matter
what proposition I offer for anything or
anyone offers I can also say how it
could be gamed so again this would take
some people being earnest and smart
enough to notice where that was
occurring to be able to work with it and
bind it so that's a fundamental
statement now that's not me answering
your question it's saying why that
question is unanswerable and a perfected
form so I can give some examples of what
progressively better systems and the
writing of wrong are and we can still go
into where they would be game about and
then what the next progressive step
would have to be perfect and I'm also
curious even go deeper on how to make
but what a good steward of human choice
looks like how to make those what it
doesn't look like and how we can and I
don't know if it's a segue into force
Landry stuff but how we can how we can
do that which way do you want to go
first proposed transitional systems your
choice it's your choice and there with
you transitional assistance let's say
we're looking at economics as a system
that is predisposing patterns of human
choice and we think of it that way it's
a system of extrinsic motives in Scent
'iv to create coordination it's not just
resource allocation it's also extrinsic
incentive right so that we can get
people to do the labor jobs and those
types of things but it's not just get
people to do the labor jobs which is a
how do we extrinsic ly override people's
intrinsic motives it ends up being kind
of a system of incentive writ large and
so a dollar or whatever kind of currency
is a fungible singular would maximally
reduced unit of value for all types of
value that's the idea so that we can
take value whether it's a service or a
product or whatever something made out
of bits or attention or atoms or energy
or whatever it is and we can decide how
much it's worth so that we can create
exchange between them so we have this
kind of abstracted value metric well
there are kinds of value that actually
matter that are not measurable they're
not quantifiable there are kinds of
value that are not extractable and
exchangeable
so insofar as value that is measurable
and extractable and exchangeable will
confer game theoretic advantage to me
over the kinds of value that are not
then I can't make decisions that
optimize sunsets or rainbows or
songbirds or you know future generations
of children getting to fall in love or
whatever I can't optimize for that
because insofar as I put resource time
attention energy or physical resources
into those things I'm actually losing
maximizing my own power and advantage
relative to those who are doing purely
measurable extractive exchangeable
things this is a this is a multipolar
trap issue and it's based on the fact
that the metric off' ocation right met
relation of value is actually a
fundamental problem we have to make
choices in service of values that can't
be put into fungible metrics so now when
we're talking about how do we condition
good human choice we can see that very
fundamental to something just like the
idea of currency is conditioning choice
in a way that is not what we would call
being a steward of good choice that if
we look at wisdom from any tradition any
kind of good thinking on what wisdom is
it would have people make choices that
are not fully based on the type of
metric accounting so if someone has a
fiduciary responsibility to utilize
their resources and they have now
quantified the value of other people's
lives as human resources in terms of
their hours and what they get paid and
whatever we've quantified you know all
of those types of resources and they
have to maximize shareholder returns as
part of a fiduciary responsibility they
will be obligated to destroy real value
in service of the types of value that
confer game-theoretic advantage and that
are on the fiduciary relationship so
this is just one of a lot of examples of
why you can't leave choice to a system
the and yet why it was also very hard to
develop humans it would make choice
outside of what Moloc or the paperclip
Maximizer of the system Orion
yeah there's a version of this in
Silicon Valley which is you know measure
what matters if it matters you'll
measure it if if you don't measure it
you will pay attention to it of course
problem is that the things that truly
matter in our lives we can't really
measure it and so there's this conundrum
there do you try to find better ways to
measure the things that are unmeasurable
hoping that you'll then prioritize it
and not corrupt it in the process do you
just acknowledge that there are certain
things that you'll never be able to
measure and you need to find ways to
prioritize it or do you get rid of all
metrics altogether and yet that seems
exactly these all seem like a perfect
solution of course you don't get rid of
all metrics but you have a choice making
process that is informed by but not
determined by the metrics because there
will be a general intelligence capacity
to look at all the metrics and say there
are things that matter that are not
being captured here adequately and I can
understand qualified things that aren't
quantified I can understand some
quantified things that I just paid
attention to that aren't on my dashboard
of metrics to look at I can understand
that my simplified algorithm is probably
actually really wrong that's paying
attention to how I did an economic model
or whatever it is and so the ability to
hold responsibility for choice and this
is one of the other things is that
people actually get out of ethical
responsibility even to their their own
self by creating a decision-making
system that they have to follow when
that says troops were being tried in the
hague after world war ii and they were
being asked about war crimes they were
all asked did you believe in everything
that you did and 90% of them said no we
actually like we started too and then we
didn't believe in it and then they were
asked did you try and stop and all of
them said no we didn't try and stop and
then when asked why they quoted the
German phrase that said something like
officers orders we didn't have a choice
so the moment that you say fiduciary
responsibility or company policy or this
is what I gotta do to you know compete
with the market you can be a Nazi right
you can actually remove all ethical
culpability by saying you don't have a
choice so the question was how do we
develop good stewards of choice and we
can see that it's not only the sense
making the calculate stuff well it's
also things like
it's also things like depth of
congruency and knowing ultimately what
your life is in service to and what is
meaningful to you and what matters
beyond what any dashboard might be able
to represent yeah knowing and here's the
difference between virtue and virtue
signaling virtue is where there's
something that matters to me that is not
expressed in some type of game theoretic
advantage it's not expressed in dollars
or likes or tweets or status or election
that I am willing to sacrifice those
game theoretic advantage in service of
virtue signaling is using the
performance of a virtue that people will
care about to get more game theoretic
advantage and when it comes down to the
two masters issue of will I actually
sacrifice um personal game theoretic
advantage and service of this if the
answer is no with some justification its
virtue signaling and so this then
becomes a core thing and choice is where
am I willing to do something that
doesn't maximize profits it doesn't mean
that it makes me unprofitable or crashes
my company right but where am I willing
to do something that doesn't maximize
profits or slows the speed of growth or
doesn't maximize market capture or
whatever because there's something that
I care about that I'm actually committed
to that I have devotion to deeper than
that thing and if people don't know the
answer to that then I don't trust them
as stewards of choice at all and is it
also being good steward of choice is
understanding the power of but also the
limitations of the scientific worldview
or scientism or that as the main sort of
guide for how you make decisions or
determine what's what's meaningful or
makes sense yeah so just like you were
saying do we get rid of metrics or not
there's a and the answer is we're
informed by but not determined by we're
informed by scientific process and
methodology but that doesn't actually
determine the choice and so when asked
to ask what is what is the methodology
that is relevant to influencing choice
that includes but is not limited to the
methods of science because you know we
have this classic is odd distinction
inside
and science can say what is it can't say
what odd because science specifically
the way you know there are some
extensions but the way we think about
science in a pop arian sense is it is
the epistemology to study things in the
domain of the measurable and the
repeatable something has to be both
measurable and repeatable to be able to
be subject well there are things that
are real that are measurable but not
repeatable there are things that are
real that are not measurable measurable
is in the domain of third person and
obviously first person itself is not
measurable you can measure third person
neural correlates that and then over
norm how well you think they're
correlated and use a physicalist
assumption to say that physical is
primary and first third person was
primary and first person must have been
a phenominal none of which is grounded
in anything other than a self
referential assumption so the real is
not exclusively measurable and
repeatable so science is a necessary but
not sufficient epistemology so when I'm
asking questions about choice making I'm
asking aunt questions not just it now
they have to be informed by AZ otherwise
they're ungrounded right so one of the
problems here is that the philosophy of
science gave us so much power over
religions and other things to be able to
understand the physical world and then
apply that as technology and engineering
to have more power over the physical
world so anyone who paid attention to
Newton's calculus could make cannon
balls hit the target way better than the
pendulum dowsers could and could do a
lot of things so those who kind of paid
attention to it just started to win via
war economic war or military war or
whatever was but then what happens is we
have a dominant system a dominant kind
of philosophic system it says we can't
say what a good choice is there is no
basis for the there is no reification of
the concept of good or the concept of
choice both of those are concepts that
we don't actually understand so we
assume choices summed up causation from
particle physics in the brain or jeans
or whatever domain we happen to study
and good is purely a nonsense social
construct the best we can do is look at
evolutionary biology reo fight with game
theory and say good is that which
doesn't lose in a rival risk context
maybe trying
reified down to thermodynamics and say
who can garner the more the most scarce
thermodynamic energy right but that's
not actually a definition of good in any
meaningful way and so good choice is
both of the words are outside of the
domain of the philosophy of science and
yet it's gonna create all the power that
empowers the choices that were making
through whatever methodology to be more
powerful in this win and so then we say
okay well if science gets applied as
technology which increases our ability
for warfare and economic extraction and
production and narrative control and you
know information control and all those
things then what is guiding how that
technology is implemented well the
economics that funds it and so then the
economics is basically saying a good
choice is the game theoretic choice that
wins so when you have technology and
getting into the phase of exponential
technology all of the philosophy of
science empowered by game theory as its
ethical system that system ends up in my
assessment self terminating because
unlike animals that can't increase their
game theoretic capacity radically within
a life that only increases very slowly
over over natural selection time periods
in relationship to the co selective
pressures that all of the other animals
in the ecosystem also up regulate
predator only gets a little bit better
right through a mutation and then at
best they start to eat a little bit more
of the slower prey which in breeds the
faster preys genes which make them get a
little bit faster so you don't get
radical asymmetries of power which is
key to how the meta stability of nature
works but the moment we had stone tools
we were able to increase our creative
capacity faster than the Amazon then the
mammoths could deal with it faster than
the whatever and we started extinct
tting species and over hunting
environments and then rather than having
our population come into steady-state
with the environment like every other
predator we could just move to another
environment become the apex predator
everywhere then start farming
environments then start mining
source and moving to a you know
fundamentally net unsustainable type
dynamics the tool-making gate which was
early philosophy of science right before
formalized philosophy of science it was
our abstraction capacity mediated
ability to understand principles right
the principle of sharpness that could
make a sharper knife not just use a
sharp Rock and then to test kind of
empirically does this thing actually
work better our ability to do that broke
the symmetry of us with regard to nature
and also of the most powerful humans
with regard to the other humans and that
kind of symmetry is key to what allows
metastability of evolution so we're
still using an evolutionary motive ie be
the apex predator but without
evolutionary capacities with capacities
undermined by evolution because our
capacities are evolutionarily
unprecedented no other animal could kill
the whole world we can they can't ruin
whole ecosystems they can't genetically
engineer new species again because our
capacities evolutionarily unprecedented
the power of our choices the basis of
our choice also has to be evolutionarily
unprecedented because we have the power
to influence the whole so much we have
to have consideration for the whole in
our choice making because our capacity
can influence the long term so much we
have to have consideration of the long
term in our choice making if we keep
making choices to optimize our near-term
apex predator status but with capacities
that break the entire metastability then
we selves terminate yep and evolution is
as a terminus concept as a field is used
to justify or explain you know lots of
different things about how society
currently works do you do you have and
how people work and why they do things
do you have served any different views
from the mainstream evolutionary there
in terms of how we should interpret
Darwin or or other sort of important
sort of divergences that have different
implications for what's quote unquote
natural or or appropriate or irrelevant
for us it's a big conversation there's
lots of things in here and the idea that
the mainstream thinking about Darwin
that was
just individual survival of the fittest
without considering symbiosis or
ecosystem dynamics like that critique is
now I would say fairly well known by
anyone that's paying attention and that
if you look at an ecosystem and you look
at the relationships of gas exchange
between plants and animals and all of
the food cycle dynamics and aerobic and
anaerobic bacteria in the soil and you
see that most of the things are actually
very codependent interdependent you know
symbiotic it happens to be that the the
competitive things just stand out in an
interesting way right when when Bucks
are you know budding antlers it just
obviously stands out and it ends up
being that of course really focusing on
that whoever really focuses on that and
wins Wars those memes get selected for
and so in the same way that you know
genes that have certain camp dominance
get selected for so do memes even if
they aren't actually holistic or true or
you know in that sense so there's a
there's a lot we could talk about of not
just looking at individual animal
selection or individual species
selection but selection at the level of
whole ecosystems that's really critical
because obviously if an individual
species got so successful relative to
the other species that it depends upon
that it debased the ecosystem that it
depends on its own short-term success
would kill its long-term success and
this happens right like we've seen
invasive species come in devastate an
ecosystem and then they're gone and so
the only things that make it through
long term are the things that lead to
self stabilizing Ecology's but when we
don't pay attention to that part of
evolutionary theory when we are
justifying being the apex predator in
the market so that's very important
there's a lot of things like that that
are very important but I think the main
thing I would give is that the moment we
understood how to create tools via
abstraction we were no longer
evolutionarily precedented and so we
can't apply evolutionary theory to us in
the same way and all you've got to do is
just like look at a gorilla attacking
and then watch a nuclear bomb go off and
look at a beaver cutting trees down and
then watch
and burn and look at a great white
eating tuna and then look at a mile-long
driftnet pulling up you know hundreds of
tons of fish and you're like oh we're
not apex predators right look at
Abby dam as Beaver Dam is the most
radical environmental engineering of any
animal then look at LA as you're flying
into it and so okay we are not
evolutionarily precedented creatures and
religions talked about us being between
the animals and the gods and needing to
ascend into our godlike nature and
really what we can see with
exponentially increasing technology is
the power of gods right I'm speaking
metaphorically but but something that is
less like the power of animals and more
like the power of what we would ascribe
to who can create and maintain and
destroy the whole and so if you have the
power of gods and you don't have the
right choice making to hold that power
ie the love and wisdom and prudence of
gods then that's a temporary story
what should serve the role that we that
mainstream thinks evolution serves
what's a different theory or school or
as it is it created it should be great
like if we are gone beyond evolution how
do we so evolution is a process by which
new things come to be that were not
before tool-making or technology design
as a process by which new things come to
be that weren't before the unconscious
relationship between those two self
terminates at a certain point we can
think about in a very general sense and
we could go deeper into this but in a
general sense we can think about
evolution as an unconscious process
there's not like a central top-down
mediated to here we want creatures like
this there's mutation is an unconscious
process and then survival selection
everybody wants to survive inmate
selection right so but what happens is
the the fact that mutation is
distributed across the whole system and
the Selective pressures are Co selective
creates a radically decentralized
radically parallel type of process that
ends up being very slow most things fail
but what makes it through are highly
interoperable increasing in order to
complex it equal
and tool-making so we can think of we
can think of evolution as a kind of
decentralized unconscious parallel
process but that is actually tending to
the meta stability of the whole
tool-making as a conscious process can
happen in a single individual can happen
in or small groups can happen in serial
not parallel someone can take insights
and you know recursively work on those
insights and it creates parts ready to
create up regulates one input variable
relative to others to be able to up
regulate some output variables relative
to others through the conscious ability
to understand that so there is a new
third creative process so if we say that
evolution is unconscious tending of
holes that obviously I'm simplifying
radically to make a construction here
and tool-making is conscious creation of
parts then there has to be a new process
that is the conscious creation and
tending of holes and because if all of
the agents are acting like parts and up
regulating their capacity but breaking
the power symmetry that is where the
meta stability comes and not thinking of
the long-term of the whole and it when
anyone deploys more asymmetrical power
power everyone then ends up reverse
engineering it also deploying it you get
this exponential curve of power
deployment all of which is driving
entropy and driving externalization that
ends so as soon as we can affect the
whole that significantly there has to be
conscious governance of how that occurs
which is where there has to be
large-scale sense-making and large scale
values generation meaning thoughts about
what is good beyond just what wins and
rivals contexts and then large scale
coordination capacity and so and this is
where we start to talk about well how do
we develop humans that can do that how
do we develop relationships and
communication processes and protocols
that work better at shared sense-making
and shared values generation to inform
better shared choice making where we
actually have better capacity to
coordinate than getting stuck in things
like perverse incentive and multipolar
traps yeah this making a couple things
one is as it makes sense to think of
humans as a means to an end in terms of
some other
being that has you know more powers than
just like we you know we were some other
being before us was it was means to to
us and does this resonate or the idea of
like global brain or the noosphere or
like and how do you see that manifesting
or or playing out do I think that we are
part of the Hydra hydrocarbon bootloader
process to make the advanced
silica-based a eyes that then deplete
replace all the hydrocarbons and are
better or that humans give rise to the
trans humans and some sense in terms of
how we technologically modify ourselves
our physiological substrate both of
those sound pretty dystopic to me and I
would very much like to make sure we are
not heading down those trajectories I
think that we it's kind of like you see
a plant that has some traditional
recognized medicinal value and then we
try to use scientific method to identify
the active ingredient extract that
active ingredient potent eyes it and
then give it as a drug and we're paying
attention to one thing that that herb
supposedly did and we're measuring that
one thing that one metric and we say
look at this is a more powerful but
there there's often also a process where
now that more powerful thing might also
cause side effects that the plan didn't
have there's externalities because there
was a synergy of the way the molecules
work together but it might also be that
there were a bunch of other things that
were not the primary objective that were
positive things that were happening that
are now lost so oftentimes something
makes it through whether its genetic or
mimetic makes it through an evolutionary
process that factors everything in a
closed-loop way and then we try to
understand it by reducing it to some
number of active metrics that we can
then measure and optimize and the
unknown unknown set the set of things
that are relevant that we don't even
know that we don't know that aren't in
our model is more important than we
account for most of the time and so yeah
I think that there is a fundamental
information theoretic problem and the
way we think about AI the way we think
about
crisper and synthetic biology which is
we will define what we're trying to
achieve as good with one or two or five
known metrics and we will seek to make a
technology that has the first-order
effect of increasing those metrics right
the first-order effect meaning a direct
effect and the calculation to be able to
see a first-order effect on a known
small set of metrics is relatively easy
but the ability to calculate for second
and third and fourth order effects on a
very large unknown set of metrics is
very hard there is a you know a P naught
equals NP issue here and so but if I'm
being driven by kind of first to market
or first to publish kind of dynamics I
have not I have the opposite of an
incentive to do deep and protracted
safety analysis I have all of the
incentive to say well we learn from
mistakes and you know let's go but the
level of mistakes when we're making
things that replicate like it's a really
big deal to get that pattern replication
tack it's different it's different even
than MOOCs cuz nukes don't make more
nukes and detonate themselves but
biotech dollars and you know and
possibly autopoietic a I could write so
the moment we start getting into
technology that is self-replicating or
just too powerful when we don't have
safe to fail probes and we don't even
recognize how shitty we are at safety
analysis on second third fourth order
effects over longer periods of time on
metrics we don't know to look at this is
a this is an information theory issue
that we really have to pay more
attention to with the level of
technology capacity we're getting so I'm
saying this to say that I think a lot of
the oh we understand the genome well
enough to start editing it is is stupid
hubris and that doesn't mean that I'm a
Luddite that says there is no way to
move forward it means what is what is
the actual complexity of the situation
information theoretically and then
what's the complexity of my analysis in
terms of orders of magnitude and are
they close and if my analysis is
factored tend to the five bits and the
reality of the situation is maybe ten to
the twenty bits of information I
probably shouldn't do the thing yet and
I should think about
safe to fail now this is an information
theoretic thing but I think mostly it's
actually not in information to
everything it's a motive thing because
I'm not even motivated to try to do good
safety analysis and motivated to do the
bare minimum safety analysis as a source
of plausible deniability to say that I
did safety analysis to actually move
forward as fast as I can on
getting whatever that one or two metrics
that gives me game theoretic advantage
that I'm trying to optimize for I want
to go back to a choice making and then
to transitionary systems a couple
questions one is you mentioned in a
different episode about how sort of that
we have these false paradoxes between
sort of or false you know false
dichotomies between mind body or heart
brain or are there others I'm curious we
unpack that a little bit wouldn't be
where it comes from or why it's false
and then mention if we think about
science is one tool in the toolkit is
there what's another important tool how
do you think about that that's woke up
broadly in terms of you good choice
making and then maybe this is related to
and I know this is a huge topic so it's
a little bit of an injustice to just
shrink it to a minute but if you could
sort of write the crux of what you find
really interesting about forest Landers
work or what you think is contribution
is I accept that's related yeah in terms
of the need to have a ethical system
that is commensurable that is able to
have logical congruence with the
philosophy of science so that the
philosophy that gives rise to our
ability to make more powerful choices is
also connected to the ability to make
better choices working towards that in a
meaningful way is one of the areas that
forests work has been that I think is
most meaningful of a contribution
there's lots of things I think a very
meaningful contribution and so you know
again we said the philosophy of science
looks at the domain of the measurable
and repeatable or we can say the domain
of measurable repeatable specifically
which is always going to be third
and so there are some philosophical
assumptions about what third-person
means what first-person means and what
the relationship between first and third
person are or reifying what we mean by
subjective what we mean by objective and
what the relationship between subjective
and objective are that forests work
starts at that level and the reification
gives the basis to then be able to
ground the philosophy of science and
something deeper than it like well
obviously if we're looking at the domain
of measurable and repeatable we we have
to start with measurable and the
measurement always involves a measure or
measuring some measured there's a
triplicate relationship between the
observed the process of observation and
the observer and yet then what we try to
do is take for the most part the
measurement process and especially the
measure for granted and create an
ontology of measures even though the
fundamental basis of the concept of
measurement itself isn't even
semantically frame abaut in a logical
way without those three concepts being
bound so it's very interesting if you
look at kind of vedanta kai deal ism or
buddhist idealism or solipsism in
general on one side and you look at
physicalism on the other side i would
say that they make the exact same
reductive mistake so physicalism says
that objective or physical is
fundamentally real and subjective is
either not real like it's just an
illusion all uh you know radical limit
of ism or it's an epiphenomena it's a
you know secondary and they have a very
compelling argument for that right the
compelling argument is it requires
assuming a bunch of things as more
epistemic ly grounded than I think they
are but so BIGBANG just a bunch of
plasma and then particles and whatever
it doesn't seem like there's anything we
can call consciousness and they're
eventually planets at a certain point
hydrological biological process
protocells whatever it's very hard to
think about consciousness before that so
it seems like there was physical stuff
before there was consciousness stuff so
then consciousness must have emerged out
of there and if people can describe
their subjective experience while hooked
up to an EEG or an fMRI and we can look
at their brain and we can see some type
of statistical correlation between
patterns of brain and their subjective
experience and we can say there's a
correlation between subjective and
objective but we think that the
objective is controlled by the objective
ie that physics is causally closed
therefore your brain state this moment
as the result of your brain state a
moment ago and the particle physics that
governs you know ion differentials of
what's going to actually happen in the
brain in relationship with the body in
the environment so if there is a
one-for-one correlation between
described subjective States and observed
objective States and the objective
states are the result of scientific
causation and this closure over that
then subjectivity must be a a causal
epiphenomena right like there's various
versions of that argument and as you can
see you know argument between Sam Harris
and M Dan Dennett who both would
typically think of themselves as being
mostly informed by the philosophy of
science come to you know Dan Dennett
says that consciousness is not real but
free will is and Sam says free will is
not real but consciousness is and at the
end of their argument Sam said something
like it appears we have fundamentally
different intuitions on this which is
actually very important which meant that
the symbol grounding was actually the
the key thing and this is where you get
tarce Keys theorem you know coming out
of girdle's theorem which is that any
formal logical system involves ideas
that cannot be reified in that system
and that means that there is no logical
system that is consistent that's also
complete and I now this comes back to I
said there is no perfect social system
and it comes back to why the first thing
Lao Tzu said when he wrote this book is
that the DAO that is nameable as eternal
Dao is the formal system that is
complete
doesn't exist right okay so we can see
how basically philosophy of science is
and obviously I'm radically
oversimplifying to go quickly and we can
do the nuance thing at some point so the
question what is real philosophy of
science says well the stuff that is
measurable and repeatable seems to be
pretty clearly real because we might
think that sound is faster than light
but we can all measure that it's not and
it's the same every time and so the the
congruence of objectivity and the
repeatability of it and its independence
to our beliefs about it seems like a
good basis for real and then the fact
that we can make predictions with it and
make out of it and that works and
whatever and so then of course you have
an epistemology which is measuring and
repeating and then testing and you know
like that which is given epistemology of
third person that is the epistemology
that makes sense starting with the
oncologic assumption that what is real
is the stuff that you can assess me
about epistemology and so then you do a
bunch of third-person assessment and all
you find is causation and third-person
and so of course you end up then coming
to what is real is third-person stuff
because your whole process has been
measurements on third-person stuff so
there's an ontological assumption that
creates an inappropriate epistemology
that then proves the ontological
assumption so then they don tor Buddhism
did the exact same thing on the opposite
side they say that subjectivity is
fundamental and objectivity is either an
illusion or Maya you know etc or in
epiphenomena the structures arising
within consciousness and they argue it
in a very similar kind of way on the
opposite they say well I don't really I
can't prove that I'm not dreaming or in
a hallucination or anything else so my
measurements might all be part of a
dream and you and the repeatability of
it is all part of my dream so I have
less epistemic ground on the objective
stuff out here than I have on the basis
that there is an experience arising that
I'm actually experiencing something
they've Hart said something obviously
very similar to this and so what I have
the most epistemic grounding on is that
experience is occurring but my
perception of myself as experience or
might be an illusion
is a self here but it might be different
than I think it is and there's a world
but it might be different than I think
it is so there is some self experiencing
a world experience or experiencing and
experienced that they the experienced
and the experienced or might have
delusion but the experience is prima
facie occurring so what I can what is
real is that which can be experienced as
opposed to measured and repeated
therefore I have an epistemology of
inquiry and noticing the nature of
experience and running experiments in
there of moving attention in certain
ways and seeing what happens with
experience and so I get a
phenomenological epistemology and then
that ends up confirming see everything
that I noticed is experience and
everything that is objective is a riot I
can only say even exists because I'm
experiencing it if I couldn't actually
experience the measurement the
measurement wouldn't have occurred this
is the if the tree falls in the forest
and there's no one there to hear so I
would say that they both basically made
an oncological that then created an
epistemology that then confirmed the
oncologic assumption in East is East and
West is West and never the twain shall
meet
and then of course Silicon Valley and
whatever we do this very funny thing
like take principles of Buddhism to do a
mindfulness practice to crush the
competition more effectively which is a
very funny strange hybrid of kind of the
game theoretic versions of both but
underneath the experience so ok
the vedantist will walk you through a
process and say notice the tree now
notice that you want the tree you're the
one noticing the tree ok so notice some
other objects notice that you aren't
those objects you're the one noticing
the objects now notice your thoughts
those thoughts are objects objects of
attention so notice that you you can
hold an image of the tree in your mind
so you aren't the thoughts you are the
witness of the thoughts and you aren't
the emotions the sensations because
you're witnessing them on and on and so
all of those are not ultimately what you
are they're changing what is unchanging
and all of them is the witness therefore
you know the Upanishads say again and
again only the self is real only the
witness is real right but they start
with an observer observing and observed
right I had to start with the tree I had
to start with a bunch of objects to even
point at the subject because the subject
is not even defined a ball outside of
its relationship with an object whether
the object is a perception or the
perceived right answer I took for
granted that I was only able to even
notice subjectivity or consciousness or
reference it by starting with subjective
objective in the relationship between
them which is the same thing as I start
with in science taking a measurement and
there is clearly a conscious experience
of registering a measurement through a
measurement process then I'm going to
take for granted
the conscious registering of that and
the measurement process to make an
ontology of the measured so there is a
deeper process that says that to even
define observation or experience or
measurement well there it are these
binding of the concepts that are
necessary and sufficient and there's a
triplicate kind of binding if we can
define a formal philosophy there a
formal metaphysics there then the unti
epistemology of the objective which will
be a reified philosophy of science is
now founded in something that also can
give us a epistemology of the subjective
and an epistemology of the relationship
between the subjective and the objective
and ethics actually lives in the
relationship between the subjective and
the objective which is why you have to
factor objective measurement metrics
utilitarianism and why that is necessary
but not sufficient so forests work you
know if somebody Google's eminent
metaphysics you'll see a PDF come up and
then he has a few other writings on a
website you VSM calm forests work so we
know from from girdle's theorem we know
from car skis theorem that we cannot
have a system that is both perfectly
complete and perfectly congruent so one
of the things that forest ends up doing
in the metaphysics is actually defining
an upper bound on the knowable and in
any domain where the upper bound on the
noble is that's something called the
increments raishin theorem
and then being able to define what the
appropriate epistemic process within the
domain of the knowable is and then also
how to do inner domain transfers across
the epistemic so different systems and
so basically as a metaphysics it is not
complete but it defines the upper bound
of what level of completeness could
happen and then it it offers the upper
bound of completeness that's at least
the claim and it was interesting for me
when I first looked at it and I had you
know decent background in both science
and the philosophy of science and
philosophic systems including you know
person Whitehead and other people that
had done things that were maybe closest
in that direction it really just looked
like gibberish when you read the axioms
and modalities it is hard for it to make
any sense and it also seemed kind of
like impenetrable gibberish so if I only
got the book I would have definitely not
done much with it after the first half
an hour and then gave up it was only
because I got to spend a decent bit of
time with Forrest and he was able to
actually show me the application of it
to solving problems that in domains that
I knew well that I'm like oh that is
actually a novel insight in the
entire space that I actually know well
and that that happened across enough
spaces that I gave the benefit of the
doubt to say oh there's actually an
epistemic there that I can see the
expressions of in areas that I have more
domain knowledge so then the long haul
of working to understand it came in and
I will say that it's been extremely
helpful in being able to take other
epistemologies like evolutionary theory
or complexity science or mathematics or
whatever and understand them in terms of
a meta epistemology that both gives more
clarity and insight and more capacity
for inter domain transfers formal
inter-domain transfers Jordan Hall and I
were having this conversation the other
day because so much of the time that is
a epistemic system that we use when
discussing other things we're like
how do we it's so hard to have
conversations where people don't have
this now because it is such a powerful
set of tools so we're working on helping
forests develop ways of having people be
able to learn the rel
and parts easier because right now it's
not very easy totally
Sam Harrison Jordan Pearson had this
sort of famous debate I don't know
exactly what the contents were my
understanding is that John Pierce was
Pro religion and Sam Harris was sort of
anti religion and then Brett Weinstein
Stein also has a sort of own view on
game theory and the importance of and
you sometime you talking about rising
above game theory but he is a strong no
no we need to harness game theory theory
and use it in the right way to
understand trade-offs and you talk about
you know not needing or trying to rise
above trade-offs I'm curious does
anything there that's interesting that's
worth commenting on so when I say things
like having the power of gods requires
love and wisdom of gods
I think a lot of people especially in
the you know Jordan Peterson kind of
world think that I'm gonna try and do
Jesus muddling and and I'm not I'm I'm
using that phrase in ace in a symbolic
way not a literal way and because it I
think
metaphorically or symbolically has
insight that offers so I'm gonna say a
few more things that are taking a
religious idea and I'm not going to do
Jesus smuggling I'm simply saying that
there was actually philosophic insight
expressed through the religious
tradition that has value so the no false
idols concept in the commandments the
way that I think of that there's a few
different ways but the way I think of
that is that a model of reality is not
reality and this is back to I so moths
ever writing of wrong right and this is
back to that no consistent system will
be complete and when you even look at
the definition of a complex system in
complexity science is a system that when
you model it meaning model it means a
finite set of variables and a finite set
of transforms or algorithms right which
will predict some percentage less than
100% of its behavior so when you create
a complicated model of a complex system
it still has some behavior not explained
by the complicated system that we would
describe as a emergent properties and if
you add more variables you might get
closer
- you go from 80% accuracy to 85%
accuracy or whatever but you don't get
100% accuracy so of course the I you
know the the like Nixie an idea is that
0.99 nine nine nine indefinitely you run
the limit of it equals one I think
there's a fundamental philosophical Amir
this is numerically very useful that it
is numerically valuable to consider it
as one versus is one is actually a
really important distinction so
similarly there's a we see some
correlation we assume some causation we
see that as we add more variables it
gets closer therefore we assume it is
purely deterministic on a finite
variable said that we have not
understood all the variables of
completely but we're converging on
perfect understanding no we're
converging on statistically better
understanding that will always continue
to have unknown unknown and gaps in it
and so given that biology and ecology
and psychology and sociology and all the
things that we really care about are
because I would say we only care about
tools and infrastructure insofar as they
affect those things the things that we
really care about are all complex
systems which the model of the complex
system will never be the thing right it
doesn't mean it's not useful it can be
totally useful but also if I make a
model of a thing that doesn't describe
its behavior perfectly there's some
emergent properties not described by the
model then if I owe my 's for the model
where the model doesn't map to the
realities where I up the reality
and we see that all the time with very
simplified economic models of rational
human actors and you know Malthusian
insights and whatever and reality
doesn't follow the model perfectly so it
has some benefit and then some up
things right so then we try to make a
slightly more complicated model so the
no false idols is that the model of
reality is never reality so don't ever
get too attached to it don't ever get
emotionally religiously attached to
capitalism or to communism or to a
particular scientific understanding of a
thing hold it as useful and maybe the
best we currently have and as
fundamentally and inexorably inadequate
so there is a reverence for reality that
is beyond current
and ever description and that reverence
for reality has a seek to want to keep
making better models while not being
attached to our models just saying they
are relatively better than other models
and inadequate and we're pretty sure a
thousand years from now we'll have much
much better models and then a thousand
years from then again right so religion
I've been reading the founding fathers
of this country letters to each other a
lot lately as I've been thinking about
public education and the need for just
an almost mind-blowing an increase in
what we would call public education and
one of the things they spoke to again
again we can think this is an antiquated
idea of a bunch of like old white dudes
in a time where science had in advance
enough and I really think that that is a
mistaken assessment they talked about
the need for a religious education as
being as critical as a education in the
sciences and technology and trades and
etc and some of them said things like I
actually don't care if they're studying
Confucius or Rumi or you know whatever
it's that there needs to be a
transcendental operator there needs to
be that whatever our current model is we
need to be able to have at least some
frames for an intuitive connection to
something that is beyond the limit of
those frames and so this is where I
would say that you know utilitarian
ethics is necessary but not sufficient
virtue ethics also serves a role because
in utilitarian ethics first if I take
negative utilitarianism I want to
minimize suffering then obviously the
best way to do that is to just kill the
universe and I'll have the least area
under the curve of suffering into the
future we can see that every one of the
utilitarian series if hypotheses if I do
a reductio ad absurdum I can see that it
doesn't actually further and this is
again one of these partial
considerations of something more complex
than the model can hold and so in
utilitarian calculus I have to assume
higher degree of epistemic certainty
than I usually have when actually making
choice right because often time
I'm making a choice in not only the
complex domain but the anthro complex
domain the domain of humans interacting
with lots of humans interacting with
biological systems interacting with
technological systems and so what I'll
end up doing is say ok the things that
matter are these things and the effect
of this action is going to be this and
so I'm willing to have the ends justify
the means and I'll sacrifice some harm
here for some greater good here but so
often I cannot actually say that that
will be the greater good that in terms
of the effect of the action that the
harm will be limited in that way that
the benefits will be that because the
unknown unknown set is so large now I'm
not doing a god of the gaps argument I'm
saying simply we can't predict the
weather 10 days out and so one of the
place where people start to look at
virtue ethics is ok be where I don't
have the epistemic certainty to just run
a utilitarian calculus on a finite set
of metrics is there something that
creates more integrity in the moment
where then the next moment unfolds from
greater integrity and we can say that
the way that people think about both
utilitarian and virtue ethics are like
they're not even using deep enough
cognitive tools and you know so we can
that this is where I do think that the
metaphysics is you know a deepening of
the cognitive tools that are being used
it's very interesting so I think you
know religions were obviously like there
were philosophers who were wise people
who were having deep experiences and
noticing humanity and paying attention
to earlier philosophers that had
genetically identical brains to what we
have today and who were sharing wise
things and then there was the capture of
that by political forces that distorted
it for up purposes and it's both
and there's heaps of up Dhamma
relevant stuff and there's actually
keeps of really deep insightful things
and I would neither want to have to keep
the bathwater nor throw the baby out nor
be bound to the previous babies as the
best baby we can get right so I think
that when the founding fathers are
saying there's a need for something like
a religious process is when people think
about heaven and hell and some Almighty
God judging or they think about
reincarnation
or something like that if they're not
yet at the kind of level of moral
development that can transcend
narcissism and care about the subjective
experience of others for no rationalize
benefit to themselves then thinking
about reward and Punishment for
themselves in an afterlife is a nice way
to smuggle in infinity right it's a nice
way to at least get them to for their
own self benefit think about things that
in the rational calculus right now they
can't see how serves their own self
benefit but there's something in a
transcendental operator of what is more
meaningful to me than my own life and do
I have a sense of life with a capital L
like all of life all of experience that
is more than just my experience and
we're beyond choice making calculus I
have a yeah I have some unfuck with the
bull virtues and ethical senses of
course the religions are not adequate
and of course they have heaps of
nonsense but I think the need for a
transcendental operator is clear there
than the question of what do trends and
mental operators that are not irrational
gibberish that is also bound to bad
concepts what does that look like moving
forward and I think we could look at
this in a way that would both clarify
and reify previous religions into
healthier versions of themselves as well
as offer a post religion post science
philosophy that includes and transcends
the meaningful parts of both pre-modern
and modern Bert Weinstein had a quote he
said something along the lines of you
know I I think of religions is not
literally true but metaphorically true
in the sense of if I believe them my
life will be better basically that they
do not literally happen but there are
some truths that I is indescribable
is that a we with that crude that crude
but very simplified statement do you do
you resonate with her as you see it's
like differently there's not not the
right way to think about I think we have
to be very careful here because you know
we can make the Bertrand Russell
argument very quickly against them that
believing nonsense because it seems to
make you happier
or have some pragmatic or utilitarian
purpose is not a reasonable thing to do
because if it's not true it'll end up
actually reality up in some ways
as you're operating on a not true map of
the real territory but affecting the
territory in the process so I don't
think it's that we want to indulge
things that are untrue because it seems
comforting I think it's that we
recognize that the philosophy of science
and utilitarianism do not give us access
to all of the true and so then we have
to say what is an expanded epistemology
for the domain of the real not just the
domain of the repeatable and the
objective so in the same way that and
you know then people very quickly say
well intuition is just pretty obviously
corrupted by desires and fears and love
Oh rationality is obviously corrupted
yet you have to Train rationality this
is actually what formal logic and
mathematics and critical thinking and
you know all of the domains of learning
how to think properly are
because we've all heard people make
rational arguments that are just utterly
gibberish because of lots of rational
mistakes logical fallacies whatever you
have to train intuition as well and if
you look at what narcissists and
sociopaths will do in gaslighting that
will end up other people up
gaslighting is usually making a rational
argument that someone feels compelled to
believe that gets them to override their
intuition and so someone's like man
something feels wrong with this
person feels like they're not being
honest with me or whatever and then the
person makes the argument well enough
and they're like okay well I want to
give the benefit of the doubt I don't
want whatever it is and so and then they
realize that they were actually being
played by someone that was better at
playing the game than they were there is
a way that we can use a rationalist
orientation to Gaslight ourselves to
override other valid methods of knowing
because we don't know how to do the
derivation and we want to be able to do
the derivation we want an electoral
congruence now the argument I'm making
can then easily be weaponized
to smuggle in gibberish but then
recognizing that someone can smuggle in
gibberish can also have them reject the
truth to the argument and so there is no
way forward other than a truly earnest
one because you can weaponize the
arguments on either sides I want to
return back to or delve into
transitionary systems and some my sort
of these are all related but so many
questions there are how do we
internalize externalities what does it
look like to eliminate trade-offs how do
we you know what technology can help us
build you know real-time balance sheet
of the Commons are there examples of
game be sort of institutional you know
examples that exist today or even
directions but you're directionally
gimpy ok I was talking about
weaponization a moment ago and also
virtue signaling earlier there's a lot
of stuff that calls itself conscious
capitalism or impact investment or
sustainable business or whatever that
you know is basically advertising
something can be like that is never
going to violate a fiduciary
responsibility to do profit maximization
or actually have any real consequential
'ti on its own advantage and it's just
basically taking a part of its marketing
or talent retention budget to you know
appeal to Millennials or to regulatory
bodies or whatever it is so are there
are there things that companies can do
are the things within market dynamics
that would be good for the world
totally but are there a lot of things
that are advertising that they are that
that aren't actually that also totally
so the discernment of anyone who's
thinking about getting involved either
as an investor or an employee or
whatever like there has to be fairly
close thoughtful discernment I was just
talking to a guy the other day who had
been at one of the top position at one
of the major banks and is now in one of
the South American countries that has
part of the Amazon and is working on a
approach to protect the Amazon and use
market-based solutions to make the
Amazon worth more alive than dead so
that's
you know market dynamics will keep it
alive and well that would be a nice
thing to do the particular strategy was
like terrible everywhere because you
know involved things like well the
indigenous people who depend upon the
environment there and protected if we
can support their rights in some way
that will end up supporting me
Amazon therefore we're making this
Fairtrade artisan crafts business thing
that the indigenous people will produce
their stuff and we'll sell the out
of it and be able to provide you know
economic well benefit to those acres
associate and like okay
so right now the indigenous people do
like a thousand things and making just
the amount of crafts that they need to
live is one of the things that they do
now as soon as you start providing
economic advantage and survival to doing
that one thing and not all the other
things and you just convert the
indigenous people to a Chinese sweatshop
where now everyone just does the artisan
crafts all of the time and they try and
bring in more people to do that thing
and like if you want to know how to
destroy an indigenous culture figure out
how to monetize one part of it heavily
independent of any kind of value on the
other things and this is where we talked
about values that are extractable and
exchangeable compared to things that are
valuable but aren't extractable and
exchangeable so it's very important to
really think through those strategies
and say is this going to be an the right
way to do it and when you start to
monetize one of the parts that is
extractable and exchangeable and not all
the other ones and you confer a lot of
advantage in doing that then obviously
you start to bias the entire culture
towards doing that particular thing and
you lose key other parts so it's not
just as someone has to say will this be
net positive and in a false dichotomy
that says well if we don't do that
they're all burned and slaughtered but
you have to say are there better
strategies so this action important
topic the rationalist community has this
you know ongoing debate in certain areas
on mistake theory versus conflict theory
Michael Vassar turned me on to this
thinking and there's this question of do
we do the dumb things because of a
mistake theory meaning there was just no
way we could have predicted that
externality which is too hard oh
or conflict theory which was we didn't
really try to predict the externality or
the problem or we even wanted to cause
it and while both are true one of the
things we have to factor is that mistake
Theory ends up being a source of
plausible deniability for conflict
theory so there are heaps of places
where we are actually doing something
that we know is going to cause harm and
whether it's PNG not fixing their things
or the deep shore thing you know not
fixing its oil rigging or the whatever
like we know something's gonna cause a
problem or we don't know it is but we
didn't really try to do good safety
analysis either because that would have
been expensive and then after the fact
we say there's no way we could have
known so we'll end up using complexity
and mistake theory as a source of
plausible deniability for being assholes
and so we have to be very careful not to
do that so oftentimes we'll look at a
strategy and make a very false
comparison and say well either we do
this or don't do this and if we don't do
it great tragedy
so we strawman all the other
possibilities to then support why ours
is utilitarian the best as opposed to
really try to think are there better
strategies and probably there are much
better strategies but maybe they take
more thinking and don't provide as much
immediate capitalisation for me so again
there is no answer other than really
deep earnestness of what you actually
care about okay so the reason I brought
that up is to say are there things that
are advertised as transitional or game B
or vectoring in the right direction that
really should not be considered that yes
so one has to really do the thoughtful
sense making if they actually care about
the direction things are really oriented
you know attention economy what could be
done there I haven't done a thorough
enough analysis to be able to make false
suggestions and say that when we run the
run all of the try and as best we can
second third order effects that this
would be the right thing to do but we
can at least propose in the direction of
I think Jaron Lane ears argument around
that one of the problems of the Facebook
YouTube kind of it
attention capture world one of the
sources of the kind of Tristan Harris
problems is that the internet was
developing in a way where we both wanted
information to be free and we wanted
entrepreneurs to be able to make a lot
of money and so the answer was the
advertising model and the advertising
model fuck's up the fiduciary
relationship orientation where facebook
the user is not the customer the
advertiser is the customer so their
actual orientation is to optimize the
utility for their customer and that's
their fiduciary responsibility but the
person that is using it that is sharing
all of their personal information and
their life and their the the degree of
personal information they share with
everybody over messenger and whatever is
then all being weaponized against them
for you know the advertisement whereas
if there was a pay for service model it
would be closer to a market like in
terms of Adam Smith Theory make a
product or service and deliver it to a
customer at a value that they want to
pay for and deliver better product to
them as soon as your intermediating it
through deliver it to somebody else's
customer where it's it's not clear you
know how the market dynamics work I
think you've actually broken what should
be the intelligence of a market and
you've made something that's
fundamentally has to be evil and so if
people had to pay a monthly fee to
access YouTube or to access Facebook and
there was no incentive for them to
maximize time on site there was only an
incentive for them to actually have the
customers feel more fulfilled with their
experience so rather than drive
addiction through hyper normal stimuli
they were trying to drive the actual
quality of engagement I think that would
make a huge difference now exactly how
do we do that how do we transition the
existing ones how to make the new ones I
don't know a lot of like we would have
to do the kind of design work and to do
the design work we'd have to identify
the problem space well enough to do the
design work but just an example of kind
of thinking through changes that could
be made that still allow businesses to
operate but that don't allow all of the
business models because some of the
business models are really enough
they should just be regulated against if
you had asked me
in a message earlier what do I think the
role of BC's could be I want to see
financial institutions that are created
that invest only in technologies that
are needed to solve the fundamental
problems of the world including the Rd
that's needed in the domain of atoms and
energy not just bits long term and large
scale I think that money on money
dynamics so I've got money I'm gonna
loan it to you I want to 10x my money
because a bunch of them are gonna fail
or a hundred extra thousand X so I want
the fastest path to liquidity events I
think that is one of the things that has
most the entire intelligence of
the market I think that when you look at
a you know kind of classical market
financial services were and should be
less than 5% of the total market and now
they're you know 35 40 percent I think
that is completely predated and
extractive and not creative and so you
know you look at 1971 Nixon getting us
off the gold standard and off of the
Bretton Woods convention and the
beginning of all the financial
deregulation that occurred and you see
that the government and the market
stopped innovating in the way that they
had before we stopped having like
Apollo projects and then Hatton projects
we started having stupidly bloated f-35s
it cost 1.5 trillion dollars that we
didn't need in the first place and so I
think that like China right now because
and you can see why China has an emperor
that doesn't have term limits and that
basically got rid of the multipolar
traps and created a you know kind of
top-down control system so they can
actually coordinate well there's all the
 up things of dictatorship that
there's also if you a democracy or
Republic is only better than a
dictatorship if you have a really
educated population that can overcome
the cemetry the asymmetry of supply-side
orientation which we don't have in which
case this thing ends up having so many
coordination failures and broken
sense-making
that really you have the simulation of a
democracy that is in all of our key
controlling representatives on both
sides so you can't even have
accountability to the the dictators
and the short term term limits were no
we'll invest in long-term stuff so
China's getting to build high-speed rail
all over the country right and
not just their country all over Africa
and all over you know other parts of
Southeast Asian into Europe and getting
to do like fundamental R&D and
infrastructure development we haven't
done good new infrastructure in forever
and or the kind of R&D so like where the
 is the thorium research right like
the the government should have a it's
also important understand when you look
at post-world War two a lot of the
things that we attribute to market were
actually because of government spending
and the market wouldn't have done it
otherwise a lot of like the early
contracts to HP and IBM were government
contracts that put the money and to be
able to do deep R&D that created stuff
that than the private sector benefited
for so government's actually investing a
percentage of federal budget in R&D and
then in infrastructure is important and
so neither is the public sector as the
government doing that nor does the
private sector have twenty five year
return horizons to be able to do stuff
like thorium and trains and whatever so
short-term money on money basically
broke everything right in the financial
sector short-term money on money both
the directors and officers of a
corporation being held on quarterly
timeline so of course they're not going
to like do something that will give
payoff at the long time in the future
and the representatives having four year
time term lines like Notre Dom took 200
years to build thorium is going to take
a while to research trains take a while
to build so I would like to see venture
funds and growth equity funds that say
we do not need another snap chat
right we do not need more kind of like
addictive technology even though
Metcalfe's law is awesome and will like
make a lot of money doing it like not
only do we not need it it's net bad for
the world so we're not going to fund
that we are only going to fund the
things that the world really needs that
are not currently on track to happen
that solve major problems and we're
gonna do stuff not just in the domain of
bits because of course bits
I have no cost of goods in the domain a
bit so I can have exponential returns
that I don't because of all margin that
I don't have in the domain of atoms
we're actually have cost of goods but
the virtual is based upon the value of
the physical and so if the virtual
starts debase the physical
because it's easier for capital to flow
there now again any system that emerges
out of a foundational system and then he
bases its own substrate itself
terminating the virtual needs to enrich
the physical not debase it so a healthy
social media would be one that made
people's friendships and physical life
better but if I'm with my friends and
I'm checking Facebook or I'm so
socially awkward because I grew up on it
that I don't have real friends then the
virtual is debasing the physical that is
net bad for the world if financially the
virtual debases investment in the
physical that isn't that bad for the
world so I want to see people who are
investing in long-term R&D of real stuff
that needs to happen specifically in the
domain of atoms and energy and who have
a longer term you know event horizon
associated with that and it it still
market right it I'm still nothing about
nonprofit I'm still talking about being
able to make returns and so start to
think about dynasties again in your
family name and being able to you know
optimize for that because otherwise the
time horizons are too short so I do
think that wanting to figure like
waiting to see because building is
hard and so VCS have this position of
let other people build see the
stuff that looks like it could succeed
and then try to capture as much
ownership of it as possible the board
seats etc to be able to create a
artificial distorted bubble on its
valuation to exit that's just
evil right like it's bad for everybody
other than them in terms of bad for the
world I would like to see people who
have capital saying how do we deploy
this capital which is concentrated
choice-making ability to actually make
good choices right when we're talking
about choice making power needs choice
making basis money is concentrated
choice making so what are we doing it in
service to and for the most part anyone
who has asymmetric power is incentive to
and capable to use their asymmetric
power to maintain and increase the
asymmetry of their power that will
always that's eboard that's the
up thing we need to say how do I use my
asymmetric power to actually increase
the baseline of quality of life for
everyone to actually use my asymmetric
power to debase the asymmetry of it
by rising everybody up not by you know
lowering Notley tall poppy syndrome
communism but but nobody's oriented to
do that but there's it would be totally
possible to be a mention of entry
capitalist who said I am looking to use
market dynamics and also use
philanthropic dynamics where that makes
sense or government type dynamics for
that makes sense to actually do things
that will be net positive to the world
not where I can tell the story that it
wasn't that positive as a type of
marketing and plausible deniability for
something that was clearly just net
positive for me so yes I would like to
see financial services totally
restructured and I would like to see
anyone with integrity actually work on
their own internal congruence to say
there are deals I'm willing to turn down
there are places where I'm not going to
try and push for a liquidity event or
 take the company away from the
founders if the founders actually care
about something there are places where
there's a good idea but the founders are
evil and I don't want to support that
thing like what what things am I willing
to say no to and what things are worth
saying yes to and then actually find and
invest in support in those things and
with the time horizons that are needed
to do the type of stuff that's needed
yeah and a couple of things related to
this one is you've written about our
talked about how you want to see us move
beyond private property or things like
private property because so sort of
projecting sort of implies that we are
all sort of discrete individuals who you
know are not connected or don't you know
have intersecting you know interweaving
value creation or in ways I would align
us better some theory you can unpack
that I'm curious if you think Wikipedia
or crypto currencies are game B
institutions and then maybe in closing
as race that is how do we transition
from you know from game a to game
KB or some of these things you talked
about so when I've said that there are
intrinsic perverse incentives that are
inseparable from private property well
that is true that doesn't mean that I
think we're anywhere close to being able
to approach what it would take to change
it in the same way that I was mentioning
earlier that there's problems with
having a single fungible currency single
value metric that Orient's towards
measurable extractable exchangeable
wealth over other things and
that Orient's towards optionality of a
real value and whatever so there's some
very deep restructuring that is beyond
the way we currently think of currency
to mediate exchange and the ownership of
the things in the first place private
property this is not something that I
see happening in this generation or the
next generation so we could have a
conversation to talk about what those
post capitalist systems look like but
they don't lock away anything I've ever
seen
proposed so far that's the important
thing to know so for the next few
generations while those things are being
developed it's actually making a liberal
democracy better which largely looks
like reversing the predatory decay that
has happened and having markets more
like markets and having representative
democracy more like it was intended to
be that is what we should be focused on
so when I was talking about longer-term
event horizons and more earnest
assessment in financial services that's
still game a in the way you know it is
not a fundamentally axiomatically
restructured system but it's the
healthiest expression and it's the
version of game aid that is the story
that we're sold right the story that
we're sold is that markets drive
innovation and the government's govern
well and that representatives represent
the people and that courts create
justice and that universities teach
people how to think well and that news
teaches you what's going on in the state
of the world and the doctors make you
healthy and the police keep you safe
like that
that's the gaming story it's just
 not trip it doesn't mean it's
not true anywhere of course it has
elements of truth but we can also see
how inside of those institutions people
figured out how to degrade the
institutions in ways that were
beneficial to themselves the thing
for the whole so long as they could hide
that right and this is you know when you
look at Baudrillard model of Simula
simulated decay which Michael Vassar
also turned me on to it kind of explains
how this phenomena happens so we need to
reverse that kind of institutional decay
and reboot something like better
versions of these institutions to be
directionally right while we are working
on fundamentally new things from an
axiom level
and in a previous episode Jordan I'm
curious why you're using the game beam
movement more broadly Jordan Hall said
when it game he becomes a movement it
will have failed I think it's being
somewhat somewhat provocative there but
it was sort of how do you sort of think
about these concepts that you've been
talking about you all talked about from
years start to gain a lot of momentum in
community around them and what's your
sort of advice for that community where
you know failure modes to watch out for
how do you think about sort of this
burgeoning game be community and
movement I think that most dominant
narratives politically right politically
left whatever apolitical I think they're
they were also influenced by the
narrative warfare landscape of what do I
need to do to get people to believe this
to advance our agenda including where
it's not fully true or where it's more
provocative or where it's straw man's
the other side or where it appeals to
people's unmet needs and emotions in
ways we know aren't fully true or
whatever I don't think that there are
any dominant narratives on anything that
are not mostly narrative warfare either
side of climate change either side of
capitalism vaccines whatever like I
think most of the topics end up having
people in Institute's that have
something to gain from lots of people
believe in a certain thing figuring out
how to tell compelling versions of that
they get people to defect on their own
sense making to be part of an in-group
arrayed against and held together
against an out-group and so the kind of
good new onst thinking that would be
needed to figure out complex things i
see almost nowhere and I think what
Jordan was referencing is game B which
could very easily be another version of
that so who it used to be the Pope and
then it was you know university
professor or whatever who's the
authority that knows what's true and has
the monopoly on legitimate Authority who
can tell everyone else is less smart and
informed than them what true and right
is to be able to control them basically
the moment that legitimate Authority
seems to exist there's an orientation of
anyone who wants power to capture it and
so then of course the sides that want
whoever captures it once they continue
to double down on it being legitimate
Authority and whoever wants to fight who
capped
it wants to be based at its fake news or
it's a false narrative or whatever right
I think that the idea of most people not
doing in-depth sense making themselves
and looking to see which of the Talking
Heads they align with and which of the
groups they can be part of the in-group
on and defect on their own personal
responsibility and sense making to be
part of groupthink is the failure mode
of game a and so it doesn't matter what
narrative that's not the thing we want
to do if there isn't a plant the flag
you get everyone to rally as a war
around the new flag there's a how do we
get people to actually make sense of the
world better in a more thoughtful
earnest nuanced way how do we get them
to check their own biases better how do
we get them to not be susceptible to
groupthink better how do we get them to
have more courage to express what they
actually feel and believe in the
presence of a group that is trying to
groupthink everyone into it and then how
do we get higher qualities of civil
conversation where the people are
oriented to dialectic rather than war
and defection I think what we're seeking
is how do we have collective
intelligence that is really collective
intelligence rather than kind of dumb
mobs captured by leaders that want to be
leaders I want to be sensitive to time
so I want to close on on a last sort of
couple questions that like previous ones
are gonna seem very different maybe
they're related feel free to take
whichever ones appeal to you so one is
that I just read this book the sovereign
individual recently I have you read in
sovereign individual the basic thesis is
that we're going to transform through
the 90s and we've says we're gonna
transform from citizens of governments
you know we exist to serve government's
to customers of governments where
governments exist to serve us there any
markets for governments the world is
going to look you know technology up
until now as increasingly central you
know become more and more centralized
it's now going to become more and more
decentralized might look the world might
look like the decentralized city-states
you know and people self segmenting I'm
curious what you it you know I have you
have a sort of if anything comes to mind
for you when you think about that future
another thing you've said in a different
episode is you are more excited about
sort of the enlightenment of the
feminine and if
I'm curious if you could talk a little
about that and then lastly and this is
in closing you said you've been reading
a lot about you know education or
thinking a lot about what the future
applications and maybe in closing any
any any thoughts thoughts about that as
relates to what we've been discussing it
comes to mind I yeah I mean I'll just
say as a general statement
I think central versus decentralizing
other one of these kind of
oversimplified narrative warfare things
where of course there are things that
are better when they're centralized and
there are things that are better when
they're decentralized and the best
systems involve the relationship between
those things and in a nuanced and
contextual way because I can show
failure modes of D central systems like
basically why China is doing better at
infrastructure than the u.s. right now
actually has to do it's more centralized
control that doesn't create multipolar
traps but then you also see more
corruption and control and you know less
of certain kinds of innovation
incentives with centralization so I
think the conversation needs to go
deeper than it usually does there
similarly if you apply gibberish market
theory to government's and say we'll
become customers and the company serves
the customer but we know that the
company can actually manufacture demand
and capture the customer when it has
asymmetric capacities like so basically
I would say that in the same thing with
masculine-feminine I think most of like
we can see the left having a feminism
that is moved to kind of LGBTQ trans
ideology and in a racial ideology that
is kind of represented in
intersectionality and then we can see a
very strong backlash to that and alt
right kind of thinking and so there's
like massively charged stuff here and I
think the general the underlying ideas
of what is true and what is good or we
need to go much deeper on I think the
Kahn I think the conversation is usually
framed in a way where I'm rejecting the
frames and would want to reconstruct the
frames so that's why
longer conversations totally perfect
that's it perfect note to close on
dinner thank you so much for coming up
the podcast for listeners who want to go
deeper in Daniels work they can check
out is it civilization emerging calm
yeah anything else you want to point
them to there is more on the media page
in terms of podcast so that's probably
the place to start yeah and and then you
go down the YouTube rabbit hole if you
found this interesting you you won't be
disappointed then you let you go thank
you so much for coming up podcast and
talk to you soon
thanks for having me who's good if
you're an early stage entrepreneur
we'd love to hear from you please hit us
up at village global dot BC slash
network catalyst
[Music]