hello this is Eric and I wanted to alert
you to a small experiment I think we're
gonna be running in the portal for a
while now we've realized that many
episodes have needs at the beginning of
the show in the first place there's a
need for some housekeeping and in the
second there's often a need to give some
context and a short introduction to the
episode so that our listeners can better
understand why we're running it well
what we thought about is that maybe we
should stop doing that haphazardly if
instead we just decided that there would
be two segments one dedicated to
housekeeping sometimes light sometimes
more extensive and in the second we had
a segment that actually gives the
context and an introduction to the
guests or whatever the point of a
monologue might be I don't guarantee
that it's gonna work and we reserve the
right to go back but we are trying to
listen to you and trying to figure out
what is doable
the second item of business surrounds
the set of rather exotic circumstances
under which this week's podcast is being
released as of this recording I am now
self isolating at home under essentially
lock down like measures as a quarantine
mentality sweeps across our planet one
way of viewing this is to see it as a
giant overreaction now I don't hold this
view and I don't wish to promote it but
the idea is that we have learned to live
with influenza and this virus is similar
in some ways to the familiar flu I'm
sure you've heard this from others I
don't want to go into it and develop the
idea here a second way of seeing this is
it as an incredibly rapid societal
change in deeply grooved behavior
patterns unfolding over perhaps the last
seven to fourteen days in earnest from
this angle it is astonishingly agenting
as measured at least by the speed of
change and thus perhaps it could signal
the beginning of the end of the nearly
50-year dream state we have discussed on
this program that said in some time in
the early to mid-1970s and signaled the
end of the previous post-war growth
regime yet a different way of looking at
the reaction of the pandemic is to view
it as a slow and inadequate response to
a very serious situation to this way of
thinking the most agenda kamon us were
worried about the situation since at
least January 2020 and they were simply
getting no traction in talking through
why they were alarmed when attempting to
convince the rest
us of course all three positions have
some merit but the first seems misguided
to me and I think the last has the most
substance many people have asked me how
I'm sense making in the current
environment the answer is rather
disappointing my answer is that I
unfortunately appear to be among the
most confused of my colleagues almost
everywhere I turned people around me are
nearly certain of things that contradict
what various others of my colleagues
know to be true unsurprisingly most of
these colleagues have settled on various
strategies on which they place great
emphasis so then the problem is
definitely ventilators unless it is
really Rea gence and testing instead or
perhaps nothing else matters like
behavior modification that is if
vaccines and treatments aren't the clear
way to go I want to share with you what
I get from listening in on such private
conversations with some of the most
respected names in health science and
technology I'm sorry to say what I get
is confusion I am sorry to report that
after many phone calls and having read a
fair amount I have not heard a truly
coherent comprehensive narrative emerge
around this virus no one really trusts
China to report it in itself and we
don't yet have enough time with the
disease outside of China to speak about
it sufficiently authoritative Lee so
what am I doing personally well the
first thing that I'm at least trying to
do is to stop listening to the very
sources that fed me bad information
initially telling me not even to worry
when I had the maximal amount of time to
prepare and to be agenting that kind of
reporting is what I've elsewhere
referred to as pure journey genic harm
now you can say that democracy dies in
darkness with a fancy tagline but it
also dies in civil society when you are
the major news site and you write
meaningless fluff pieces on what are
ultimately life-and-death issues
inducing people to undertake exactly the
wrong course of action unfortunately
that means that I've more or less been
forced to give up on a lot of mainstream
news like The Washington Post or The
Daily Beast after they both
condescendingly warned us against
reacting to the threat of the virus
similarly I am trying not to listen to
any messaging specifically designed to
calm me down or to distress me now why
is that well first of all what stresses
me out most and I'm just being honest
here is some questionable expert trotted
out with a PhD whose
response to a deadly virus is to lecture
us on psychology I mean if I'm on
lockdown
I want to be talking about viruses about
morbidity and mortality I want to see
grizzly autopsy photos the ones that the
experts have not because I'm a cop but
because they help explain what we are up
against and why the government is
reacting so strongly information data
risk assessment that's what calms me
down and I suspect it works the same way
with a lot of you as well
I want information and guidance the same
way the experts do how bad is this I
mean people in the know right now are
talking about the potential for multi
month quarantines much longer than the
three-week ones that are currently being
discussed in public as well as about
much higher respiratory burdens on the
young who recover contrast that with the
talk of quote full recovery close boat
that I am more commonly hearing in
mainstream discussions I'm sorry but in
terms of morbidity I don't think
recovery from this illness is anywhere
near as full or as free as is being
discussed that wouldn't make sense to me
in fact a friend of mine listening to me
suggested looking up ground-glass
opacities and I thanked her for that
search string I think you might find it
interesting as well but instead of an
expectation of full information we are
too often getting the opposite to put it
bluntly we seem to always be managed
rather than informed to the best of my
understanding we are all in the famous
metaphoric crowded theater and the
powers that be have been cutting costs
for decades by making our exits smaller
and smaller so their current focus is in
getting as few people to panic as
possible when the correct thing to do is
to ask why our leaders didn't push for
larger exits before the crisis now in
the metaphor those larger exits would be
deeper reserves and larger emergency
cushions of ventilators hospital beds
reagents for testing all the things that
a successful civil society would
naturally want deeply stocked in just
such an emergency so we have a bit of a
conflict the right thing to do in an
ideal world would be to level with
nations that had been all the while
properly prepared for actual
society-wide adversity but to begin that
now would mean admitting to universal
institutional failure in the previous
era to adequately prepare for any event
of this kind thus what I'm planning to
do on a going-forward basis is twofold
first I've stopped listening to any
exoteric
mainstream messaging meant to manage
panic just as I've started slogging
through esoteric medical and scientific
communication but the second part of
this is no less important I have started
to privilege the information implicitly
contained in ostensibly self-destructive
economic behavior coming from
governments far too under the control of
elite economic interest to begin with
that is I don't think anyone in
positions of asymmetric information and
power would adopt these measures unless
the virus was very severe indeed because
the financial risks are themselves
catastrophic thus as far as the
government is concerned I am looking at
the severity of their actions and
turning down the audio of their words if
the two are conflicting I am taking more
information from what we are putting at
risk and I am from descriptions that are
being shared with the public so to sum
up please take this seriously we don't
yet have a way to filter the information
misinformation and disinformation with
which we are all being bombarded what
can you do well the best we may be able
to do is to turn off the audio meant to
calm the masses and try to start reading
the technical literature if we can and
lastly watch for the sign that powerful
interests are willing to put the very
markets which enrich them at risk to
fight this that is a bit
counterintuitive but in the end the
revealed preference and the content of
that information may be the best that we
have at this point
[Music]
I would like to say some brief words of
introduction to today's episode with
James O'Keefe of Project Veritas first
of all I respect James for being willing
to come on the portal as our beginning
interaction on Twitter was not
auspicious as I recall I wrote I hate
this shitty hidden-camera gotcha crap
and perhaps unsurprisingly he took
immediate exception
I found his response interesting and
invited him on the program to explain
himself and to my surprise he accepted
despite my unconcealed hostility I
admired that willingness to face a
critic and I've endeavoured ever since
with James to be a constructive one on a
preliminary setup call I promised him
that there would be no gotchas and he
actually said that that was unnecessary
I told him that our politics were likely
opposite and then I wouldn't pull any
punches nor would I pretend that I was
without admiration for some of what he
does such as in the case of his pushing
at the famous Amy Rohrbach hot mic video
this release revealed that higher-ups at
ABC News may have been deliberately
holding back the Epstein story for years
in that video the subject matter was of
utmost public interest and the reporter
caught on the hot mic was made to look
even more heroic in having gotten the
story early I did tell James however
that I didn't like his choice of targets
and that his methods made me very
negatively disposed to the entire
project Veritas endeavor he simply asked
me to keep an open mind as he felt that
he had answers to all of my concerns as
it happens however I believe that we had
a conversation that would have been very
difficult to predict by either one of us
had we not simply gone ahead and tried
to better understand each other the
decision to invite James O'Keefe onto
the program was not taken lightly why is
this well it's because of an idiotic
game many in the regular media play
which we might call contamination in
this fool's game if you so much as
interview with James O'Keefe you are
marked by extension as damaged goods now
this fools absolutely no one who's
paying attention claiming that
everything project Veritas does is
unreliable when often they are merely
sharing unedited continuous footage that
they have been sent is not a convincing
argument for those in the know in
essence James O'Keefe is after all a
creation of our mainstream media their
decision not to aggressively pursue many
stories of great importance
has created opportunity and if you
believe that James O'Keefe has
absolutely nothing to contribute I do
hope you more than anyone will enjoy
this interview with him hello you found
the portal I'm your host Eric Weinstein
and I get to sit down today with James
O'Keefe the head of Project Veritas
James welcome great to be here I'm
really glad to have you now you know of
course that by just having you in that
chair some percentage of the world is
gonna go bananas and say oh my god Eric
has jumped the shark he's beyond the
pale he's gone too far he's platform
somebody should never be platform and
this is going through my head even as we
speak
and part of the reason I bring that up
is that I want to fight that which is
that's ridiculous you're an important
figure we need to talk to you we need to
understand you and I also want to just
begin by commending you because you got
to be here in part by your answering a
tweet of mine by just being open about
the fact that I didn't feel like I was
being fair to you and maybe I would just
begin by reminding our viewers and
listeners how this began okay shall we
do that
sure okay so you project Veritas had
just caught David Wright of ABC News on
undercover camera saying some things
that he probably shouldn't have yeah and
he was suspended by ABC as a result of
project Veritas his actions and you
tweeted that out and I responded why is
this person suspended because he's a
socialist question mark because he
thinks Trump is a dick question mark
because he discusses the dinosaur
broadcast broadcast channels because he
is thinking about institutional bias
dunno and then I say I also have to
admit I hate this shitty hidden camera
gotcha crap and your response was you
hate this shitty hidden camera gotcha
crap right was in a public space
speaking freely amongst his peers in
newspapers that's called reporting
you're prejudiced against the method
doesn't make any sense
you prefer I report this all caps
without the audio quotation anonymously
sourced closed
quote and I thought that was a really
interesting comeback so if I just can
recall I said thank you James for this
question let me answer this as honestly
as I can we have a William Tell problem
aim too high and you miss the story aim
too low and you kill the impact due to
the uncomfortable methods in my opinion
you are aiming too low and I am aiming
too high and I think that that really
comes down to the the the interesting
issue that we have for listeners and
viewers today which is I think you and I
are agreed on a lot about the problems
in the current system mm-hm and we're
radically divided by the methods and I'm
very concerned about the damage Project
Veritas is doing and I'm also interested
in the progress project Veritas is
making and most people want to have a
one or the other perspective right and I
have a superposition of the two issues
so I thought that place to start
that'd be a great place to start do you
want to talk a little bit about how you
saw the interaction in any background
that you want to bring to the
conversation it's a lot to unpack here
there's a million things to directions
to go into but I thought that was a very
interesting conversation and credit to
you because after having the
conversation you actually invited me to
talk to you and to call you and that in
kudos to you because most of the people
I deal with don't even think that I'm
human they kind of want to dehumanize me
they don't want to engage me in a
conversation so thank you I appreciate
that I think that a lot of people it's
ostensibly
about the methods of what we do but in
reality it's about the findings it's
it's actually not about the methods it's
it's used as a kind of an excuse and in
that particular tweet Twitter thread you
were referring to this is a common theme
it's it's the ethics of recording
someone like David Wright was in a bar
in New Hampshire and do we want to live
in a world where our likeness can be
broadcasted and transmitted instantly to
everybody
like people don't want to live in that
world my argument is going to be and has
been my whole life that reporters are
there there's a routine nature in
journalistic methods to
both utilize deception and to broadcast
things to the world that are not as
accurate as a camera would be there's a
routine nature first of all of using
pretense journalistic deception is
standard in the industry reporters make
you think that they're your friend and
then they betray your confidence they
appeal to your sense of loneliness or
vanity and then they betray you they
pull the rug underneath you that's
that's what I meant when I said that's
the paragon of investigative reporting
and then when it comes to the actual
medium itself which we will talk about
here today the camera is a more accurate
version of the events in question so
surely not just from a legal perspective
but from a moral one we would consider a
consider it unreasonable to place
ethical restrictions on recording
someone when we don't place restrictions
on someone writing what they set down
with a pencil and paper and shouting it
from the rooftops five minutes later
because the recording does the
individual more justice than second-hand
hearsay you know words or different
mediums so that was the point I was
making to you and and I think you had
avert we had a very honest
back-and-forth there and I appreciate it
well thanks very much and it's a great
you know I think your your tagline is
something like be brave be brave do
something be brave do something and I
think that it's brave to come into
somebody's studio when you know that
they've got a problem with you from the
get-go so kudos to you sir I think that
you and I are act so let me also just
try to be radically different than most
of these interviews I've told you that
there will be no gotchas and I'm gonna
stick to that because I don't I don't
like gotchas your perspective which I
thought was incredibly honest was that's
it's an interesting thing to say because
gotcha is in some sense what I James
O'Keefe do with project Veritas and so
what I said in response was it's an
interesting question whether or not the
gotcha problem that I see in the news
industry should be doubled where you you
got you back to the gotcha ears or you
should try to set an example of cut that
shit out right and
in part what I try to do which is I try
to go after institutions I try to not go
after individuals and what I wanted to
talk about in part is that because I see
you and I as in agreement that there is
a serious problem with the sense making
architecture that currently goes into
the name of journalism and it's not
clear what that architecture is actually
doing and I think it's clear it's it's
more and more Americans and others
increasingly are asking is this even
really what journalism was supposed to
be all about as we start to see the
mechanism fail because I'm an agreed
with you there's a serious problem I
don't think that when I say I'm really
disturbed by the methods that I'm part
of the thing that's trying to protect
the institutions which is I think what
you're usually getting from people who
think you're the devil mmm I think what
I'm really concerned about in part is is
that you are actually damaging the
enterprise that I'm interested in by
pursuing it and in some ways I sort of
view you as analogous to Donald Trump
okay and here's here would be the
argument again it's a loose analogy it's
not a tight one mm-hmm
we have a situation in which for example
no one is allowed to bring up all of the
problems with immigration within the
standard architecture of news in general
there's only one role for the
restriction estándares the role of
xenophobe which is preposterous it's
idiotic it's beyond belief
the way in which that weird meme has
perpetuated has been perpetuated for at
least thirty to forty years where
there's only one reason to oppose
immigration and that's because of a
moral failing of the self can only
happen by the news choosing not to
report all of the reasons one can be a
restriction list so as an example of the
comparison I would say Trump found a way
to talk about immigration and
restriction ISM openly in a way that
many Americans could respond to because
a lot of Americans actually want
immigration restricted on the other hand
he tinged it with stuff he played with
whether or not he was actually openly
racist to know that you can make the
argument they went right up to a line
and then he
people to complete thoughts in their own
head that he didn't actually say but he
got very close to some very ugly
sentiments at the barest minimum and in
part the method of bringing something
dangerous up in public tinged that
perspective with a kind of meanness or
unsavory 'no snit needed at all so the
vacuum was created by the median not
functioning as it should trump filled
the vacuum and he also brought this
extra little bit which was an unsavory
tinge to the subject in some sense I
would say I see you as doing real
journalism hard-hitting journalism and
that is to your credit and then it is
tinged with something which I see is
very disturbing which is kind of methods
that make us all uncomfortable and I
think you're quite correct to point out
that journalism it's is itself openly a
deceptive practice as practiced by the
institutions and I want to just say I
also find the journalists practice of
trying to be your best friend and then
stabbing you in the back disgusting okay
good no man there's a lot to a lot to
unpack there where do I begin let me
just address the the characterization
that I'm a gotcha person which came from
you it didn't I didn't say it fair
enough fair enough and I and I may want
to correct myself here because maybe
there's a universe of God I may have
said it in the tweet but I didn't mean
to say or no I understand so I think I
think we don't even quote people we we
let them be themselves we assimilate
with the people like at the bar and and
when you know we're letting people be
their natural selves sometimes people
don't have the courage to be themselves
in in public in the way that we record
people and a lot of these people in the
media that we've recorded like whether
it be Patrick Davis at CNN or this guy's
right at ABC they didn't have the
courage to say these things publicly and
I happen to agree with these people what
they said but when it comes to the
methods you have a choice to make
you can either from my perspective
deceive your audience or you can
for lack of a better word deceive the
person that you're interviewing such
that you can tell the truth to the
audience and and one is worse than the
other and you only have these two
choices and that's what that's what I
mean the Gunther wall roof was a hero of
mine he was a legendary undercover
reporter in Germany still alive he's in
his 70s and and this man said and I
don't like the the way he utilizes the
word deception but he says my task is to
deceive in order not to be deceived to
break the rules of the game in order to
disclose the secret rules of the power
structure and a lot of ethicists have
basically said the same thing and when
it comes to this sort of journalism it's
you you only have two choices you can
you can hate the methods but then you're
going to broadcast lies to the public
and telling the truth to the public is
paramount the public has a right to know
this information so you can you know
this sort of the beauty and bane of
ethics is that I guess it's it's always
situational but we've reached a point in
the media I mean I'm you know look at
what's happening this week with this
mass hysteria - we can that's another
subject but that that the the mass media
has become so so far gone of an
industrial system of this production
that manufacturers consent that we're
getting to the point now where I believe
these methods are universally
justifiable because the media is so
broken and I have a choice to make I can
repeat what they say to me at a podium
or into a microphone or I can or I can
use disguise which we believe is morally
necessary and I would even go so far to
say it's actually immoral not to use
disguise if the only way that you can
get to that truth is to use disguise and
other reporters throughout the 20th
century agreed with me many of those
people are not alive anymore but at this
point it's gotten so bad that we think
that these tactics are completely
necessary because we live in a country
or the public's right to know is very
important we cherish the First Amendment
we
we you know hold these truths to be
self-evident we we we believe in the
First Amendment so much that you're
going to have to deal with that the
methods you're going to have to deal
with the possibility that the person
sitting next to you has a recording
device because we cherish these values
if you want to live in a different
society which doesn't cherish those
values which which leans towards secrecy
and the public not knowing things then
you don't have to deal with those
methods and that's that's in short order
why we believe that undercover work
pretending to be something that you're
not in order to extract truths from
people are not just justified they're
morally necessary in this environment
good
so can we both say that were it possible
to get at the truth without using
deception it would be better to do it if
that was possible in that circumstance
Society of Professional Journalists I
think it was in the early 70s said
because they always throw this stuff in
me no Society professional journalist I
don't know who the journalism gods are
that came up with these rules but the
society professionals said you know you
only use it as a last resort and I would
submit to you that we're basically there
that we that we have we have a last
resort in our society right was not
deceived in that bar inside ABC News
he was the undercover reporter met with
him and and let him be himself we didn't
really have to use that much deception
to be honest with you we we this is the
tape that we released two weeks ago if
your audience hasn't seen it it's an ABC
News veteran news correspondent
he's an oxford-educated guy a very very
very intelligent man and I happen to
agree with everything he says he says I
don't have the quote with me but he says
my bosses don't see an upside in
reporting the news ABC owns Disney they
sell their Marvel Avengers or a degree I
understand what your in cover everything
he said so we didn't really use that
much deception we got close to him and
allowed him to talk allow him to be
himself
very
deception our deception pales in
comparison with there's no there's a
relative deception question okay and
you're absolutely right let me I want to
I want to cede to you wherever I can see
to you and I want to fight you wherever
to fight you and then I'm happy to
change my mind and I hope that I can
change yours and we'll find out I have
definitely had the experience when
talking to a reporter who screws up a
story come on you know the game Eric
you're a sophisticated guy you've been
around the block I'm supposed to be your
best friend I'm supposed to lure you
into a false sense of security
you're supposed to divulge too much to
me I'm supposed to tell you that I
understand everything from your and then
I have to print the story because
journalism is printing what I think
people don't want printed or otherwise
it's public relations you know the quote
Eric right so I think it's absolutely
correct that what you're saying is true
journalists view are you willing to name
excuse me are you willing to name
examples of the people who have said
that to you I can tell you that I got
into a pretty bad situation with the
Wall Street Journal at some point I can
tell you that the New York Times put me
in an article called they tried to
outsmart Wall Street where they tried to
shift the blame for the 2008 crisis off
of these CEOs and Bank heads and on to
mathematicians and quants which was
completely deceptive and ridiculous and
they used their physics reporter yeah
whose name is Dennis Overby and I
thought that was a complete hatchet job
I can tell you that you know Nellie
Bowles who I've become friendly with at
the New York Times tried to print an
article about me as a men's rights
advocate when I didn't even know what
MRA stood for and I said I don't even
own a gun
yeah I'm not afraid of that on the other
hand I've talked to Nellie
you know since and we've come to a
better understanding I think Michael
Phillips was the journalist who covered
me at the Wall Street Journal who did a
complete hatchet job on me and I had to
go through biron column so yeah I can
name names if
that's actually but what I was looking
for and the point being is that you know
we we're not beat reporter we're not
we're not no I'm trying to come right
right sure thing I do understand what I
think you're saying which is that the
game of reporters is to be these sort of
deceptive sociopaths if you will and
then you get to say no no I'm not a
sociopath I'm a reporter so if you have
sociopathic tendencies in some sense you
get to work for one of these papers and
then you get a halo attached to your
head which allows you to do things which
in other circumstances would be
completely deceptive and in fact your
point to me and I think this is great
and this is just like super complicated
we're gonna have to take the time to do
it is is that the style of reporting
that you do has gone out of favor in a
certain sense because of the costs
because of the risks and that what
you're doing is in some sense
resuscitating an earlier form of
journalism in a different medium in a
different medium with a different tinge
and a different institutional backing
and so I think that this is an
incredibly complex thing to be pulled
apart yeah because in some sense what
happened in my into my way of thinking
is is the journalists used to hunt
institutions when they were heroes in
Kings and then they went from hunting
institutions to hunting the the
individuals that disrupt institutions
yes 100%
and so my feeling about this is you want
to know why the reputation of the press
is in the toilet
it's in general because what it does is
is it has changed its the focus of its
crosshairs to Noble individual let's
talk about that for one minute sure the
the thing that I've learned doing this
is that and the New York Times did a
front-page hit you know attempted hit
piece on me literally one week ago and
in this it was about like spies some
people in the Intel community were
helping train Sombra people and there
was a paragraph in this front page New
York Times was chock-full with
circumstantial evidence one of the
paragraphs said you know it's not clear
what the relationship is between Trump
and O'Keefe and so forth so on that one
little paragraph the way they worded
that it was literally it's just not
clear that was the the meat of their
argument it's not clear
was the extent of their evidence and
then that justified a circumstantial
headline which was used to create a I
don't know if it's common cause or some
left-leaning ethics group filing
complaint against me and what it is is
it's what Daniel Boorstin the former
Library of Congress calls a pseudo event
the shadow has become the substance
these these people create these fake
things and number two what happens is
that people on the government these beat
report I call them beat reporters they
have a source and government which leaks
them information and then and then
reportedly this happened that leaked
that thing which I don't do that but I'm
not a beer I'm an investigative reporter
which is a huge world of difference a be
reporter depends upon these people in
the power structure to feed them
intelligence it's like a
counterintelligence operation someone in
the government some two-star general
talks to the New York Times and we don't
know who that two-star general is we
don't know their name we don't know what
motivates them we don't know why they're
doing it we don't know what they're
saying we don't know the full quote and
this is that this is the status quo of
journalism so when you unpack that and
you take you think I don't have a
problem with journalism and in exactly
this capacity I'm sorry do you think I
you don't have a problem with it or you
do I mean you and I just began this by a
singing Gershwin together to check our
mic levels true I would imagine that you
and I are pretty harmonious on the idea
that our major institutions of news give
news gathering and dissemination are
wildly at it but the reason why that
matters is because this is we're trying
to diagnose what is wrong and how we got
there
and what happened was look I can do this
stuff in my sleep in a in a rambling
interview internet personality Eric
Weinstein sat down with right-wing
activist James O'Keefe James proceeded
go ahead justify his methods which have
previously been found
unethical by his peers in the
journalistic community through a series
of ends justified the means points that
failed to lane or something like it can
go on and on and on what would you like
to focus on well the the point that I'm
trying
get at is okay I know how they play this
game I know that there's a to be sure
paragraph seven paragraphs in where the
actual information is shared right I
know the highly placed sources say X I
know that they cut the quotes they
change the context right okay
all of this stuff is assumed but you
don't know my audience I got the best
audience in all the podcast see I may
not have the biggest podcast by of
people who will dig into anything we
talked about and and we don't need to
handhold for them make sure they got it
and they also believe probably mostly in
the need for journalism they understand
the problems with the major institutions
of journalism that's not really what
occupies us if we spend our time there
we're gonna stay in the shallow end and
won't get anything done alright okay
assume that there's a terrible problem
in news now mm-hmm and assume that in
some sense you are actually a throwback
to an earlier more aggressive style of
journalism but you're also picking up
some serious negatives and I don't think
that the trade-offs are the way you say
they are and so that's I want to get to
the next level conversation rather than
the intro conversation let somebody else
have that with you sure okay I don't
think you're on the efficient frontier
would be a better way of saying what my
problem is with with you and Project
Veritas in other words you're saying
that you have to deceive the source it's
some level who which is a negative you'd
prefer to do as little of that as
possible so you have two objectives one
is you want to inform the public mm-hmm
and you want to deceive the source as
little as possible I don't think that
you're at the point where you have to
trade off one to get the other I think
you could do actually deceive less and
get more now I could be wrong about that
okay okay one thing you could do for
example just to limit the damage to
human beings would be to pixelate people
and say this is a senior reporter we
disguise the voice
we've pixelated the image our interest
isn't the reporter the reporter is only
as important as that chair and our focus
is on the chair and if you did that at
some level you would say look I'm not
trying to humiliate somebody I'm not
trying to make them unemploy
I'm trying to say you've got a problem
in the news media what is your problem
and it would be seen differently it
would be seen as his focus isn't the
issue of sticking it to the enemy his
focus is trying to get journalism to
function properly okay let me try to
address that I mean I think it's does
the point make sense about nothing so
should friends as I explained this cut
me off if I'm going in the wrong
direction correct me if I have a wrong
impression I'm trying to understand your
point so let me let me see if I can
answer this I think going back to your
point about newspaperman in the 1970s it
wasn't that they were blood bloodthirsty
or had a lust for for blood lust because
you know people get fired when when you
expose things it was that they had an
instinct to go for the jugular but not
be bloodthirsty and I think that
investigative reporting does in fact
harm people I do think it does and
that's that's the premise it's a outcome
of truth-telling and if your goal is to
limit damage to people it's going to
maybe this is where we disagree come
into conflict with investigative
reporting I your point about pixelating
faces I I think about this a lot I think
about the ethics of this a lot and what
makes what we do a Renaissance to your
point about the 20th century and boring
it is a Renaissance newspaper men used
to do all this stuff and we could talk
about this later in the show or right
now whatever your whatever your
preferable it is the only way to to slip
the disc so to speak in my view the only
way is to is to is to focus on a shift
in the medium the fact that we don't
pixelate the faces the facts that the
Galinski says pick the target freeze it
personalize it polarize it the fact that
you have an actual service elinsky
affects all instead of him not a fan of
him he's stating what I think is a
reality about forcing a reaction I'm a
progressive who can't stand a lit well I
don't agree whether you're conservative
who actually thinks it's interest no
it's not it's not binary I don't like
Alinsky I'm quoting something he's
saying don't I appreciate that a
universal truth about human behavior if
you pick the target
freeze it personalize it and polarize it
you're more prone to generate a reaction
we can talk about this later
sure that I think slips the disk so when
you don't pixelate the face when you
show the intonation the body language
the the the cadence the the way that the
man looks in his eyes Patrick Davis at
CNN when we covertly filmed him he was
an unwitting whistleblower he did not he
was not a villain he was not a villain
and some ethicists might say why would
you put that poor managing editor at CNN
on blast and I said because CNN is
played in airports that's why because
you are you are a few standard
deviations away from the mean Eric most
people in airports look at that and goes
that's the truth and when the managing
editor I can't recall his exact title
managing director of field operations
Patrick Davis sits in that bar this is
filmed last last year and says I hate
what we've become this is what Patrick
Davis says on the hidden camera what
could be so much better than we are
that's a direct quote I don't even
listen to the CEO to press other
presidents as calls anymore I'm
disgusted by it is what he's saying and
I have to make an evaluation a
means-ends evaluation on do i blur this
man's face and I say no why because in
my view in a world where the media is
more powerful yeah then all three
branches of the government of the United
States which I can talk about that if
you disagree with me I have an
obligation to tell the people about what
this man who basically controls all the
stuff happening on CNN I understand we
are leaves okay okay and and I'm not
even look the I'm just passionate that's
why I'm not you know arguing the view
I'm just passionate and I firmly believe
that brother you ain't seen nothing yet
go ahead no I'm I'll match your passion
for passion okay yeah my concern is is
that you're actually so the way I view
it is you're an alternate David throwing
stones at the same Goliath and you're
pissing me off at some level and the
reason you're pissing me off is probably
complicated which is why these
interchanges they never happen and it's
great thing to do it if I look at what
happened for example with the amy robach
tape do you want to say a little bit
about how you see that and then I'll
come back to it and say how I see it as
being significant how I see it engine in
in in general well just that you you
broadcast it to the world and I think
it's an incredible incredibly important
and interesting okay use of footage and
but our listeners may not be aware of me
Roebuck was this this is back in
November of last year we had an insider
with an ABC News record this hot mic a
moment where amy robach is the anchor on
Good Morning America and she comes
across very credible in this tape she's
she's very attractive blonde female
anchor and she's the moaning how ABC
squashed spiked the Jeffrey Epstein
story they had victims they had all this
evidence and she's really upset that she
didn't get the scoop and she says that
they she testifies this is a hot mic
moment between like during the
commercial break that it was to protect
the Clintons and the British royal
family so this was I've been doing this
for 11 years in a really major way this
is by far the most viral piece of this
is like a 90 second piece of film and it
was like the most viral thing I'd ever
seen it was it was it was an indictment
to so many of what we're talking about
here today I'm like holding back emotion
it was so powerful right it's like okay
now I took me six months to get up the
courage to say I wonder why it is almost
no news outfit we'll ask the question is
Jeffrey Epstein known to the
intelligence communities of the world
and as his pedophilia known and did we
sit idly by while 12 year old girls and
up were bore down I don't even know
we're being trafficked in the most
powerful circles in the world I mean is
somebody going to ask the questions
where his fortune came from and where
the trading records were that I'm trying
to map the silences of the news media
I'm much more interested in what they
don't say don't report don't do and this
thing that I'm calling the disc
distributed ideas suppression complex is
perfectly illustrated by amy robach and
you so far as i know simply broadcast
the video in an unedited form that was
leaked
to you something to that effect we have
and we have this insider program these
it's actually quite extraordinary thing
if I could mention it for a minute we
have these people on the inside of these
institutions who you know they do have
you know confidentiality agreements with
their employers etc etc but what's
remarkable is they might strap a camera
to their chest or simply record and and
give that to us and in some cases Eric
these insiders go public and and go on
the record sit down and become a hero or
a martyr in this case is a rare
exception where this person is still
working there and Disney Corporation
you know quarantined every employee and
grilled them for hours and they still
have not been able to identify this
person so this was recorded and it was a
remarkable moment it was it was on the
same type of standards but amy robach
did not know yeah she knew and so far
she was wearing a lav mic you know it's
an incredible it's incredible piece of
footage and then if I recall correctly
yeah she comes back and sort of almost a
lobotomized fashion apologising for what
she said yeah so what happened was again
I'm speculating here but I pretty safely
speculating ABC News she don't speak you
don't need to ABC News issues a
statement
yeah and the statement is you know that
at the time not all of our standards met
our reporting for air it was very
robotic you know corporate statement
justifying why they did I regret that
some of the intemperate things that I
may have said in a moment of frustration
were picked up mowin of frustration hard
words yeah I don't know that she used
that she did actually it was actually
quite literally quote moment afresh oh I
didn't I didn't know it's a chronic
there was a me statement and there was
ABC News estate whatever it is it's it's
freaking scary him right because the
idea is that you're seeing it's like
somebody's recanting their testimony
exactly in North Korea and you know that
there's like a gun held to the person's
head or you're watching a hostage video
or something like that okay now here's
my problem and I really want you to take
the time to play this through with me I
watched what happened when that debuted
with
project Veritas stamped on it and in my
circles but what got said and this is a
trap and again it's not you're not
responsible for it but we both have to
agree with the game is the game is is
that anything that comes through James
O'Keefe and anything that comes through
Project Veritas cannot be trusted right
that's what they've done they can fit
they fitted you with a shit suit and
your shit suit is you are so
psychopathic so not a reliable then even
what appears to be continuous unedited
footage can be completely discounted if
it appears this project Veritas and that
has not stopped us well not only has it
not stopped you it creates a really
interesting dilemma first of all that
tactic that is being used against you is
manifestly stupid and unethical and I
nothing I can do about it no no what you
jump in ahead I don't agree with this
James I think that the the problem is
that this is at such a level of
complexity
whatever the ABC News function is that
stop that stop that story from running
that might have saved people from having
terrible incidents in their lives I
don't know whatever that thing was is my
enemy
that's the disc and we have to slip the
disc in order to save our society that's
basically my take I also agree that
you've been fitted with this thing so
that if you're handed a piece of footage
and you run it and it is appropriate for
you to run it that that footage
immediately becomes inadmissible in what
I've called the gated institutional
narrative which is the Washington Post
discussing the New York Times about
whatever the Democratic Party said in
their engagement at Princeton University
you know blah blah blah blah yes that
thing is trying to seal itself off from
the Internet
so the idea is that there are Thorat
ativ sources and then there's the
garbage that happens online which is
ridiculous I don't think you're helping
break this thing open because what
you're doing is in in essence there's
this weak point in the crust and there's
this magma of truth underneath it mm-hmm
and they've decided okay anything that
breaks
through at project Veritas is
immediately inadmissible and it's very
important that I'd be able to defend
something that occurs at your outlet
okay and you're not helping me because
of the level at which you're playing the
game and so maybe that's partially my
frustration I don't believe that you
that that's a deep fake interview I
believe that that's a real hot mic I
believe that it's leaked I believe that
you probably have lawyers who went all
over it and said it was legal for you to
use it I bet that you probably even do
something that regular journalists don't
do which is check the journalists code
of ethics right and so all of this
positive stuff that you're doing mm-hmm
is then sacrificed in part in in my
opinion because of certain kinds of
super aggressive self-justifying tactics
which is what's really pissing me off
I'd like to yeah yes your shirt if I go
into the wrong direction just steer me
back no if I'm overboard and not getting
something you let me know this is a very
important point and we have some
disagreements about this because the
game let me start with the conclusion it
hasn't stopped us and there's no other
way to slip the disc there's no other
way than to anyone who have anyone if I
didn't invent or create project Veritas
and some other person did they do the
same thing to that person no matter who
it would be they would slime and slander
and defame however what's interesting
about the amy robach tape and the David
Wright tape both of which came with an
ABC News is that the president of ABC
News did in fact return my phone call
the day before I called him for common I
did the ethical thing I was I bet and
they did in fact issue a response and
that response did in fact make it into
the Washington Post in fact the
Washington Post ran three articles on
the same day we were in fact one on the
front page of the Style section this was
a couple weeks ago where they said
reporters suspended over and had to put
the quotes mm-hmm from David Wright
bemoaning the fact that his corporate
bosses this and that the stuff that your
audience all agrees that's
the print edition on the front page the
Style section thanks to project Bharath
now now here's the rub as Shakespeare
would say that in cider when I met that
person I'm not going to tell you their
gender I'm not going to tell you
anything about them except this when I
met that person in a hotel room it was
like a scene out of all the president's
men like literally out of a thriller
novel and this one we're having this
unbelievable conversation which if there
was any justice in the world there'd be
a movie made out of this one day this
person says I had nowhere to go I I
couldn't go to the window host I
couldn't go to the New York Times he she
they were like I can't go anywhere
because and I'm gonna quote them here
they'd hunt me down like a trophy buck
not only would they not to tell this
story my story they would systematically
this is what you were saying hunt me
down and and and this person said I had
to go someplace just let me finish to
what he said he said to go someplace
that I knew no matter what this person
wouldn't give me up wouldn't quit
wouldn't stop wouldn't settle lawsuits
which is this thing we should talk about
in this episode and there was only one
institution in the world I could think
that would do that project Veritas now
where we did we're where I think you're
mistaken I feel as though where you're
mistaken is they attack us
slime us and call us Liars but they have
to put on the front page of the Style
section The Washington Post
yes so this is I mean this is exactly
where I want to be this is the
conversation you're never gonna get
anywhere right okay so what we know what
this is we call it Fudd fear uncertainty
and doubt all right the idea is that we
have to create fear uncertainty and
doubt around you but because the there
was no way of just pretending that video
didn't exist it had to enter the djinn
gated institutional narrative
I accept your point now I want you just
to listen to something that's just very
tough for me to say consider that
heroism and sociopathy are adjacent all
right a friend of ours named named aunt
Andrea I'm just blanking on her polish
last name for the moment has a theory
called extreme altruism
and her point is is that an altruist and
a hero an associate path or one toggle
switch off of each other and the key
question is when you have this kind of
need to shake things up is it done for
the self or is it done for the greater
good and I detect that you actually have
a commitment to this that is at a level
that is somewhere between heroism and
sociopathy to be blunt now I get it
there are no super tough people who
don't crack don't fall have their own
organization are willing to fight in the
courts and this is in part what you're
doing and you know what let's talk about
another story you covered which I was
brought in before they leave you were
brought in which was a Google insider
mm-hmm
now what can we use that person's name
yes let's do it
Zach Voorhees okay so Zach Voorhees was
talking to me about all the stuff that
was going on at Google and he showed me
things like screenshots and and programs
about ml fairness machine learning
fairness and how Google was going to
bias search by unbias it you know that
he didn't say those words but that was
my encapsulation of mm-hmm and I did not
know how to help him directly and what
you're saying is true in a world in
which no one will cover the goddamn
story you're looking for the outlet that
will and that's what happens repeatedly
and it's not just with you Fox News
Breitbart
you will cover stories that go counter
narrative to this mainstream
left-of-center tradition or narrative
right and so for example as you know
when my brother was driven out of his
college where he was a professor by
racist students calling his anti racism
racism that was so completely bizarre
for something like the mainstream media
that you had an effective Lee a black
led Maoist uprising with a white sort of
ultra woke president
against an anti-racist behaving in an
anti-racist fashion being called a
racist that story was so destructive to
woek ideology that the New York Times
couldn't cover it and so my brother
ended up where at Fox News with Tucker
Carlson so once you understand that
there's sort of this weird rule which is
if all of us pretend that that thing
isn't happening then the idea is no one
has to cover it no one has to discuss
what it is and the only places that it
appears are right of Center and then
each of these right right of Center
weakening Zinn the crust think of the
crust as the disc right you have a
narrative which is everything on fox
news is bullshit everything that
Breitbart prints is crap everything that
comes out of Project Veritas is a is
unfairly edited and is an unethical
piece a threat okay you're not helping
when you go into your self-justification
mode about what we have to do this I
mean you may have to do this but you
what you first have to do is to exhaust
all the things that both serve the ends
of informing the public where they need
to be informed and minimizing the damage
to humans unless those humans really
deserve the damage so let me just try to
get it then huh my contention is anytime
you move private life into the public
sector
it appears bizarre and is incredibly
damaging we are supposed to appear here
as if we always put on sport jackets and
button-down shirts let's say and conduct
ourselves you know in this kind of weird
mannered interaction which is in some
sense force now for example I love fart
jokes just love them
do you like fart jokes I'm not too
familiar with fart jokes well for
example there's a fantastic really long
Limerick called the farter from Sparta
may I say the first yeah there once was
a fellow from Sparta a truly magnificent
Faridah on the strength of one being
he'd blow God Save the Queen and
Beethoven's moonlight sonata and it goes
on and on I like that right it's really
quite good now the problem is is that
when I talk about fart jokes in public
it's like wow Eric you're doing potty
humor nice classy stay classy anytime I
move private life into the public sector
its destructive and that's why it's not
just about the written rules it's also
you know we talked about in Judaism the
written Torah and we talked about the
oral torah and i believe that your
lawyers know what the rules are for
recording conversations in public places
semi public places whether the doors
open closed one-sided or two-sided
consent blah blah blah and the idea is
it varies from state to state and the
average person their idea of these rules
is zero
they're completely ignorant of the law
so the key question is don't we as
Americans have an oral torah an idea of
what one shouldn't be doing that goes
along with the written rule and you tend
to get alerted to this when somebody
says that something is perfectly legal
that's the phrase that alerts you to the
fact that they're usually violating the
oral torah rather than the written Torah
is that they say perfectly legal rather
than merely legal and I'm concerned that
what you're doing is perfectly legal and
overkill with respect to the individuals
and it's killing your ability to
actually stick it to the institutions
who need to be policed and that you're
set up to police okay oh boy
first of all I don't got you here but
it's no it's a lot of thought it would
be tough well as you were speaking there
were about seven points I wanted to
address there but let me try to take it
from the top okay you know I was reading
a book I think it was about images and
the Marshall helped I pronounce his last
name was Marshall McLuhan the medium is
the message you know that book and you
know the way that the medium changes how
we perceive the world around us it
actually changes how we think it does
and I maybe this is self justification
but I truly believe that this medium you
know like in the McLuhan sense of what
we do which is transmitting these little
hidden shaky videos on a tweet and it
gets 10 million views in an hour
changes the way we perceive the world
around us and it affects our
understanding of each other and to quote
Scott McNealy like we what lost our
privacy already that this is a new world
maybe a brave new world and when they
invented that the the the telegraph I
think there was a criticism this as an
18-minute mid 19th century that there
was a criticism that well what does
Maine and Texas have to talk to each
other about anyway and when they
admitted that when Alexander Graham Bell
invented the telephone it was like well
that's a kind of an invasion of privacy
you know transparent heaps of jelly to
one another was a characterization that
was made about the telephone at the time
you couldn't cut a man off by gesture or
look when you're talking to him on the
telephone so now we have this new
paradigm where you or I could be
recorded in the bar saying see you NT to
a friend in a very in a context that's
that we think is private and that can be
broadcasted instantly and then we have
this contra cancel culture phenomenon
and who wants to live in that world two
things first of all there was a
difference between recording something
and broadcasting it and I would say this
this oral torah metaphor that you
there's oral torah that you use we draw
the line at the choice to broadcast the
information i can't tell you on my
server how raw tape i have where someone
sent something that was very private
i'm not gonna tell you where or who but
there was an example where someone at a
bar said come up to my hotel room and
engage in some menage tois
i didn't publish that that's pig's blood
it's my duty as a citizens my obligation
not to publish because it wasn't
newsworthy wasn't it wasn't newsworthy
it's a it's a private sort of the
private sexual nature of people there
was probably some infidelity but that's
not what we do we try to focus on areas
of profound public importance now I also
tell you that when Upton Sinclair yeah
wrote the jungle there were no you know
hidden cameras Upton Sinclair was it was
an extreme ideologue as far as I'm
concerned he was a socialist and he
cared about worker participation he I
don't think he set out to expose the
meat conditions he wanted to so he's an
advocate for so
when he infiltrated went undercover
posing with the lunch-pail and taking
off his tie to fit in with the workers
he he didn't even have a I don't even
believe he had a writing utensil I think
he sprinted back to his hotel room to
write down from memory what he saw so we
would make the argument that the
recording the recording itself is
distinguished from the broadcasting of
the recording and that recording someone
is a fundamental human right just like
writing down what they say is the
fundamental human right and to restrict
someone from saying what they hear it
goes back to my argument the First
Amendment that that we live in a world
that that we we live in a world where we
capture people audio visually this is a
new paradigm now I was listening to
George Carlin on a comedy show recently
and he was given a sketch and he said we
live in a new world earth plus plastic
we live in a new paradigm earth plus
people at bars being recorded and that
being put on Twitter instantaneously and
just like the at you know invention of
the telephone of the invention of the
telegram or the invention of the
automobile it'll it'll remake how we
view our world but there are safeguards
against privacy privacy issues existed
before the advent of Technology you can
you can choose where you go and what you
say to people false friends existed
before the advent of Technology
betraying people existed before the you
know and in most cases it's not in your
self-interest to betray a close friend
or confidant so I don't think and I
really strongly believe that what we do
is moral for getting the legal that we
can talk about the law but forget the
law you realize that I understand the
argument that sometimes what your honor
thing is of such consequence that it
would be immoral to hold it back
wholesale but it is also the question I
mean I'll be honest about it I feel like
you get a kind of pleasure you and I are
both feeling gas-lit is my you feel like
I get a pleasure out of out of out of
out of what I'm worried that you get a
pleasure out of sticking it to
the sanctimonious elitist progressive
thing that suffuses that yeah absolutely
I'm just trying to make it easy for you
to understand where I'm coming from
which is I can't stand what the left has
become it's unrecognizable to me it's
not it's not a force that seems to want
to fight for working families it doesn't
really seem to care about the
environment like this you know the
Sierra Club used to be against
immigration its sanctimonious it's pure
constant sanctimony sanctimony in the
service of institutions so the idea is
that I see this kind of we are the world
not as this beautiful song and sentiment
but as the cover story for breaking your
bonds to your fellow countrymen so that
you can go seek cheap labor or overseas
or something like that the Davos crowd
if you will betrayed the left and the
the right who's always found the left to
be irritating this is a part of the left
on this show that can't stand the part
of the left that you that you may be
targeting that said I have to stay my
hand because I don't want to engage in
the kind of crap that they do and I feel
like you're in some sense doubling down
on their methods I disagree I think that
investigative reporting you know going
back to the 1960s and 70s and I'm not an
expert on this but I know some these
people did some things that were maybe
maybe we we or you disagree with their
tactics but I mean you had let me give
you a few examples you had you know
Gunther Woolworth was an extremist he he
literally used disguises and infiltrated
newspapers to show how the news colored
things you had the Chicago sun-times ran
this undercover operation where they
purchased a bar in Chicago actually look
let's frameless yeah cuz I think this is
really important yes you and I both have
the sense that journalism used to be
very different and much closer to the
methods that you're using is that true
I would say even further so then the
methods I use but yes but but your
methods were or closer to an older-style
journalist yeah so I also have this
impression yes and you've said this okay
so yeah what does it ask yeah what I had
to asked you on the phone when we spoke
is can you frame for us a timeline yeah
of what changed that relationship
between journalists and this kind of
aggressive style of investigative
reporting which you at least partially
exhibit in project that's an economics
question as well which we can't reach
well I'll try to get to but
investigative reporters back in the day
there were newspapers and they were
typewriter guerrillas as they recall I
call myself a guerrilla journalist I use
video as my medium but these guys did
things like there was a guy named
William Gaines who dressed up like a
janitor in nineteen mid early 70s
1972-1973 and got a job at a hospital he
literally employed himself as a janitor
and the surgeons would say hey come can
you come assist me with surgery and
without even washing his hands he was
asked to participate in doing the
surgery on somebody oh and also he won
the Pulitzer Prize
so the I would I would never do that I
would never
can you imagine James O'Keefe gets a job
as a janitor assists in in fixing
someone with the coronavirus I would be
I would be did bacteria on my hands
would get inside wasn't Gloria Steinem
the Playboy bunny Gloria Steinem was a
Playboy bunny but you had these
reporters Clark Clark Malin off at the
Iowa newspaper you had you know Bob
Woodward lied to deep throat Jack
Anderson in the 1970s and all of these
people were hated
I mean hated by the system while they
were doing right they were they were
despised they were attacked by the
establishment media and then something
changed and what we were talking about
the phone was what I think changed well
there was this old line about what are
the 10 most feared words in corporate
America Mike Wallace my clothes from 60
minutes is here to see you
yeah yes Mike Wallace used to ambush
people and boardrooms and and and and
then something happened in the late 70s
I trace it to this incident I wrote this
book called American Pravda and I Reese
searched the 1970s journalism and what
happened what I saw was that in 1977 the
Chicago sun-times which was the center
of all this muckraking newspaper
reporting ran this bar for like seven
months they bought a bar under a under
disguise and it was Bart ended by
newspaper people and they put cameras in
the nd and the rafters of this bar aptly
named the Mirage they actually called
the thing the Mirage it was kind of
ironic and they filmed all of the city
inspectors taking bribes bribing each
other you know payoffs and asked Pam
Zekman was working at the Chicago
sun-times Pulitzer Prize winner they
were asked why did you have to resort to
all this so-called deception they said
because nobody everyone was afraid of
Chicago City Hall none of these people
would talk not even on background not
even off the record so they ran this bar
and I mean this was like the most
consequential in my opinion
investigation of the 20th century like
50 people went to jail
the mayor lost re-election it was just
such an consequential impactful thing so
it gets nominated for the Pulitzer Prize
1978 and Ben Bradley who's the legendary
editor of the Washington Post says no
we're not going to give you a Pulitzer
Prize because you're a deception was too
elaborate your deception was too much
and I think the quote was you know when
when cops posed as journalists we don't
like that so we shouldn't pose as
something that were not and that was the
one of the a few inflection points in
American history because there was no
there was no there was no currency in
doing this it was expensive first of all
which I can talk about and how expensive
this stuff is and then you had Mike
Wallace in the mid 80s
Mike Wallace 60 minutes said it became
about drama not illumination I think
that both Ben Bradley and Mike Wallace
were were disingenuous I don't think
that was the real reason they stopped
doing it I think that argument which is
one we can have today relates more to
economics of mass media and and Ben
Bradley probably was a little close to
people in the Chicago machine
and and you know Bradley reportedly
these are not my sources had contracts
with people in government and so forth
and so on and it became this mass media
became had a symbiotic relationship with
with those in power and using these
tactics
it's just too close for comfort you're
you're burning these institutions
agencies and things that you need access
to to get your information from so it
got cut off in the 70's days and finally
ABC News in 1992 got sued by a grocery
store Food Lion by the shame of diet
chain is called Food Lion grocery again
they got off they've got jobs working in
the butcher shop and they recorded they
put hidden cameras in their wing-like
you might be able to fit a camera in
that in that hairdo of yours and they
had wigs I gotta grow at this were like
tiny little thing and and they filmed
the meat was rotting and they repackaged
the meat so this was a this was like
bleach or some bleach the meat was
rotting it was a devastating expose Food
Lion stock tanked they got sued ABC did
they lost at trial they won on appeal it
cost God knows over a million dollars
and ABC's bass brass basically said to
hell with this we're not gonna spend a
million dollars there's nothing in it
for us
so investigative reporting was not
profitable it was not profitable it
wouldn't get you the Pulitzer Prizes it
wouldn't get you the trophy I want I
want to do your point even more than
you're doing it all right people are
gonna hear that like oh is that where
you're doing reporting to get a peel at
surprise that's not the point
hey let me do it let me do it okay my
belief is that the Pulitzer part the
Pulitzer Prize to say nothing of worth
the puter fortune came from was intended
to say this is heroic behavior this is
admirable behavior and when you took
away the prize it was the community
saying we no longer want to see this as
heroic yeah and that that message rather
than the prize
is is the chill and it's one of the
reasons well to your point about the
growing links between the journalistic
community and the institutions they
cover those links were not absent
earlier in fact there were some you know
I asked you to look at the story of Jean
Seberg a woman destroyed by the FBI
using the Los Angeles Times in Newsweek
as their conduits for a smear campaign
against one of the leading actresses of
Hollywood because they didn't like her
politics so there have been very
chilling threads between our media and
the institutions of power and in fact
the cryptic institutions of power what I
don't understand is given that those
things existed before something had to
change
environmentally for this type of
reporting to all but disappear over a
period of a perhaps twenty years and
that's economics a lot of it in my
opinion investigative reporting was a
lost leader on a company's balance sheet
so in those days there was kind of a
newspapers were certainly more
profitable than they are now and David
Wright on the ABC tape put it thus he
said it changed in the digital era when
it became even more commercially he says
the commercial commercial imperative is
incompatible with the news and I get
branded as some right-wing guy and it's
like well I actually that's a Chomsky
argument from manufactured a lot of
let's be honest a lot of my friends on
the right spend a lot of time quoting
Marx Chomsky there's a lot of
commonalities there is there is that and
I agree with that statement so the
commercial imperative is incompatible
the news said David Wright he was
suspended by ABC News for saying it and
investigative reporters like I'm gonna
give you my economics of what I do I'm a
charitable organization I'm a 501c3
organization and let you project very
wee but you're you were a huge part of
prime the chairman and CEO of the
company and I had to be the chairman
to have the authority to make decisions
like not to settle lawsuits you know 60
minutes got sued over a hundred and
fifty times in the 1980s 100 maybe even
more than that all of the reporters I
mentioned earlier the 1970s were I mean
some of them went to jail to protect
their sources they were sued for libel
yeah investigative reporters had to deal
with all that stuff and to your point in
this age
I'm vilified for having to deal with all
that stuff back in the day was
considered to be a thing so you'd go to
jail for your source a hundred percent
and ready to jail I've been to jail we
talked about that but not only would not
only does the reporter have to be
willing to go to jail
there the reporter has to be willing to
appeal it all the way up to the Supreme
Court and if the supreme court
determines that you have to disclose
your source the reporter has to be civil
disobedient yeah that's what you have to
believe in in your heart to do this most
of the people in the news business these
days you kidding me they're just trying
to get to retirement they're just trying
to to get across the finish line get
their pension and be done this is what
makes you such a difficult character is
is that you have so many of the most
admirable features of journalism and I
don't think you get to have the
conversation where somebody who really
is troubled by what you do also
acknowledges the positive in what you do
you want you to me are a superposition
of what is noble about journalism and
why I can't stand journalism that maybe
so I think in light of the recent
equities though Eric there have been a
couple reporters Paul fari The
Washington Post
Guinan Grove at The Daily Beast have
actually talked to me I've never
actually and you're frankly just this
manifest destiny I'm sitting with you
here you wouldn't be sitting with me but
not for the events of the last six
months but why is that I've been aware
of you for a long time job well I think
because I think because of the the that
I'm continuing to do this that I'm
getting and tell me if I'm wrong but I'm
getting reactions from these
institutions that they're the worst
you've been an interesting person to me
for a long okay I did not know that yeah
so by the way I should just say people
will assume that you and I are connected
somehow through Peter Thiel and
completely untrue I know I just had my
first conversation with Peter about you
ever
the New York Times run a front-page
story association between Peter teal on
the and the substance will be it's
unclear exactly what relationship and
then they'll run that and do that whole
thing but so the economics I'm asked me
this is a very important point you know
one of the reporters I researched and
Pravda when I wrote this book Pravda was
that bosses have to have they said
bosses with balls right you have to have
an editor or someone that works for you
that has cojones that has principal and
warehouses unisex because it works for
both what is it what is it huevos huevos
huevos you have to have huevos and in
back in the day there were bosses with
balls anyway in these days what David
Wright says is this is so ironic Dave
Wright actually says at the bar
my bosses don't care about this stuff so
that's is that integrity is a lack of
morality and then you have the economics
of mass media it costs my my
organization or our organization because
it's a nonprofit project Veritas over 1
million dollars to do a story and
sometimes it'll cost us as much as 3/4
of a million dollars to fight a lawsuit
I do not settle lawsuits Eric in fact
I've we've won eight straight lawsuit
you have settled those I have not ever
lost a defamation lawsuit I've never
settled defamation lawsuit 11 years ago
I was sued for invasion of privacy in
California and I settled one and I made
a mistake and I'll never make that
mistake again so I appreciate the
distinction but you have settled just
important distinction every time you say
something that isn't they're gonna
you're gonna do you know they're gonna
play the game and I'm not again I am NOT
trying to destroy you I'm not trying to
build you up I'm trying to get you a
fair hearing yeah let me be clear we've
never lost a defamation lawsuit we've
never settled a defamation lawsuit and
11 years ago I was sued for invasion of
privacy for recording a guy in a room
with the door open in California this
guy was coaching me on how to
girls across the Tijuana border he
claimed later he would claim he was
playing along but I did not defame him
by quoting him and I was sued for
invasion of privacy I fought it and I
didn't have any money so I settled so we
don't settle lawsuits anymore we've won
every lawsuit we've laid by the way I
also I just want to be very clear that
there are all sorts of situations where
people settle when they're in the right
because of the economics of the legal
profession there he'll do a different
standard than me all right so totally
understand settled the and your audience
knows this CNN settled the Covington
lawsuit for they were sued for 250
million people settle lawsuits all the
time but my point is this that you have
to say me I don't think you should be
held with the standard of never settling
as the if you can meet it you want to
know something very interesting please a
lot of the insiders one of the reasons
they came to us other than the fact that
they'd the Washington Post in New York
Times I said that is one of them said to
me the fact that you didn't settle that
lawsuit yeah the fact that you stood by
your reporting the fact that you would
stand on principle at great economic
cost my staff has to scuttle around the
country on airplanes to meet with these
people and ask them for money and and in
it pains me to have to spend
three-quarters of a million dollars
little old lady in North Carolina you
know sues me for defamation
I did not Defamer I quoted her
accurately I know the law and the facts
are on my side and the arbitrator or the
the person in the middle goes larges
give lady $25,000 called a day and I
have to spend three quarters of a
million dollars J that's like I
understand your problem you know I
understand you break my fucking heart
you really do because you do stuff that
is unnecessary that causes harm to the
effort to illuminate what it is that
you're trying I don't have your politics
your argument you're making a very
interesting argument I do think wouldn't
hearing let me see if I can restate
where you're saying I do things that
hurt my argument but you like you like
the the the the effects of it or you
like the truth I like it I perceive and
I could be wrong about
you're a very unusual person you are
driven by something which is not money
there are easier ways to turn a buck
than what you're doing right you were
driven by I think it could be wrong in
part an ideological need to get at
certain things that are going unreported
anywhere in essence there are a tiny
number of places that can break a story
like the stories that you're breaking
and I want to be able to wholeheartedly
say did you see that thing that occurred
and when I see Project Veritas and I say
okay beyond that I already know that the
big boys are playing unfairly with you
right so it's not like I'm saying that
everything that they're doing is fair to
you but you do things that are
unnecessary that tarnish what it is that
you can bring to the world you're not on
the efficient frontier and this is my
irritation and my anger with you okay is
is that you've got cheap stuff in there
when you're supposed to be a stat
reestablishing investigative journalism
like what what's the give me some
example I think that is what I think
that you could do a tremendous amount to
let people know we've got the fucking
goods on you we didn't you say cheap
stuff just give me an example recently
or and even the last day when you've got
a camera in a purse or whatever and
something feels to me like you're on the
verge of entrapment or you're making one
of those technical arguments ignorance
of the law is no excuse we you know we
looked it up and we were perfectly
within our when that kind of stuff
occurs mmm-hmm and you're in costume mhm
and I'm thinking like okay was the posts
the poor sob who happens to be employed
in this way and as you know speaking
with bravado maybe the idea is like the
standard reporter techniques of
buttering people up I hate those when
that comes from the New York Times
I've been through that mill yeah okay
yeah I don't like the behavior pattern
and my feeling about it is is that
ethics clearer ethics are a peacocks
tail in other words if you have if you
have the ability and the skill you get
to have the ethics if you're this close
to the line it's because you haven't
gotten your skill together now I'm
trying to do some of what you're trying
to do I released an episode recently
talking about whether or not laboratory
mice are broken for the purposes of all
sorts of science which may include drug
testing mm-hmm and I'm I I did not go
for the jugular
it was very pointed but I invited the
person who's most associated with this
story onto the story after the fact I
have tried not to speak much in public
giving them a very long time to figure
out how they wanted to respond right
right and I intend to close this story
out but I am struggling with the ethics
and my concern is is that I want to
watch you writhed in pain as you
struggle with the ethics of what you do
I understand the argument you're
unearthing things that really matter
well I could I mean I've what's that
line from the Shawshank Redemption
whatever sins I've committed I paid for
them and then some I've been I mean God
my story is another deal I've been on
probation for three years federal
probation supervised I've been charged
with crimes I haven't committed I've
been sued deposed dozens of times I've
I've laid my soul bare under oath in
depositions where they have all my
emails and like Chesterton says you know
the thing about bathing in hot water is
that it keeps you you know these are
twin problems and you're not getting
away with that I'm to me just very
carefully those things may make you
heroic they may be incredibly I'm
listening I'm listening they may make
you heroic they may be incredibly
painful but all of that stuff
speaks potentially to courage and
nobility to being the righteous man in
an unjust world that's not what I'm
talking about James let me see if I can
address your the fundamental issue here
of the the purse scam or the button cam
or the lapel camera or the what it
represents what a represent every soul
what whether I rise in in in in
consternation
I guess the easiest way I can explain it
in in a very personal way is that when I
was in college I went to Rutgers I'm 20
35 years old so when I was 20 years old
on st. Patrick's Day which I believe is
this is it of today or tomorrow we're
around st. Patrick's Day filming here I
was surrounded by professors telling me
how great Stalin was and I'm like well
I'm not really a history buff but that
seems odd you know shouldn't we also
talked about the gulags and again I'm
not I wasn't a very show trials it was a
way I wasn't learning about Stalin I
just said well that's odd and I'd read
the New York Times every day because I
just like to read the New York Times I
said well that's odd they seem to be
using obfuscation in there and I felt
compelled to wear a hidden camera and
going to my dining hall to try to prove
a point and I tried to get Lucky Charms
banned on the grounds they were racist
to my Irish heritage it was a little
stunt like it was a little Borat like it
remains people's favorite video I'm
getting to a point here and that what I
what I realized in doing this was that I
had to hold these people to their own
expressed values because they don't it's
really hard to shame these people yeah
and and we can be shamed because you
believe in morality you believe in
probably some sense of law and there
should be equality before the law you
believe in all these principles and the
people that I'm dealing with are just
irrational they're just like Stalin's
great you should love him and I'm like
well I'm paying money to come to school
here to learn about philosophy and
you're telling me how great the Soviet
Union is that that's just unjust so when
the premise is that these people in at
Rutgers University the Student Handbook
said you're not allowed to offend
anybody for any reason I said well
that's that would gladly give you sense
that that's irrational I know so to
confront the irrationality to hold them
accountable to their own expressed
values or a szalinski would say make
them live up to their own principles I
went in there
I was very scared I was shaking I was
worried and it doesn't come natural to
to do these sorts of things and I donned
a little Kodak camera this is before the
iPhone 2005 and
put it on the table and put a little
cloth over the red lens because in 2005
cameras would blink red when you
recorded video and I began to do - to
pretend to be something I wasn't I said
I mean I am Irish but I'm not offended
by Lucky Charms and I said as an
Irishman this cereal offends me the
mascot offends my heritage
oh and by the way it's a violation of
your own campus rulebook about offending
people and the Dean of Dining Services
took me seriously and the Dean of Dining
Services said there will be no problem
removing Lucky Charms from the cafeteria
what we did is a microcosm even though
they're magically delicious and though
they're magically delicious I even said
the marshmallows were teeth rotting I
said that I'm 6 foot 1 Irishman which I
am O'Keefe is my last name and I said
I'd this offends my heritage and I tried
to keep a straight face was very
difficult and even though I was shaking
because I was afraid of what I was doing
and what we did is offer the community
Rutgers University which is far left an
opportunity to go that's ridiculous
we we slipped the disc we we show it we
should and and and what you're saying is
I'm doing the thing that you don't that
they did the Jordan Peterson so what
you're saying is you're saying is what
what the argument is is that I should
feel more unclean I should no no no no
no help me understand the argument is
that what you're doing is you're you're
balancing harm that you have to inflict
with good that you have to do and I
don't think you're efficient on either
one and in some sense you're screwing up
stories for everybody else because they
don't have and this is very like it's a
complicated point and you I don't know I
won't understand it ok I'm trying to my
belief is is that like the the Zac
Voorhees story about the Google insider
and what was actually going on at Google
isn't a really important story and any
if I took a terrible terrible important
story and I put Project Veritas on it
right now mm-hmm
I know that it won't have the impact
that it would
if we could somehow force it into the
world in a different degree I completely
disagree with you disagree strongly mine
done but let's make sure that we
actually do disagree that we're not
having a miscommunication I'm not sure
but that statement you're making Zach
for he says documents Zach you know you
know I'd come to me you know come to us
some years ago we had to send a reporter
to talk to Jen Jen I who was an
innovation person for Google she was of
Irish heritage and we we filmed her in a
in a Mexican restaurant in San Francisco
saying that she wanted to prevent the
quote Trump situation and there was some
ambiguity about what exactly she meant
by that did she means stop Trump from
winning the election did she means stop
Russian interference but Jen's and I
also said on this hidden camera
recording which Zak did not provide to
us that I was filmed by our undercover
reporters she also said that um that
Google needs to stay big - too - yeah I
feel a fragmented then you wouldn't be
able then you wouldn't be able to to
stop Trump essentially so this is what
this person said and that amplified
Zach's messages his documents that we
interviewed him and I I feel very
strongly that I know do you understand
I'm worried that we're not communicating
again I agree that there's this really
strange problem that you can't go to CNN
The Washington Post NPR New York Times
with a certain class of stories that
were encountered - their unstated
narratives they won't run them yes I'm
right yes so let's let's we can be an
agreement on we can agreement on that
the New York Times is the paper of
record they call themselves they used to
be they call themselves who knows what
but certainly not all you are you are a
very intelligent man you pay attention
to the stuff your audience is is I'm
certain extremely intelligent most
people on in Los Angeles looking out of
the streets have no idea what we're
talking about and in fact when you go
into the airports and no hair or JFK no
no I'm also the guy who goes into the
airport and temporarily when I look at
that screen and has CNN yeah the right
Iran's yeah whatever my brain goes into
the same stupid trance right as probably
even does yours right
it's the lower brain probably okay
probably right so when the New York
Times Jim Ruttenberg I believe was his
name set in 2016
something to the effect of we have to
cover Trump unfavorably or unfairly he
basically said this on the front page
the executive editor Dean Beck a who is
definitely no fan of mine executive Rd
McKay said good good for Jim rittenberg
to say that the paper of record has
established on the front page of the New
York Times they basically by Jim
Ruttenberg we must cover the president
unfairly and when we live in a world and
I'm trying to address your fundamental
argument when the premise is that our
it's that our institutions that inform
our citizenry by the way I believe
government is downstream from media I
agree with solsa NEETs in that the press
has more power than all three branches
of the government and I think you
probably agree with that too if you
don't we should talk about that well I
wish I saw it as distinct from the
essence of government yeah okay
but unlike the government no we don't
elect our media officials and there
aren't any committees and there's no
there's no way of holding them
accountable so when you live in a world
where that is the case and the paper of
record says we are going to cover this
person unfairly and everyone's okay with
that I mean I don't know if it's just
war theory or whatever the ethical look
areum's locations it's again the there's
an efficacy issue which has I could see
for example when you are given a tape
that needs to air and imagine that you
had two ways of airing it you had a way
of airing it with Project Veritas
stamped on it or without Project Veritas
stamped up I'd have to use Project
Veritas I feel strongly about that
because you believe in your own project
no because in order to have the
authority to make the decisions to let
me do them please let me finish this
point because I this is my Martin Luther
moment here I stand I can do no other in
order to have the authority to not
settle the lawsuits such that I can draw
another insider out to come to me with
no where you go I have to I have to I
have to be able to draw they call it the
the network effects if you will
sawing effects of drawing out other
people they they they have to know where
to go to you project Veritas because no
one else everyone else will settle the
lawsuit everyone else's that will quit
there the barriers to entry I don't even
know if this is correct Spanish but like
huevos del Toro
you know like Yuri establishing at some
level that your organization will stand
behind the people who contribute to you
you will protect them that you have the
competency that is how you see Project
Veritas let me seed for the purposes of
this argument that that is true okay
hypothetically imagine a second white
label that had established the same
track record did not cut white label
that established the same track right in
other words people had come to them they
never cracked they never broke and they
never settled on defamation or whatever
right I would submit to you that the
barriers to entry are too high for that
but what I'm saying what I'm trying to
get at is do you acknowledge that you
have not evaded the shit suit very
effectively
maybe you think you've done as good a
job as you could do but I can guarantee
you like I I had a choice when I sat for
this in it when I decided to have you
sit for this interview which is how much
did I want to spend on James O'Keefe and
I thought you important really important
me in my history of what I've done or do
you mean by virtue of the fact in the
crazy left-of-center mainstream game
they play an association game right so
my association yes so you sit in this
chair and I don't and I say anything
that's positive about you you normalize
and the I that's what they're gonna say
whatever the hell they're gonna say
they're idiots yeah right if we if we
think about the idiots who sit in the
golden Thrones inside of the
commentariat we will never get anything
done you are worth spending in terms of
their idiotic calculus of adjacency on
graphs mm-hmm okay so I've decided to
lose credibility I've decided to lose
some viewers I've decided to make a very
easy target on myself just by sitting
with you because they're evil and that's
wrong
you deserve a hearing you've done a lot
of stuff much of it good and I'm still
pissed off and angry and I don't know
that we've exactly connected okay we
haven't even gotten to whether or not
they're selective editing on some videos
all the usual things I tend not to spend
time where other people do spend time I
figure you can have that conversation
with somebody else it's a waste of my
effing time so I want to I want you to
have a conversation here that you're not
going to be able to have anywhere else
thank you okay well thank you so what
I'm trying to get at is I want to see
you more disturbed if you think about
this as a fraction it's important truths
per unit deception or just unit sub
ethical deception okay and your point is
my fraction is positive and I want you
one to search your soul could you have
made the denominator smaller without
making it zero I'm not I don't think I
don't want to hold you to the stand
to the standards of Jesus if Jesus was
an investigative reporter okay the
asymptotes towards that deny it's like
over time I think it'll get cleaner and
cleaner and cleaner that maybe but the
point is is that you had to spend a lot
early on learning your game I think that
and I also I want it to I want it effing
come to Jesus moment if you're gonna
continue to be the only place people can
let's take your insider from before yeah
and that person that says look I
couldn't go anywhere else mm-hmm I
believe that in some sense that's true
and I believe that you have to take on a
new responsibility you're right you're
right I actually one of my I have 14
ethical principles which I actually
don't have memorized but I generally
know them and the 14th is with great
power comes great responsibility very
cliche but I tell my team every day I
got two of my folks are out there in the
the green room in there and they're
winking at me like I tell my folks every
day that we have a profound
responsibility where I disagree a little
bit is that and I'm I am trying to in
good faith get to the fundamentals
usually we've had a good faith
conversation so far oh absolutely I'm
just trying to address your fundamental
pleas argument and it's an interesting
point that you're narrowing that you're
pinning your down on it's interesting
Eric because nobody else even in even
the people I are my heroes of the 20th
century all of them work this sort of
like aw shucks like are you kidding me
give me a give me an effing break about
ethics the guy's not gonna tell me this
stuff unless I go in there that's how
they say it they say the only way to get
the information is to use this and they
they do go for the jugular but they're
not bloodthirsty it's not bloodsport
they they they believe so much that a
government agency's not stepping up in
all the rationalizations that I've gone
over with you here about why we do it
they and for me in college the Lucky
Charms it was literally a justice
complex and when you're wired the way
that are you a hypocrite what's that are
you a hypocrite I am how so I don't know
I say lots of things that aren't true I
lie sometimes I have a rosy opinion of
myself that probably won't I'm serious I
see what you're saying in other words
you're saying I'm a sinner to use the
religious yes I think not to be
destroyed for my sins constantly I don't
always want to be reminded of the farter
from Sparta although it's a pretty damn
good Limerick that is a very astute
point a lot of people have said are
weary because if they're in front of the
magnifying glass you're gonna find if
you're in a bar saying things and I
think it goes back to why you're losing
people just yes in part in part the idea
is I can't see the difference between if
you had a more clearly stated ethics if
you went to greater lengths to first try
can we get the reform without causing
somebody to lose their job but can I can
I make one modification about our vision
statement please our vision statement
has evolved from ten years ago and now
we have these brave insiders that that
where the cameras and and in some cases
violate their own confidentiality
agreements and they're to your point
they're heroes for what they do and
they're willing to lose their jobs and
why because they have some sick fetish
with being martyrs of course not because
they are so motivated by this justice
complex oh and by the way when we talk
about being hypocrites every of course
I'm a hypocrite everyone does things
that make
takes in their private life if you put
my life things too hard I do of course
we have secrets yeah and and there are
boundaries on where I appreciated what
you said before that you had things that
could destroy somebody that you wouldn't
err because you didn't a hundred percent
and we and I tell another ethics rule of
my fourteen rules is I tell my staff
behave as though there are 12 jurors
always watching you Eric this is a very
important distinction between me and us
and I would think other newsrooms and in
the intelligence community a huge
distinction ethically that we that I
believe in is that you have to behave
like there are 12 jurors always watching
you whenever you work mm-hmm in your
bedroom I don't want to know what goes
on your bedroom I don't care I think
that's a boundary I would never cross I
brag when drunk in bars you I don't I do
not do that do you drink
very rarely okay I drink there's nothing
wrong with drinking okay when I drink I
become disinhibited when I become
disinhibited I say things that self
aggrandize that I think make me look big
in the moment and when there's a contact
wait a sec I'm sorry now my point to you
is not to tell you that I'm the world's
worst person in a bar my point is is
that a lot of us go drinking in bars a
lot of us say stupid stuff a lot of us
say contradictory stuff a lot of us puff
ourselves up a lot of us come forth with
lies with truths all sorts of things and
effectively what you're doing is you're
losing those of us who wish to remain
sinners and part of this world now I see
this in terms of a right-of-center
counterculture for example you are
particularly animated by the story of
leftist professors extolling the virtues
of Stalin when he was an incredible mass
murderer I'm with you I come from the
left
I hear you it makes me effing crazy
likewise I can tell you that I am very
very pissed off and angry about all
sorts of stuff that goes on on the right
now in general I spend my time targeting
the left for very different reasons
that you do my feeling is you guys are
throwing the game you make us look
terrible
what are you you're like from my
perspective you're supporting mass
murderers now you know you want to talk
about the starvation in the Ukraine you
want to talk about the show trials you
want to talk about article 58 who the
hell are you to extol the virtues of
Joseph Stalin okay your perspective
maybe that's that lefty crap but I come
from a part of the left that you
probably would get along with much
better you know question but people who
stood up for the working poor people who
are very focused on the abuses of power
wherever they are and I look at you and
I say you are politics your own crew say
like I I see the issue with justice I
have a justice issue as well and it it
both brings out the best in me
mm-hmm and the worst mm-hmm and when I
asked you about like you know searching
your soul and you start talking about
all of the things that make you more
heroic I'm not hearing the part that I'm
looking for which is what opens you up
to people like my family my friends my
colleagues which is you're doing great
stuff sometimes sometimes you're doing
terrible stuff I don't want to get into
what I think is great and what I think
is terrible but it's enough to say that
some of it is great all right I want to
be able to bring my people what you do
when you're doing great stuff and I
don't want to spend three hours talking
about the ethics of James O'Keefe it's
gonna be hard Eric because no matter
what we do
I think it's you're a rare individual
because all of the time it's ostensibly
about the F about the Nerds but in
reality is this but that your case it is
not what you were saying and you're
saying that the methods make an you an
easy target i I it's it's a it's a
conundrum because you can't get the
effects you can't get the no no no it
write an interior point you're not on
the efficient frontier there is just not
there is no other means of acquisition
disagree if you if you were targeting
Twitter let's say okay and you went
through and you said look
we have a new program at project Veritas
we are going to try to get this
information but what we're gonna try to
do is we are going to try to limit the
collateral damage to individuals because
we don't really want to destroy people
what we want to do is to make sure that
it is understood that the world has an
accurate idea of the platform on which
it communicates okay
right and then you went through great
pains and you said look here's our first
line our first line is we're gonna try
to spare people and then we are going to
provide greater and greater resolution
as you come to ignore our work because
the content layer is different than the
than the really sexy humiliation later
the voyeurism you talk I can't stand the
voyeurism maybe it's been characterized
in the 20th century as voyeurism like
the television I say something I really
appreciate you came up with that word I
would I wanted to use it and I thought
that's not gonna be fair to him and so
it feels to me like that's in good faith
and I do think that viewers have a right
to know the public has a right to know
what David Wright said in that bar with
his face mummy I don't know the answer
to that question because I think the
answer is yes okay and I struggle with
it and I understand your argument and I
worry okay okay and I also worry that
for all of us hypocrites in the audience
I don't want to see your face in a bar I
don't want you in a mustache I don't
want you in a dress I don't want you
with a camera in your purse
I don't think privacy is completely dead
I don't know all the business and in
your life you may have gotten to that
point and I know that all of the people
who own tech companies want to tell me
that privacy is dead because they want
to monetize my privacy and I started to
be honest I don't know what they're
doing in their bedrooms and so it's the
asymmetry that I don't wish to live
under and I don't wish to put a camera
on you to keep you from putting a camera
on me now you may have accepted those
terms but I am rejecting the game and
I'm rejecting the game when the New York
Times plays it with New York Times
published my wedding website last Sunday
and and I can tell you in a personal
moment of vulnerability here that that
was hard for me yeah and a lot of people
a lot of people in fact I would say the
majority reaction was they doxed
O'Keefe's wedding
I remember I was in a grocery store
because I think this cuts to your point
I was gonna go store I thinking man that
sucks that hurts but I kind of
simultaneous was like nope that's my
cross to bear
that's that because you've accepted the
game I've accepted that I have not I I I
hear you and most of us you see your
appeal is limited by virtue of the fact
that most of us are sinners who don't
know we're you James o keeffe's editing
don't know where James o keeffe's
disguises don't know where James o
keeffe's
practices begin and end whether the in
general covenant between two people that
is assumed which is often violated often
yeah not not actually but that existed
before the advent of Technology to me I
understand that and I understand your
point that it's better to actually have
an accurate representation of some but
the thing is is that I also think that
in part do you remember like this
program to catch a predator of course I
remember it okay so that was really
really interesting was that the right
way to go about that problem it was a it
was a little different than what we do
it was it was a little it was a little
that was mainstream yes let's put that
out Chris Hansen an NBC NBC NBC Dateline
Chris Hansen would set up these people
with wind and an intra and entrap them I
not legally speaking because they're not
the government but in in the case of
right and robach particularly as this
asymptote gets a little less problematic
I would say to ethicists were just
literally letting people and I and I
mean it's too strong with right we
didn't even quote him like even though
what I'm trying to yeah what I'm trying
to do is to say what Dateline did if it
is in fact Dateline Dateline NBC daily
was to set up something much more
extreme in some sense than what you do
and to use the entertainment value of
catching and destroying someone who
would prey on show you have something an
activity which is completely evil yes in
my book and I don't I'm not going to
back away from the word evil probably
committed by people who are mentally and
psychologically damaged in fact our
friend David Eagleman even gives the
case of a guy who had no pedophilia no
kind of feel like this desires until he
developed a brain tumor and then
suddenly had them and then the brain
tumor was excised they went away then
the pedophilia came back and they
scanned the brain again there was a
tumor so it's possible to destroy a life
based on a weird physiology thing it's
possible that these people are just sick
evil horrible people I don't know what
it is I'll tell you what I do know ok I
know that the activity that these people
were engaged and was evil and I know
that the techniques were entertaining
because they were so destructive and
vindictive so a lot of ethicists in the
1990s and tooth and the 2000 said that
it was akin to using a bazooka to kill a
fly it was voyeuristic at project
Veritas we didn't I said it may have
been sorry I don't even know that I
maybe it was the case that that was so
terrifying that it actually stopped some
stuff I don't know I have very complex
view on this but I strongly believe that
there are some like we're talking about
Google now we're talking about it's this
situational ethics and listen the beauty
and bane of the ethical thing is that
it's inherently situational you can't
evaluate the means used to obtain the
interest to obtain the information in
the abstract you have to evaluate on a
case-by-case basis this is what all of
the reporters have said in the 20th
century when it comes to this and when
it comes to what what what we're talking
about now we're talking about Disney
corporations to children's company we're
talking about Google you know with
whatever a trillion dollar market cap
we're talking about Facebook we're
talking about these these these these
leviathans and and we feel I don't know
I don't know how else to say it and I
know I'm being redundant but we feel the
public has such a right to know I also
don't think you can aim your your rock
with enough force and I don't think your
stone will be true I think that you're
you're not understanding the point which
is you're paying
four things that you could do better by
a limit in the effectiveness of the
project if you could get your politics
the hell out of what you're doing down
this point I'm going to vehemently
disagree with you please we focus we
don't moralize we don't we don't we
don't editorialize the content the the
the the medium is so pure it's the
purest type of reporting we don't add to
it we don't edit it out of context
contrary to reports we don't do any of
that stuff and what other journalists do
is is try to contextualize and add
moralism to it investigate our our stuff
is is hard fact it's it's hard fact and
and people say with your right wing well
here's the deal if the New York Times
wants to say on the front page Jim
Ruttenberg wants to make the argument
that we need to cover this guy unfairly
and they used the paper of record and
the bully pulpit to do that then if I
just take my camera and aim it in any
direction I worst vote I'm going to
record things that are contrary to what
the media says yes and the media has a I
don't want to call it a leftist senator
but like a Democratic Party bias it I
believe that it does you may not I can
say that it does all right no that's not
up to I'm not I'm not asking you to say
I just believe strongly that I don't
have my politics don't where'd you go
after acorn because I logged on to
YouTube and I saw a videotape of of well
three reasons number one a girl messaged
me on Facebook and said I'd love to do
something on acorn so I logged onto
YouTube 2009 I typed into the search bar
acorn because I didn't know a lot about
them and I saw a video where there were
squatting foreclosed homes and I looked
at up I said well that's against the law
so while that might be morally justified
in some circumstance I think that
someone needs to expose or test these a
Quan workers propensity or willingness
to break the law and then Hannah Giles
the young woman said why don't you poses
at why don't I pose as a prostitute and
I said well that's interesting if
there's a prostitute who probably should
be some pimps so I was
I was testing and affirming why is it
that this organization which may get
billions of dollars in federal money is
allowed to break laws and do people have
a right to know that information and
what was different about what we did is
we just walked in off the street and had
a conversation it wasn't some elaborate
deception we go after the sacred cows
Eric we go after the organizations that
the media is unwilling or unable to
invest I believe that there's a huge
problem that you have it an ostensibly
and I hate the term left-of-centre media
sort of a center-left oriented media
that refuses to go after center-left
counter-narrative stories and that would
be a counter-narrative story so in other
words I I think I can tell the tale
which is each there is no news outfit
that is so good that it can run counter
narrative stories and there's no news
outfit that's so inept that it can't run
a story fairly that comes right down the
center of its narrative and then the key
question is what about the stories that
are you know thirty percent oblique to
the to the narrative or who knows what
right so this is like the main problem
so given that the major organs you know
tend to be aligned with this sort of
center-left perspective those stories
don't get cut that they they live in the
blind spot and so I understand why you
do it and in part this is why I target
the same group of people because my
feeling is is that they are destroying
the confidence now what really divides
us is is that you and I have radically
different ideas about what to do about
this problem and I'm concerned that I'm
coming across and I'm saying here are my
biases mm-hmm
right and you're even saying your right
wing if I say your right wing versus
right-of-center versus conservative
versus all right like there are all
sorts of ways to conjugate players of
socialists Seymour Hersh the guy who
broke the My Lai massacre was an
anti-war activist all of the people that
have ever done anything worth doing as
far as arm ski about manufacturing
that's not my point my point is is that
anybody who's ever found facts
we're the fiercest of indignation fused
with the hardest of facts were total
ideologues and more power to them as far
as I'm concerned as long as what they
were reporting was actually factual I
understand it is not your job to
investigate all facts and that you're
you have a right to choose what you want
to focus on it and right now that's
probably the Fourth Estate is the is the
beat I understand it but you I'm missing
the point well or I'm or I mean I say
most of the discussion is really good
but we there is a point at which we the
ethics of what we do and and and I don't
know if I can I don't know if I'm
qualified academically to go deeper
strike me as very self-righteous and
insufficiently reflective with respect
to some of the most persistent critiques
and it is not the case like I don't
think you've ever been given your do for
the good that you do like Trump when he
does good we tell him that he's a jerk
right okay in general as a society so
the idea is that he just if you wanted a
model when you decide that somebody is
themselves bad there's a belief that you
should never say anything positive about
that person right because to do that
clutters the issue and the issue is we
know we have a bad person so for example
Hitler gave there was a protest in the
Rosen Strasse of women who wanted their
half Jewish men back from the death
camps mm-hm and somehow these women were
so badass that they actually caused a
problem for the Nazis and the Nazis
relented and released these men okay do
I want to say good for the Nazis for
doing this whore this this thing in a
middle of a horrible you know psychotic
situation I don't want to say a damn
thing and that's positive I want it to
be so simple so clean that it's just not
C equals bad right right so this is kind
of the problem that we have is is that
we don't want to acknowledge anything
good about somebody we deemed to be bad
but but the way our videos work is that
they slip
the disk insofar as they force a
reaction and that end justifies at that
particular mean maybe the idea is I want
you to be a little bit less certain
about the numerator and denominator of
what you're doing because it adds up to
effectiveness and that I know that in
the next two years somebody is gonna
send you a piece of video that I am
going to say oh my god that is
incredible I needed to know that that is
the most important thing and it's gonna
have project Veritas stamped on it and I
am going to show that to people and you
know what they're gonna say I'll just
tell you because I move it I move in
academic left-of-center circles you
can't trust anything from Project
Veritas and I'm gonna say wait a minute
are you claiming that there's a cut in
this are you claim just let me go in I'm
listening honestly are you claiming that
this never happened are you claiming
this and they are not going to listen to
a word all they are going to say is I've
got my fingers in my ears my eyes are
closed and I'm done I'm done I'm done oh
so I don't have to hear a single thing
James O'Keefe ever says that's their
strategy to keep you from having the
impact that some of your the best of
your work deserves and it will work for
a while but then one day we'll catch
some things and we'll catch some more
things and for some more reactions and
little by little over time people will
go you know but that there's a guy in
New Jersey David Perry that guy was
caught on tape telling a person he
thought was a child abuser teacher just
lie and put it back on the child the
Democratic state Senate of New Jersey
where I'm from this is two years ago
held hearings about it they they they
the governor of New Jersey who's who's
Phil Murphy's a big big friend of the
teachers union was forced to condemn it
so what by getting the reactions from
the institutions by forcing other
insiders to come forward it's just after
a while that I did we just keep going we
just keep doing it and I do my health
and you're you were partially effective
and I can't get the knot I'm not trying
to focus on my self-righteousness or my
heroism what I'm trying to do is is tell
you that in order to do this job the
reporter has to have a sense of singing
narrow tunnel vision
nothing can get in our way if I let
anything stop me from that vision which
is a very by the way I it's going to
happen we're going to recruit more
insiders they're gonna record more
things inside these institutions and and
that there's gonna be double the output
every year and and and after a while we
did one of these stories in Delaware
where a teacher a teachers union
official was caught on tape and the
union said you can't trust Project
Veritas their right wing extreme
criminals and the membership most of
whom were probably Democrats but not as
political as us we're like but he was on
tape protecting a child abuser why are
we trying to cover that up there was a
slip in the disk and I've got the
documents I could show you the source
material where the members were talked
chattering on the internal message
boards and Eric the president of the
Delaware Union said do not click on this
YouTube do not give O'Keefe one more one
more view and all of the members like
but but what's why I hate oaky but
what's wrong with what he did here so my
point is content is king James you're
not getting it I am well I feel like
what you're doing is you're telling me
that you are effective and I'm not
disputing that why why bother telling me
because if you want it because if you
want to evaluate the ethics in the
abstract it's impossible for me to
justify I cannot it's in pot telling you
to be an angel I'm really not it's it I
cannot I will not it is ethically
impossible for me to justify using a
disguise and in the ways we do because
it's like trying to I haven't even said
anything about whether you're entitled
to do some of that stuff I'm maybe maybe
I need to make myself clear maybe maybe
so but I believe what I it's going to be
very difficult for me to make an
argument a logical argument defending
methods that taken in the abstract are
indefensible on their own it's like
trying to one ephesus says i trying to
invite fireproof wall a fireproof coal
or dry water i can't i'm not asking them
to be a perfect angel i'm telling you
something different which just doesn't
land okay I don't think you're on the
efficient frontier
I think that there are things you could
do that could minimize the individual
harm and maximize the anti institutional
effectiveness of your operation more
individual harm right in other words the
problem that you have is is that most of
the people that you're broadcasting to
are like me poor Schmucks who don't have
their stuff completely sorted out they
partially sympathize and partially
cannot stand the people you're catching
on video mm-hmm and by doing more to up
the ethics of your game you would have
more effectiveness and I'm not saying
you have no effectiveness I'm not saying
you've done no good I'm not saying you
don't have huevos of Steel I'm not
saying that I haven't thrilled to things
that you've released I'm not backing one
second away from my decision to invite
you here and I think I made absolutely
the right decision I I have things I
could try to gacho you with I think
you'd be fine with it because I think
you're a pugilist and you accept the
game in a way that I do not and the key
issue is I'm standing by what I'm doing
we want your heroic behavior and we want
you to get some of the flies in your
ointment out maybe not all of them okay
all right I think I think I understand
and going you want to see you struggling
with the fact that somebody's not gonna
have a job when you're done with them or
somebody's gonna be humiliate or
somebody maybe will take their own life
at some point so why put a pic with
sorry when you could have pixelated
their face and gone after the employer
like insulate the face if I use these
strategies you can figure out what look
as I said I'm not making a case that I
would not make against Dateline NBC you
don't know what you you don't know the
unknowns which is that we do in fact
redact omit and otherwise not pretend
sack war hisses face when you had him on
your program yes yes until yes and he
made the decision to go up I understand
that but my point was that there was a
period of time where you were protecting
your source yes and not protecting the
target gen gen I google or examined and
what I'm trying to say is I
want to see you wrestle with the ethics
more than justify the ethic because to
be honest I had a phone call with you
and you were wrestling with the ethics
and it was inspiring I think you I think
I wrestle with them more than you see
that's what I'm saying and at night I
getting a little naked at the at the
booth here i torture myself yes that's
what I'm trying to fuckin say and most
people don't okay see that in the single
single-minded driven you know you don't
wrestle with the idea whether you're
gonna protect your sources what would
you wrestle with the ethics this is the
thing that I do you have to take my word
for it but at night when I don't believe
that when I'm in my bed I'm you willing
to die in turn I have an internal
dialogue with myself for example in the
upcoming story which I'm not going to
say on the air and the upcoming story we
have this person that was we had to
protect for reasons I can't even say and
our team had two days of conversations
about do we blur the person's face to be
a right your name we did all that and it
and it comes down to a cliche which the
Pam Zekman said in the 1970s which you
have to balance the harm to the person
with the with the weightiness of what is
being exposed and internally you only
have to do that on the efficient
frontier do you understand the point if
you're in an interior point you are not
at the point where you have to balance
those two things yet your first goal is
to get to the efficient frontier and
that's an issue of skill okay
help me understand more help me
understand bridge of this concept for me
efficient frontier Americana let's sing
harm versus public importance right
imagine for example that you hadn't
pixelated somebody's face but you could
pixelate it and you could have the same
effect now just for the moment I see the
point is you don't yet have to balance
the harm to the individual in fact you
can even get a boost in both it could be
that people say oh my god he's trying
not to destroy the person he's really
concerned about the platforms that have
a bias that can't be discussed in public
which I'm really disturbed about and I
also you know I hate I really hate the
Donald Trump as president I really do
mm-hmm
but this is a democracy and we have
there wait wait wait okay
go ahead we have a right to elect Donald
Trump if that's what we're what we're
gonna do we don't have a group of people
that gets the right to stop Donald Trump
you either signed up for democracy
project or you're not I'm signed up for
the democracy project so if the
electorate elects Donald Trump I have to
accept that Donald Trump is the
president I don't have to like it right
but that's part of what being an
American is and goddamnit if my guy at
some point wins you're gonna have to
suffer through him - it's a tough shit
right that's that's the bargain that we
signed up for is American mmhmm okay
you don't have an unelected group of
techies who get to keep their finger on
the scale and say well for the good of
the world we have the right to control
the election because all the information
passes through our servers okay I get
that what if you're in a situation where
you can protect the individual and by
protecting the individual display a kind
of humanity that causes more people
rather than fewer to sign on because the
content rather than the destruction of
the person is what really animates us
are you telling me that I'm being D
boosted and down ranked and they claim
that they don't shadow band because
they've got different words for it are
you telling me that Google has an
internal thing called a good censor and
they won't talk to us about it is there
an esoteric exoteric game are you
telling me that a bunch of people whose
politics I don't know is determining
exactly what the contents of my mind are
and that we can't even discuss this
I'm animated by your content and what
you're instead showing me is the
pornography of personal destruction
interesting interesting the pornography
I've heard say it was me the pornography
of personal discipline ography if I
think personally struck I think I've
heard this some I've heard this argument
before or somewhere someplace by someone
so that I've actually thought about this
and I think we're we're where we
disagree on the premises that I'm quote
destroying unquote someone by letting
them talk and what I'm what I'm when I'm
trying to reconcile here is that I we
believe so strongly that that journalism
is corrupt because you don't see
the intonation the movement of their
eyes I've already see that this you
already see this to me but to me this is
directly connected to the premise that
we're destroying people I don't think
we're destroying David right and and I
had maybe when they were freeing I had
the walls better and I'll come after me
okay okay they like personal destruction
don't get them wrong they're in - I
think you and I agree on those all right
so then I don't need to grapple with
that but what I'm struggling with is I
don't view it as a destruction and I'm
and I'm ready and willing to live in a
world in this sense I'm not have this
right but where if some wants to record
me to bar bragging bragging openly
because this is you're you're also
getting paid from this I mean I don't
mean to say that that's what well
actually I think we make a profound
comment about this I started in my and
I'm passion I'm not angry I'm just
passionate because I appreciate that I'm
not I'm just passionate I I started this
on my parents bedroom floor with a
laptop people thought I was freaking
nuts and and and and and II I don't want
you making this argument may get better
for you
well the fact that I said that you were
getting paid for it doesn't mean that
this is your road to riches you could
get more money doing something else let
me make the point very clearly okay am i
right that you're basically willing to
die for what you do might come across as
you know I don't are you always at risk
death for what you do it's a very calm
are you willing to risk personal
destruction for what you do what are you
willing to risk jail for what you do you
probably yeah I think you're willing to
risk ruin yeah okay yeah my my favorite
guy Albert Einstein said that the the
public intellectual has to be willing to
risk ruined financial ruin but he
generally jailed talking during the
McCarthy era okay okay I think it's very
admirable I don't see enough of this in
my world and I struggle with this how
much am I willing to risk to run the
show
how much am I willing to risk to do an
episode on Jeffrey Epstein when I don't
know what the hell is on the other end
of that story right there's no amount of
money that you can pay me to do that's
not why I do it all right i sat on that
i sat on that episode for a long time
but I just found it was
looking out at me I couldn't stop
talking about it because I'm worried
that I'm part of a country that looks
the other way when somebody who has
intelligence maybe a freelancer who
knows you know is is is trafficking
twelve-year-old girls in my cut in my
country and my reporters won't stand up
and ask the goddamn questions mm-hmm
right and so I don't even know if I made
a sane choice I just know that I
couldn't sit on it any longer with that
said this is your game it's not my game
mm-hmm and therefore I don't have the
same need to be able to say well I'm
willing to go into a bar okay you've
accepted the game so you've accepted
that's the price of what you do but what
you don't understand is the rest of us
are not like that and because we haven't
made that bargain we both think you're
protecting us and hunting us at the same
time if you were trying to hunt power
you could have less collateral damage to
the individual and I won't say it again
because I think I've said it enough
right my feeling is you displayed enough
depth of character on the phone when we
were talking as you struggle with these
issues and you evidence
a higher level of inner conflict of
dialectic of concern your stories would
benefit so much more from showing that
person rather than the person who knows
exactly what the laws of one sided
recording are in Montana versus Iowa III
hear it and I wrestle with that every
time we release a story I probably
should have started by talking about the
process by which we wrestle with it both
from a company like my colleagues and me
personally at in my bed every night
these are these are inherently
situational tests but going back to our
rules for radicals book which you know
we could talk about or not but to hell
with Lex all Lenski I know I people
think it's controversial I keep citing
alinsky but the he says the nadir of
immorality is to do
nothing and he this is what he says then
in a deer of morality is to do nothing
and I could never justify inaction and I
tried Eric to live a normal life my
personal story is is pretty crazy I
tried going to law school I tried going
to business school and I'd sneak out to
get into the video lab like you're right
I I have a unique role in society and
which maybe makes me more willing to
subject myself to the tactics that I do
but that somebody has to do it the
insiders it's point zero zero zero zero
one percent of people are probably
willing to strap a camera to themselves
violate a nondisclosure agreement for
the public's right to know in the
country four hundred million that's a
lot of people there are roles that we
have and we I don't know if maybe we
just want to move on to the next point
and you know who would told Palicki is I
remind me he was a Polish I guess
nobility and he had the idea during
World War two that he should visit
Auschwitz so he dressed up as if he were
Jewish so that they would take him into
Auschwitz and he did reconnaissance and
he organized resistance and then he got
himself stuck out so he could tell the
world now it was deceptive was it
justified twelve thousand million
percent
it's not about deception right it's not
about not wanting to bring these
institutions when they're doing wrong to
their knees and it is not about the
issue that I do not see I I completely
agree with you the journalists have
taken this privilege for themselves as
an indulgence of working for The Times
that they have the right to behave in
this fashion and those outside of the
club do not mm-hmm the issue has to do
with whether or not you are actually
being effective in not wrestling in a
more productive way in front of your
critics given that you are going to
continue just if I take things where
people are simply going to feed
you information because they can't trust
anyone else and my claim is is that that
is what places this moral burden on you
are you familiar with Stanley McChrystal
and Michael Hastings in 2010 you know he
burned McChrystal and with the Rolling
Stone magazine it's customary for
reporters to go to you know speaking of
going to bars and the military brass are
saying things could have off the cuff
yep
and are you familiar with this story yes
McChrystal resigned or was fired by
Obama or whatever the case may be do you
believe in that circumstance that
michael hastings is this a is this
consistent with what we do are different
because it didn't involve the case of
video no offense it's not just about
video it's about the fact that you are
one of the only people standing outside
of this structure
who's got the organization and the
stones to go up against this and
honestly in some sense i'm doing a
different version of this I'm not as
powerful I'm not as prominent yet but
the portal is in part another place for
things to come to the surface that need
to come to the surface where there is no
other break and I guarantee you they're
gonna try to fit me with the same shit
suit that they fit you with oh you can't
trust that that appeared on the portal
did you see this one tweet from Eric and
here 2011 blah blah blah this taken out
of context that Russell conjugated etc
etc my point is you're not filing a
flight plan and I don't want to meet you
in the skies doing your barnstorming
tricks too many costumes too little
pixelation too much hidden-camera shit
too many people being felt being made to
feel that they are vulnerable when
you're targeting an institution like a
tech platform right and you're
collateral damage is an individual who
went maybe misguided maybe sanctimonious
maybe hypocritical this is the William
Tell problem from the original tweet
that I tried to mention you keep aiming
too low now you can come back at me and
say Eric what the hell have you done I
could say you know what I'm so worried
about hitting the kid did I knock I'm
not coming
to the Apple so I'm willing to be the
other failed part of this enterprise but
my point is maybe you want to take your
aim a little bit up and maybe I need to
be a little bit more pointed and
bringing it my arrow a little bit closer
to the fruit I appreciate your point I I
think I understand it now thank you for
well thank you for putting up with me
hearings a hard hard conversation this
is a unique conversation because I'm so
used to dealing with disingenuous and
bad faith criticisms but I don't think
it must you what you're getting you
gotta get all that are doing I just I'm
just you're just going deeper into an
issue that most people at least on the
surface don't have an issue with and I
will say that on a bottom being very
vulnerable here but I'm I consider
myself a pretty transparent person I can
say that on my staff speaking on behalf
of our reporters for a minute who
operate anonymously really wrestle with
this and in some cases we even have full
curriculum workshop I can't get into all
the things that we do when we train our
people but we actually have an entire
half a day where we man is it's do you
do you empathize with the person that
you're your and it's almost like we
accept it we take our medicine that I'm
talking on behalf of the reporters and
we go well how to balance the public's
right to know and circumstances will
determine what they're saying and it and
we do jury we do struggle with it and
the way that I'm wired in my brain is I
have internal dialogues with myself
yes that's what I'm trying to get it the
people people don't know that I know
about me no kidding in fact I would say
even my staff doesn't even you know
that's what I gambled on given what it
is that you do because you do things
that show super piss
you don't have to believe me but I hope
that you'll take your word for it leaks
out and what you do James but I mean my
man I mean to say is this very important
point I James O'Keefe have internal
dialogues in my brain like an angel on
one holder devil and right I do this I'm
wired to do this I think I have a
internal governor that like a like on an
old car that that stops the how fast
you're going
that governor and I surround myself with
people Joe Halderman czar one of our
producers
he's never voted for Republican his life
and he's never voted for a Republican
ever he's a he's an old newsman and I
tried to create a management team that
we really do grapple with these things
but but what it comes down to is the
people believe so much and I'm and I
mean I'm coming here from a very I'm
trying to be as genuine as I possibly
can they believe so much in the value of
the information and the public's right
to know it that they kind of have to
take that medicine and deal with the
harm done to the individual in that
specific circumstance and it's something
that we we do despite the harm not
because of it we don't we don't want
harm we farther you get away from things
that look like entrapment selective
editing invasion of privacy right
needless destruction of personal
reputation etc etc etc all the stuff you
can imagine the greater you make the
intake of your messages because more of
us understand that we are not in your
crosshairs you see in part I don't
really I don't want to be your worst
nightmare I want to be your best
nightmare I want to be the person who
has the conversation with you that gives
you the criticism that you never get
because most of the criticism is at this
very simplistic level right I have to
grant 12 things before we even get to
the conversation that we're supposed to
be having okay well we got a chance to
do that and I promised you that that's
what you were gonna get am i right that
there was no misrepresentation as to
what this interaction was I think you've
been very fair and I think you've been
very fair and a bit very forthcoming and
I really appreciate that
what I want to say is I would look
forward to being able to have this
conversation with you again when and you
have my number
feel free to call me up the key thing
that I'm trying to focus on is to the
extent that what you do is a good thing
that must be done and to the extent that
there is almost no one else willing to
do this
consider that you are not on the
efficient frontier and that upping the
ethics may up the effectiveness I
understand what you said about you
cannot afford a denominator of
negativity that is zero or you know
badness or whatever you want to call
mm-hmm right my claim is is that
partially what is harming the efficacy
of your of your project is that people
feel that they are in your crosshairs
it's a very technical argument and that
you're getting too much pleasure out of
the voyeuristic spectacle and I don't
think that's actually what's motivating
you I really I'm gonna gamble and say
maybe that makes it mimetic and people
want to want to watch somebody be
destroyed but the information is so much
more important the ABC might be holding
back information on Jeff Epstein that
the major tech platforms have their
finger on the scale and may be trying to
tilt elections I don't even remember the
names of these people I don't care and
you know to be honest it's like in a
corrupt world if I go to Nigeria I
guarantee you I can find everybody
taking and giving bribes right right and
so in this moment of universal
corruption you really want to point to
individuals being sanctimonious or sub
ethical or you know disguising speech we
all do it so what might my claim is is
you have an unique opportunity which is
stop talking about the trade off and
start working on getting to the point
where the trade off kicks in point taken
well I'll consider that James would be a
pleasure to have you come back and
further the conversation we look forward
to what you guys do next let me know if
I can be a constructive force in your
future and I'm really glad whatever the
cost that we chose to sit down I think
this was a conversation that I was dying
to have with you and you have behaved
terrifically in that chair and thank you
sir and thank you and we welcome
let me just say we welcome skepticism of
even ourselves we want we I try to be as
transparent as possible even into our
methods more so than others so I welcome
this I appreciate I appreciate you also
we
so you've given me something to think
about and something to research further
I I've never had anyone drill so far
into this argument and I'm happy that
you did so and I will think about it and
I hope to see you again I look forward
to that so you've been through the
portal with James O'Keefe of Project
Veritas please find us on Apple stitcher
Spotify wherever you listen to podcasts
and subscribe also navigate on over to
youtube and not only subscribe but click
the bell icon so you'll be notified when
our next video episode drops be well
everybody and stay safe during this
bizarre corona epidemic
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]