good morning this is gonna be an
interesting time period I did not post
the link because I am doing storytime
and that will make it more difficult I'm
trying to process rehash sit with my
story revolt and with my sister and in
so doing I have a bunch of no it's like
I don't even know where to start
I don't even know where to start except
that how I normally explain this one I
don't want to explain hi normally
explain it it isn't about a story for
entertainment it's about getting my
highest learning out of it so I can be
my best self and listen to my path
wherever that that might lead but also
though there's a lot of background and
somewhat humorous stuff and somewhat you
know ironic and and working through that
so I don't want to like live in that cuz
I don't want to push away the feelings
of the actual stuff but I also don't
want to just count that because it's
part of it is my journey I mean the
irony of everything I'm asked to do and
put through and the gifts I get out of
it are what I'm here to showcase and
share and write this this thing
especially with my sister is a huge part
of that so I'm one I'm in the middle of
three children my sister was born first
and then two and a half later I was born
than two enough later as my brother was
born and me being a neglected middle
child is actually a big part of my story
and an giardi and I can't imagine being
any other way of course who can who can
imagine you know the the a different
human being than they are but looking
back at our childhood a year in a bit
ago versus now looking back at my
adolescence with my sister looking back
at my entire life with my sister is
definitely in a different light than it
was January 2019 so I don't know whether
to start and give you a bit about her
childhood and then flip that like that's
basically I do so like I said I was born
to half years after her she's a very
beautiful blonde feminine little person
and so when
we were kids she always got like more
feminine thing like if they bought us a
pink and the green
doll or blanket and I would get the
green and she would get the paint can
that was just like the normal it was
never a question she always got first
choice on everything because she was
first born but also her personality
which is a first born personality that
even when my parents would maybe give it
to me because they usually gave it to
her she would play it go behind the
scenes and get it from me because she
was alpha and I had I didn't I hate I do
and hated conflict and so any conflict
between her and my parents I would try
to mitigate any conflict like inner
conflicts I would try to mitigate and
there was a lot of them price to pay for
that like she was a child it was a
narcissist but like all children her
daughter says basically and would ask
for what she want but that would create
tension in our family like why aren't I
I want to be in gymnastics I want to be
in this I want to be in that and I want
clothes and I want to like she just
didn't see our family for the
socioeconomic status we were and so she
would bring this this tension so I
wouldn't ask for anything but I did such
then she like there is I'm not I can't
just paint me in a perfect light and in
this story I mean she went out and got
paper outs and paid for her her clothes
and paid for makeup and things that she
valued at a higher level once she was
able to do that of course she couldn't
do that as a young child and then I
totally stole those things and used to
them because I was the little sister
that's I did I'm like sneak into her
room and use them without a revision
because she wouldn't give me her
permission which not that she should
hope that's not really part of this but
looking back at our like my sister has a
lot of wounds with my parents because my
mainly because she was a somewhat unruly
teenager better parents would fumble
handle that mine couldn't and she ended
up going to live with elders of our
church for a few months when my parents
couldn't handle her and she was wreaking
havoc on our family our family story 30
years on is that
that like how what a horrible thing to
do and they gave her away what a wound
and it's all on them and nothing's
nothing's on her and that's one of the
things that changed in my after this
incident where I was like actually you
were really disruptive to our family and
although I don't I would never do that
with my kid I don't think what do you do
when you have three right and your one
kid is wreaking havoc and you have an
option for them to go stay with someone
who's much better people to handle the
teenager enos at all so mister was just
like a she was the black sheep of the
family
in teenage time and she like no I
remember when I started high school
there was this moment where one of my
teachers read the roll call and we
thought - my name was like Jubilee
Briscoe was like stopped attendance
brought me out to the hall and was like
are you related so you her neighbor
actually for for high school was Candace
that's her actual name but it's what she
went by in school because these other
girls changed her name for her she was
popular but I also saw the drama that
went with that so I like chose not to be
popular like in high school when I
couldn't kind of hang out with her and
her friends it was like I don't want any
of that drama like actual friendships
and actual connections and so we also
when she she got kicked out so she that
was like when I was in junior high that
she moved out for a few months and then
she um got kicked out when I was in like
grade ten she had she says drama with my
mom yeah my mom have a much better
relationship than she doesn't and she
has diagnosed my mom with narcissism and
if he know about narcissism narcissistic
parents generally will have a scapegoat
at a golden child and so she definitely
labeled me the golden child and her the
scapegoat and there was like evidence to
that but also quite frankly I was the
golden child like I I got good grades in
school I tried not to cause havoc I was
very conscious of any kind of ripples I
would make and try not to make them and
was I'm just like my personality's
middle child peacekeeper don't make
waves total and hers is
firstborn center of attention
everything's me I get my stuff first I
get and that is our personalities from
basically day one so we grew up she
moved out to Vancouver pretty much right
after her high school and I moved right
after my high school to Vancouver as
well my dad was already living here I
lived with her for a portion of time we
actually lived in a row house I we lived
with her boyfriend who's like one of the
only very few boyfriends I've ever like
defers and the reason I'm telling that
story is that at the end of us all
living together I was gonna be going to
volunteer to go to Costa Rica so I had
this box of memory stuff and she was in
her and her boyfriend broke up and she
was moving in with her other Alberta
friend that we lived with and I had one
box of memory stuff that was probably
like this big that I wanted her to keep
for me for three months she was like I
can it'll be nicer guys I can't keep it
in my stuff so her boyfriend of the time
ended up taking it with him and because
they broke up in lost contact with him
it might as well have been lost him to
be third luckily actually I got this box
that back to me by another mutual friend
to miss like by the way this guy still
has your stuff can I get your address
and I got a box full of stuff about six
or seven years ago cuz my daughter was
already born but this box that my sister
would not keep for me for three months
is a big part of our story because she
moved to LA four or five years after I
moved to Vancouver my brother had moved
to Vancouver he was here about a year or
two
my brother and I moved in together and
she moved to LA and when she moved to LA
she had this box of stuff that she left
with me and I moved this box of stuff
ten different times she would come to
visit because it's her memory stuff in
her box of pictures and memories she
would open it destroy it all because it
was like this this box that was about
this tall and like this it was the
square box about this big it was about
this tall and it was full of papers and
so it was heavy and it was always
anytime she went into it it would like
explode and then I would try to she
would never put it back together I had
to put it back together every time and
every like I would ask her time and time
again to take this box with her to LA
it's her memories take it with you take
it with you never to go with her I had a
dog of hers that that I had four four Oh
oh my god I when she moved to LA she
left her dog and her dog was very unruly
it everywhere bit people a bit
especially my brother and I it was like
the worst dog and eventually because I
was like I can't this isn't my dog I
can't keep it
nobody's gonna do cycle find a home for
him for her I was like I can't find a
home for her nobody's gonna take her she
bites she's gonna get put down she's
like well then take her to the SPCA I'm
like I'm not gonna take your dog to the
SPCA haven't had a horrible last few
weeks before she's put down if she's
gonna be put down I'm gonna take her to
be put down so at least she's with
someone right at least that she someone
that's part of her pack I mean my sister
ended up bringing the dog and finding it
at home and it was it was horrible but
that was what nearly the entire web is
like if you make me kill this freakin
dog because you are not responsible for
it I am gonna have an issue but I ended
up taking the dog to LA I actually was
the one complain it was like sparking
the whole time my hair plugs in it was
like this because you can't have it out
and on your lap it has to be in the
stowaway stuff so my so this box that I
had that she took apart so many times I
don't know my heart rate
so last year she joined this
millionaires
helps millionaires YPO group and she was
and I don't have to go back further
so three years ago she was foster
adopting this little girl and she was
really really happy for the weekend in
love with this dog the girl who she like
identified as her daughter and then
after the first weekend together she
found it actually the maternal
grandmother is seeking custody and she
was heartbroken she to look after this
girl for for three months
well then we'll the maternal grandmother
was getting her stuff together and she
was constantly in this state of like
she's mine I'm gonna get to keep her and
trying to keep her and that's not how
the court system works through the
foster care system works if there's a
blood relation that wants the child and
that's there in any way capable
to get it and the foster system it
definitely showed a lot of holes in the
foster system in California and what
that looks like but she was treated like
child care but she also but she spends
thousands and thousands of dollars on
this little girl on like formula like
state of the art from Europe formula
which that Plaza repair people were like
don't you need to give formula that's
like the same thing they can buy at
Walmart because that's what she's gonna
be used to oh that anyway she's gonna be
used to it and so I went to visit my
sister while she had this little girl
and it was a really weird trip because I
went and saw Kyle cease while I was
there which you watched my other videos
that is how to also a falling apart the
loss of a while but it was it was a
really powerful weekend if anyone has
done self-help stuff like gives me this
boost of energy for a period of time
before it kind of dissipates it falls
apart and so thank God I went to that
because she went through losing this
this foster daughter while I was there
she took us to we all went to Disneyland
I said to my daughter got a princess
makeover my sister has money I don't
she's rich and I'm poor or were anyway
which is always attention with us
because I don't want to be rich and she
definitely doesn't want to be poor and
so it's it's a mismatch every time we're
together it's like can we can we go for
a picnic and not spend $500 not spend 80
bucks to go for a picnic anyway so we
had to visit Bella no getting taken away
and which is heartbreaking I mean having
a child than not having a child is
heartbreaking and and I although I was
like thank God I was able to handle that
stress because I just went to the Kyle
sees day but we end up growing a leg of
lamb I ended up going to Universal wit
and Disneyland all of which were for us
but also like that's a lot the problem
Persinger grunt rip especially someone
with chronic fatigue but my chronic
fatigue was a little better during that
during that time period but my sister
herself right off her 40th birthday
while I was there and I felt like I was
I was her rock for that for that period
and I always her emotional Rock I mean
that's what it is to be sisters is I've
managed to bring down my stress level in
my own life to near zero because I have
to for my
nervous system I can't handle stress but
my sister comes with a certain amount of
innate stress because she's a roller
coaster ride of emotions and risk and
like so you can't be associated with
that and not be getting stressed but
it's like secondhand stress that I was
like okay I love you in my life I don't
want he likes you're not going to change
so I accept those things together but
like those like accept a foster kids
foster kid gets taken away she went to
Bali for to like deal with the
heartbreak the last day she was in Bali
this guy that she was was came at the
same time and up killing himself the
last day like these things just happen
to my sister all the time and did she I
mean she chose to be a foster parent she
chose to go to Bali but like I don't
think she chose to get the daughter
taking me I don't think she chose to
have this guy commit suicide
I'm sorry um take his own life it's not
a crime
so can't commit it having so anyway this
box that I had for so long she has YPO
she's finally oh no that's got to be
part of the story - so she's horrible
dating every guy she said she dates a
lot and yet at the same time they're all
shitty shitty people she's had two
boyfriends that I'm like yes he is a
fine individual instead of he is a
shitty human being I mean she's dated
sniper she's like hi what is from
whatever that she she did and she has
never had a relationship last longer
than six months and then bringing this
up because it's it's like that's her her
I want to say shadow side it's like what
she's here to learn that she can't seem
to figure out it's her relationship and
what I'm here to learn that I can't seem
to figure out is my health stuff no
matter what I do nothing works for
health no matter what she knows like
about the words relationships and so a
year in last year she was adopting
because of this whole heartbreak think I
need a baby I need like one that's mine
that's not gonna be able to be taken
away and I watched her go through that
whole process with fertility treatment
she was dating this guy who had physical
disabilities or he couldn't like
necessarily clean the house as well and
he couldn't do stuff and he was he's the
other guy
the one we lived with and and this guy
are the only two I've ever seen her date
that are like good human beings and they
broke up basically because he has a
disability because he can't match her
energy
I can't match her energy betters like
too much energy going on I mean even
before I conserved myself so much
disability before I had the events
because I had I have lifelong
disabilities and I've acquired ones
before I acquired my disabilities we
were not compatible like I went I've
traveled three places in my life every
place I went up spent like three months
there she did like all of Europe in two
weeks like we're very compatible with
our traveling and just with her with
what how we choose to live our lives
like she's an entrepreneur who chooses
to take high risks I'm like I can I need
to understand to mitigate all the risk
and so last so there's this box there's
this box I have health challenges and
this freakin box I've asked her to take
with her and she hasn't and she's opened
it I've had to put it back together 20
times and then she has these to this YPO
I she needed to tell her life story for
YPO and she needed to tell her life
story for adopting this finding a birth
mom and adopting and so we made a time
to go through this box this box were
like she can handle things on the fly
back that's how she lives her life I
need things scheduled she changed
schedule and we were gonna go through
this box like 5k actually was twice but
so it was on her he's like I'm tired I
couldn't possibly I'm like I need a time
so I can save spoons and do it so we
went through this box we went through
every picture of the box looking for
childhood in high school and old all the
like events of her life we went through
every single picture together we had a
stack of like yes scan that or send that
to me no and and I don't think we had
it's a stack of throw out I have chronic
fatigue and going through this box I
took all of my energy for a long period
of time so I stepped over it for like a
week before I was able to put it back
together put it back together scanned
her the photos and went about my life
and then I had family day happened which
is a rather new holiday and
see I took my daughter to the local
community center and spent my students
what they do when I'm a parent like I'm
gonna she wants to go play in the
balance II castle help and so I was I
was exhausted and I get home and there's
a text from my sister or saying like I
need you to go through the box I need
you to find to find by European photos
it was like hard no it's not happening
I'm not going through this box I just
went through it for you I just finished
packing it up
I'm exhausted it's not happening those
and those photos don't exist there are
no European photos we both saw them
there's nothing in there there's like a
few pictures of random streets in Greece
none with you in them you could get
better photos off of Google like I'm not
going through this and and she's like
you're being passive-aggressive I'm like
I'm really not being not so aggressive
I'm just not gonna do this for you the
task is meaningless there's no picture
so even if they were there I already did
this for you I'm not packing up that box
again it is not happening and and I live
with my dad so I I went to him and said
like my sister wants these she I don't
know if she wants you going through the
box ask her first and be my dad he
didn't just went through it sending
another text being like I was like you
wanted the photos how important is it to
you I'm not able to do them and so the
next day I wrote her this letter and I
have them up I don't know whether I'm
they're gonna read it cuz it was a year
and a bit ago and it was a just me
explaining my life to her because she
doesn't understand my life she doesn't
understand my disability at all because
I say about all of my spoons to go visit
her because I know she's a whirlwind and
even though she may be cuts down hurts a
little bit it's like I have to match her
energy I have to match her money I have
to match Matt which is again on me like
I beam that wasn't necessarily
explicitly stated but I had freaking box
this bottle of it that's my daughter
even a year later is like you guys
really not talking over a box like yeah
it's over bucks well I thank you for
attention this story I told a lot
actually a year ago and I told it and
that's why I'm like ready to get back in
touch there's a microphone selling it
one last time and see how it is and this
is the first want bread so I'm
read the emails because it is part of so
Oh full disclosure this is me writing to
her full disclosure I'm very angry with
you at the moment but I'm going to try
to write this with as much compassion
understanding as I can your last text to
me sorry a box in 10 minutes is so
overwhelming for you except you were not
you were not sorry at all that 10
minutes of any activity can be extremely
overwhelming for me I can pay the price
for weeks or days you don't understand
at all what my life is like I know you
try but as soon as my conditions my
conditions cost you anything you freak
out you're freaked out itself costs me
already limited spoons here is a bit of
what I'm dealing with
at this exact moment in life our guinea
pig died a week ago in Aurora keeps
that's why she's burst into tears
because the cage is still in our living
room which I do not have the spoons to
deal with I have to make doctors and
dental appointments for for my daughter
and myself for months now our entire
house is a mess I need to have it clean
for my time off with with my kid max
week it snowed in Vancouver which means
we're home which means my kid was home
last week and I had to take the bus
everywhere which included a 40-minute
walk home in the freezing cold on
Valentine's Day because the buses were
not working I'm still exhausted and achy
from this our dryer stopped working I do
not know when we will be getting a new
one I have to hang up and take down each
load and I can only do about half a load
at a time because that is all I have
room for it it takes all my spoons each
day to do that half the load of laundry
future events I have to prepare for my
kid is off of school all next week and I
am on cooking at cohousing on Thursday
night which it may snow again and I
might have to take the bus and pick up
pick up my kid in school
Aurora also I think you playing try to
say every day but not Saturday or also
has swim classes on Monday and Wednesday
that we have missed the first two of I
have to get her to the remainder also my
health is getting worse and I'm trying
to figure out ways to improve it it is
terrifying to think what might happen in
the coming years if I cannot figure it
out
wheelchair needing to give up custody of
Aurora to you when I am low energy I am
impatient and bitchy with Aurora and
have no spoons to do anything with her
we
are often on survival mode for weeks at
a time yesterday the Monday of a long
weekend after having little energy saved
up due to the previous snow week I
decided to use my spoons for days so I
can take a road to the Family Day event
she is one of the few people you
historically be in the other that I will
not go into negative spoons or willingly
because she pays the highest price for
my condition I feel like she misses out
on a lot over the last month I have
filled out paperwork for you a week's
worth of students oh yeah I also filled
up paperwork for the adoption process
bought the box out of the shed made
plans to go over through it on Friday
you cancelled because you had a bad day
once you were able to get together I
spent two plus hours on the computer
with you going through the photos and
sending them to you spent a few days
stepping over the photos until I had the
energy to clean them up spent an
afternoon dismantling your photo book
that was falling apart and would not fit
in the box got the box back together and
stored it in the living room for when I
can manage to get it back in the shed my
house fell apart over the days I was
dealing with the box I love you I did
those things knowing they would cost me
spoons for days because I know how
important they were to you and that I
was the only one who could do it when
when we went through the Box the first
time I half jokingly told you that this
is the last time I know I said it in a
voice you might not have taken seriously
I don't even know how serious I was in
the moment but it's the truth that box
holds emotional charge which is a
microcosm of the dysfunction in our
relationship I've asked you on several
occasions to take the box with you I
have moved it five times and I've had to
repack it after you and I went through
it at least six times now as long as I'm
a Spoony I will not be doing it again
when we went through it the first time
there were no European photos that you
deemed worthy of being in the guest pile
and when I went through the photos to
put them back in the box I did also did
not see any European photos all of your
European photos are somewhere else last
night when I got your text I did not
have the ability to go through them it
was a hard no for my body when you have
the flu and can barely watch the
bathroom or make yourself food that is
my normal when I am crashing if you do
not if I do not listen to that feeling
flu it lasts for weeks explaining my
limitations repeatedly cost precious
spoons which I am already lacking I
cannot dilute the emotional labor to
deal with your drama over and you're not
jumping to your command not a request
it's like
clearly was not allowed to say no to it
in the future if you have a request of
me it needs to be just that a request a
request can be emotionally physically or
mental and they all cost me students
before you ask me if I need you to sit
down and ask am i her name emotionally
or mentally equipped to take a no if not
you cannot ask it of me if you are then
asked me and I will listen to my body
and give you an honest answer as to if
I'm capable of doing it in the past I've
ignored my body clearly say no to your
request and I will no longer be doing
that I'm not going to explain the note
to myself or to you as figuring it out
and communicating it cost me spoons I
don't know why last night was such a
hard note for my body but it was I need
you to speak to me with kindness always
and if you're unable to then find
someone else to vent to about me if
needed my body cannot take being yelled
at especially from you because of how
much I love you when making assumptions
about me assume goodwill please that I
will help if I can
I am not out to get you I'm not being
passive-aggressive just the passive part
maybe out of necessity what is what is
simple and easy for most others is not
for me as for the box it is probably
best if you do make arrangements for
someone else to have the box someone who
is capable of fulfilling your requests
in a timely manner that you require them
done someone for whom ten minutes and a
box is not an issue that is not me I
love you and it hurts me greatly when I
disappoint you I need to prioritize my
health and these about boundaries will
help retain our relationship I still
want to be someone you can turn to when
I'm able to but I need you to understand
that many times I will not be able this
will always always is so always hurt me
more than it hurts you love your Spoony
sister Jubilee yes and then so then my
sisters response to that was that she
thinks my daughter should come stay with
her for a while are you open to that I
think she thinks I'm depressed because
of my condition you look like I'm not
I'm not depressed I know what depression
feels like she stated that she would
help with them like that she would get
my daughter there because I was so low
on spoons like I cannot comprehend that
I cannot like if you can get her
physically there and yeah she can come
stay with you for two weeks but and then
it went from like yeah she'll figure it
out with her friend who lives
my brother will do it too like oh well
you just need to get on a plane and get
her here and then go home and I'm like
that's not in any way what you just said
like it's not and so then she sent so
what I asked for in that letter was
kindness I'm a Spoony I can't handle
stress I can't handle doing these things
I need you to be kind to me and I need
you to like if you're requesting
something for it to actually be a
request and so now I'm gonna read the
other one that she wrote to me I'm gonna
I'd there might be some parts I don't
share cuz they're a little personal for
me but honestly I'll probably share it
all because it's it paints me in a bad
light through her eyes but I don't
associate it with it with it even though
it was very painful when I read it a
year ago
so Oh Mike anyone anyone with this booty
disability I'm sorry for this because
yeah anyway Jer jublee your life is a
choice you have chosen this path and you
have the power to choose differently
this may be hard for you to hear but as
your sister I have the point I have to
point out that when you were pregnant
with Aurora you were looking for ways
not to work and you decided you would
make a fictitious story to go on
disability I don't know where she gets
that from I told you at that point at
that time to be very careful because
having to repeat out loud what your
words over and over again that you are
sick and in pain which is what like at
the time I'm like I'm exhausted and in
pain and she's like well if you keep
saying that it's gonna kill words like
that's not making it up it's starting
small and then anyone ever trouble it
will manifest in your body the world was
created in every tradition by the spoken
word the spoken words are powerful and
they create the lives we live I have no
doubt that if you continue to use
language of spoons limited energy
fighting for disability you will end up
in a wheelchair you have been through
numerous doctors who say you were not
ill no I haven't not a single doctor
center model and and you fire them and
get irate when they say you can work
yeah that has happened with several
doctors with the medical system doesn't
support it's like well we can't say you
can't works we can't do this we can't do
that and many doctors yeah I have been I
can tell that story next Sunday I see
your commitment to proving them wrong
I'm not saying that you do not struggle
on a daily basis or you are not in pain
or your experience is invalid I remind
you where your power
lies your mindset is making you weaker
every day I've observed you becoming
recreationally angry selfish and
entitled over the years yeah in your 20s
you felt entitled to steal from
Starbucks which I totally did I worked
that I shop I stole money from them to
pay for my trip to Costa Rica and felt
that they should find your trip to Costa
Rica in your 30s you felt entitled the
steal from Whole Foods this is a
dangerous game involving a serious lack
of integrity and it manifests in your
body then you decided to live off the
system which I have to remind you has no
basis in reality back when you began her
side most importantly it robs you of
your own personal power to make the
money you needed to go to Costa Rica to
buy healthy organic food and to make a
living in a way that affirms who you are
as a person and how you contribute to
the world in your own unique way I know
this is hard to hear and I have zero
tolerance policy for self-pity
unless it's coming from herself I have
been through my own battles including
the loss of a child my ability to have
biological children I have fought
through labor or board cases depression
ATD sexual assault sexism poverty buying
bullying and always ask myself where
does my power lie here what can I
control and in spite of everything I've
been through who do I want to be I do I
don't do emotional ultimatums or
blackmail nor tolerate people who avoid
responsibility for the results in your
life I hear you saying you have
extremely limited energy throughout the
day I would really like to support you
but it feels like you were pretty set
set on and maybe even invested in there
not being a solution by picking up on
that correctly I have boundaries our
relation I have I also have boundaries a
relationship is important to me but it's
not helpful to keep feeling sorry for
yourself I can only listen for five
minutes unless you're ready to discuss
solutions of course my heart goes out to
a boy living in this condition having a
mom who is impatient sleeping all the
time and smokes weed daily I say I see
her committed to these results by
choices you make every day regarding
Aurora I know that the best place for
her is with her mother however her
mother is not in a healthy place right
now and I feel like the best place for
her is to come and spend an extended
period of time with me I can research
putting her in a Waldorf School here of
course I do not see this as a permanent
solution but it breaks my heart that you
think that the way she's being raised is
okay and totally acceptable my friend
her horrible friends
I'm inserted was in a place where she
was completely incapable of taking care
of the girls and they had to spend six
months living with her parents she took
that time to build her life up and
become a better mom she has done much
transformation I'm so proud of her
her girls reap the rewards now ball
continues to be in your court I have no
doubt this email will enrage you but we
both have the right to speak our truth
this is mine this is how I feel I also
wanted to point out that this email a
neglected to mention the work you have
done on yourself or all the ways that
you are a great mother and sister
because that's not what this email is
about just know that I do see those
things I do everything I want power to
encourage the Lightning you the part of
you that wants to evolve and grow my
response which was you know I'm just
trying to see the time period the same
day
Aurora won't be coming to stay with you
for an extended period of time the dates
I gave you by a text are okay if you
want to make the arrangements for a
visit she's excited to visit with her
auntie I know you don't understand my
life or health challenges you probably
never will
I appreciate that you love us and want
what is best there's a silver there's a
sliver of truth to what you have said
but it is not helpful to come from you
do to our dynamic my evolution comes
from within and not external sources
especially you because what works for
you does not work for me what we have we
have different paths and that is okay I
will learn what I am supposed to learn
as I am meant to learn it the universe
is love and we are all perfect and
growing every day what I said about
boundaries is what I will be aiming for
and what I will be following listening
to my body and answering my truth
without explanation emotions you feel I
will need to release responsibility for
the emotions you feel I need to release
responsibility for it's an ongoing
learning I am listening to my voice and
my truth not yours and that can be
really hard for me sometimes because
your voice opinion have been so
historically loud in my life it may look
to you like a lack of love but I do not
want to open up your wounds either but
for me my and Aurora say I need to look
for my I have to look out for my health
first her response on this email chain
same day also my voice and my truth have
been loud for you because you amplify
them
was literally what I was saying I'm glad
you are finding your voice and support
100% thank you for allowing me to speak
my truth I never said it was that your
truth only my view from where I'm
standing I would love for her to come
stay with me however long you feel
comfortable however either you or our
brother will need to fly her at least
one way I bought the so from I will do
everything to actually you guys need to
flyer it's like that's not the spoons I
don't have the spoons for that where's
the other one okay so I so have more
emails to read done check in on stream
very quickly so his expression yeah
spoons is an energy current an energy
currency for people who require it that
we actually have to worry about the
spoons they happen today which I do and
I've learned to manage them quite well
but not from her point of view cuz from
her part at you it's my it's all mental
all of it hope it's mental she hasn't
had an issue with hell it's like her in
her relationships I'm like just make a
relationship work just make it work and
this is so then she so I then brought
her so that was the 22nd this is now a
few weeks later and I wrote her I love
you and I am having a really hard time
figuring this out and allowing this
process to unfold it feels icky not
talking with you I know two things one I
really want you in my life to I cannot
change to be in a relationship with you
I do not know how to currently have a
relationship with you well you feel what
you do about me and to have it not be
toxic for me I can I can't just ignore
it and I can't seem to ever explain it
to you in a way you understand I have
tried to explain tried to ask for what I
need I know I just have to love you
exactly fully exactly as you are now as
and as I am now which is what I've been
asking of you I will get there
you are too important for me not to my
process is slow yet powerful I love you
my lack of communication is not a lack
of love and I was out for a walk when I
said that oh and like 15 minutes later
because I was so I'm gonna read this one
then I'll come back this way I love you
and I hope you're getting everything you
need this is hers to me
our time apart has allowed
me to reflect on something I also need a
boundary in our relationship which is
your negative talk about capitalism and
everything I stand for over the past few
years as my career had advanced I've
witnessed your blatant attack on
capitalism which I can't help but feel
personally even if it is not your
opinions or your own I support you and
everything you want to build and do and
be however for me that includes having a
boundary where you where we don't talk
about those things or have you make
statements like not everyone has money
not everyone can afford that or not
everyone as you which by the way
although sometimes it was more blatantly
it was more like other people don't have
that it's like I don't have that I can't
afford that oh yeah see that's the voice
I think it's about you I was talking
about it because that goes into humor
and like masky and as opposed to do I
still have an emotional charge so that
was February and March of 2019 and I've
spent the last year working on it like
okay I still have Marshall in charge
talking to friends about it telling the
story reading that and every time I
talked to one of my good friends and I
don't have relationship issues like my
ex who I dated before having my daughter
is one of my favorite human beings I
love him we're not necessarily
compatible he's way more compatible with
his wife but like there's nothing about
here where I'm like yeah he's a bad
human being yet my sister didn't quite
approve and like she was critical of him
when we were together I'm like I don't
date bad people you know like what is
that and anyway when I told him the
story when I told one of our mutual like
one of my friends who actually likes my
sister the story all of them are like
hangar sister's toxic like your sister's
toxic for you you're not suppose I'm
like really hi Jen's anyway wouldn't she
sent me that thing about capitalism it
was such a weird because I was I had the
message the that I needed to give her up
I needed to let her to go I had to be
willing to not have her in my life and I
wouldn't know I was not willing to do
that I was like crying and arguing and
not willing to do that and when she sent
me that email
like you can't talk about capitalism
anymore there was this clear choice it
was like your sister or your project and
hands down I picked my project I was
like Oh 100%
I picked this and then over the course
of the year cuz you can tell from the
email up is still very much like we give
her stuff oh I'm still my sister I love
you I just need some time apart and it
became like I don't know how much time
that part this is gonna be but then I
looked back at our life and her and I'm
like oh my god she has diagnosed this is
just my side of the story she's
diagnosed my mom with narcissism her as
the golden shiny as the golden child her
as the scapegoat and I was like not only
is that not true she like in our adult
life we've a little bit flipped the
other way I'm like she's actually the
narcissist
she actually has invented that I like
this game code it's like I can't do and
there's there's a truth there that isn't
like when I was just writing out the
seven areas of life because I was like
in a real way she's either better than
me at these things or I'm better than
her at them but in no ways that relevant
or family like it's like okay like she
so the seminary's like she's like
spirituality so she took up meditation
when I had my brain surgery which by the
way she made all about her my entire
family well I'm under the knife for 12
hours was like focused on helping her
get through it and that's kind of the
story of our lives
I need to go get my ears pierced it was
all don't like her almost fainting
because poor me I'm like how do my bed
speak up about you like I looked back at
my life and and okay yes I stole from
Starbucks to go to Costa Rica but it was
also one of the best things of my life I
still don't feel guilty about that she's
like actually I still stand by what like
Starbucks said they were a coffee
country that they would help their
partners I either their employees their
coffee countries they were committed
that year to literacy and health care
and we were going to build hospitals and
schools in Costa Rica I was like yeah
give me 500 bucks and they were like oh
no if we gave it to you we'd have to
give it to everyone and so I as my 18
year old self was like you're funding it
anyway and basically a little money from
cervix
pay to go to Costa Rica when I
volunteered mind telling him to do sound
like yep I totally did that and then
which talks about stealing from Whole
Foods wasn't hopefully with those
choices right weren't and they were a
horrible employer and I gave basically
all of my old friends and Starbucks are
working for minimum wage
very cheap groceries for the sign period
that I worked there and this is where
we're not in alignment because I I
follow my guide in my values and my
values aren't not to steal from
corporations like I just don't have
because I understand capitalism and
where our money comes from and all like
I'm like I don't have a problem I would
never steal from another human being but
yes the big multinational corporations
the only reason I don't know is the
legal ramifications of like being a mom
and not wanting to go to jail it's not
because I feel good about it and then
she loved herself in with the doctors
I'm like if you want to do that if PTSD
around doctors I avoid them like the
plague and yes when they have hierarchy
over my life and they tell me to do
something that I absolutely can't do
then I have an issue with it like I said
next next Sunday because we're doing
Sunday storytime I can give the story of
my medical story and why I'm not a fan
of doctors which also because there's
nothing
none of them who've done anything
horrible it's just the overall that they
think they have the answer when they all
contradict each other
someone else figured this out but with
my sister so anyway she adopted a child
last year in April at the end of April
he was born and so because we have this
thing in February I knew he was born he
was gonna be born and a papal beginning
of May hey that was my deadline in my
head of like getting back together and
then she had him and I was like okay I'm
no way ready in fact I was going through
like hatred and extreme anger because
that is what I needed to go through like
oh here's everything my sister's cost to
be in my life and I had to go through
the processing of that emotion in order
to get back to neutral in any way my
issue is that and this is my issue and I
knew it a year ago I knew that like that
I was gonna do the work to repair a
relationship it was never gonna be her
she's she doesn't think she didn't like
she doesn't think she did anything wrong
that's never an apology Toby in fact
looking back at my life there's never
been a
for anything ever and I asked my brother
of my Kashi ever Napolitano never
apologize for anything
she promises it's just like she thinks
I'm ungrateful because she has given me
things she brought me to Disneyland into
Legoland and paid for a hotel and that
was in me and Universal and I really
like Harry Potter remember they like
Lego my kid got a Disney Princess
makeover that she promised I am grateful
for those things but also I'm like it
was too much for one visit and like I
there was this point she lived by this
this grocery store in LA called air one
it's like a really expensive Whole Foods
they've really amazing stuff but it's
really expensive and they have their
there their stuff they make like their
juices and their students and their
stuff that you can't buy anywhere else
but a lot of their stuff is the same
stuff you buy at Whole Foods in the same
stuff you buy Trader Joe's Trader Joe's
is literally three blocks away and we're
driving and I was like can we go to
Trader Joe's instead because she like is
like no we can't I'm like okay then you
buy the seven dollar yogurt I was like I
can't this stresses me out I can't look
at seven dollar yogurt but this like
tiny thing and think that's okay so just
tell me how much money it's gonna cost
for the week I'll give you money for
that no we can't do that
I think so I think what like I don't
understand we had this other I it was
after I went to LA and that meant the
whole thing happened with money in like
she left for the day she drove me to the
airport
she left her wallet at home and so I had
to pay for lunch and I was like yeah I
can absolutely do that I was like here I
have 40 bucks on your second we can't
eat for 40 dollars here's what you do
you look at that menu you look for an
entree one tip you just can't have
drinks and dessert and under hors
d'oeuvres and a main dish you can buy
two main dishes for me you and my kid
for 40 bucks us no problem and she came
to visit one of her best friends who I
love lives a couple of her best friends
live in Vancouver but they live like an
hour away and she was staying with them
and stuff I couldn't ask them to drive
me and I'm like yeah you could have
she's like your sister you've been
friends for 20 years you can ask her for
a favor you ask me for favors all the
time and anyway so she was here for like
four or five days
and she came to stay with us for like
two hours before going to the airport I
was like are you freaking kidding me
never see your niece and she came and I
was in a bad mood and I end up freaking
out on her I'm like why like why can't
you stay with me for a night it's like
yes I understand I don't have a guest
room I understand like but who cares
come and stay with your family my place
isn't clean but quite frankly neither is
yours when you just like you have
she has house cleaners and nannies at
all and it's like your house is still a
disaster
you're still a disgusting human being
like what it is like it's just that that
realizing there's areas of our life that
I'm better than her at but even there
like I the spiritual side she meditates
but she's like fake spiritual like it's
like all of it's just positive
gaslighting like if you're not positive
it's like okay so you're like she's like
well of course you get sick of you
saying you get sick every time we've
hung out with her and my kid my kids
been sick my candle had a cold or the
flu my sister will say she could he
possibly get it because her immune
system so good she'll share a utensil or
share a cup with my kid and then she'll
get sick and then she's the biggest baby
about it I'm like you don't have magical
immune system that you pretend you have
but then I get sick but I'm like I might
get sick she's like cuz you said you
would you also got sick he also got sick
and so there's these events and because
she was alpha and I did i placate to her
like I I went through every I'm like oh
I've cleaned your tub I don't know how
many times so that you can have a bath
you've never cleaned mine she has
absolutely done things for me she came
to stay with me before I had my
radiation she did come down for my
surgery even if she was useless for it
she came down for when I was supposed to
give birth my kid even though that
nobody was here because that's own story
um but it always is with this if she
gets something out of it like if she can
look like the savior if she can look
like he's and there's other things that
happen where she's like yes there was
her friend that lives here we went to
stay with her friends at one point in
time I was camping out in the yard then
we ended up drinking mimosas all day
just to stay again and that she decided
to leave so I had to spend the night and
her friends whatever hello the story but
we had
when you say is her friend one of this
of this other guy was there and did this
internal massage stuff where it's like
massaging your veins and he was like yes
if you don't talking about me if I don't
change something I'm probably am gonna
be completely disabled and in a
wheelchair and stuff in a few years
mister was like hey I will pay for this
massage for you and I was like if you
will pay for it I will try it I mean
I'll try anything it's the issue that my
sister has money and and like tries
things for her health and their life
changing because she never had a health
problem it's like I did this cleanse
that I have so much energy I'm like
right but you don't have a health
problem it's like maybe in a
relationship I have no problem in a
relationship my relationships last
longer than six months but I'm in them
and some are situation surgery your
brother good old good old I looked after
her after her she had a fresh surgery
twice and I looked after her and I mean
it's just and then like she adopted this
little boy who I wanted to have in my
life and and I was very upset but also
knowing being a mom I was like oh God in
two years we can talk the first year of
a baby's life is is like this it's hard
and yet way easier than at any other
point until they're about seven or eight
like it gets harder and harder and
harder until it starts getting easier
and I'm like you so the three things if
you look at the letter I was like okay
so the three things we talked about are
her business which is YPO millionaires
helping millionaires all about
bling-bling I'm like I don't want to
 hear about that I don't want to
hear about how like you got put to the
front of the line for adoption how you
get put to the front align for medical
stuff if you need it because you're
millionaire's I'm not okay with that
that is in no way okay but I'm not
allowed to talk about my my project
which is making a world that works for
everyone and honoring that some people
don't have money and some people don't
have capacity then there's parenting
which is like she's not a parent yet
she's been a parent for like three
months to a newborn which she did an
amazing job of but it's like yeah talk
to them when your kid talks back
talk to me when they're running around
and you don't have three nannies guess
what just happened she had to fire her
nanny she lost her business like she's
now at home with but
as everyone is in the quarantine in Los
Angeles but I'm like when when my
nephew's - I know she'll understand more
of what I went through and my kids - but
that means I miss out on the first two
years of us life like I miss out on his
baby hood because baby hoods not that
hard and she won't won't get there
she'll never she was also just getting
out of a relationship with this guy with
a disability she's dealing with her
infertility which is like her own
version of disability I'm like I could
tell you all these things on your own on
you on you like does that help that your
whole life you said you didn't want to
have a child because it would wreck your
body and now you're infertile does that
help to think that you're responsible
for it because you mentally thought
about it no men in fact is poison which
is exactly what she's doing to me it's
like we used to shoplift you you use
words like pain and spoons I'm like well
how do I explain it if I don't explain
it like it's a very hard line to follow
and and I had to own and go through the
process of my responsibility in that I
was faking my disability just not in the
right direction or to the people she
thought I was that I was faking being
better with her than I actually was
because at least subconsciously she made
me feel responsible for my brain tumors
when I had them never like fully like
brain scan they're there I need to have
surgery and then I need to have
radiation and I felt like a failure on
both of those because of how she talks
about things like that
so no I'm not gonna let you know what my
body's actually like so I kind of let
her think that that I wasn't returning
to work because of that and like I was
like but at the same time there was all
what was actually going on there like my
work won't accommodate me as they were
before and I can't go back like this and
she also doesn't like my mom had what I
had when I was a teenager but she'd
already left the house and my mom also
still has it but hers is it's not that
hers we have about the same degree but
my sisters my mom doesn't have all the
other factors she's not deaf in one ear
she doesn't have autism there's like
other things that she doesn't have that
don't make it worse and we're both like
my mom just retired so she was still
able to work more or less full-time her
whole life I'm not
it's it's it is what it is my sister
like built a business that I was could
have been sold for a million dollars
constant like well would I make millions
of dollars I'll be able to do XY and Z
I'm like you're never gonna do that
you're never gonna help the appellations
because you're never gonna have enough
money to want to give it you won't even
give it to your family like it's like
you have to earn it first
something like earn it okay well I what
does that look like like whenever I
think I'm gonna win the lottery it's
like I give it to my family in my head
right like what I got my sister this
about my brother this it's like she
feels absolutely entitled to to money
which he did earn she put the risk in
she put the effort in I'm not denying
that but at the same time it's having
like she's entitled like I'm like you
think you're entitled because capitalism
is giving you money that you think
you're better than everyone else and in
a real way like less so in the last four
years less so so she started meditating
and such but like I've witnessed her go
into a coffee shop and go to the front
of the line and be like I'm important
like I mean why everyone in LA drives
like they're the most important person
on the road and you gotta cut everyone
off so that's just everyone but it's
like those kind of things just happen
all day every day she feels entitled to
everyone's time she'll turn to my time
which is why this thing happened it was
like I need this done now like now it's
not an option for my body and so after
like I see this events happening and
well it's happening it's really hard and
I know I need to process this because
the irony is you go back team bringing
the letters what I I I'm from my side so
I mean clearly like I'm like I don't
think I did anything wrong here there's
not a single thing I did wrong besides
maybe taking a year in a bit my nephew
was born but like I can't control time
so this process happened I tried I've
done somatic therapy of a regular
therapy of the coaching I've done a lot
of things on can I get rid of this talk
how do I get to the point where I can
love and accept her for her even though
she will never love and accept me for me
she'll love it she's like I love you I
want what's best for you she wants what
she thinks is best for me right she
wants and like only that is acceptable
and so when I look at our areas of life
it's like spirit
quality well she meditates and lives in
LA so she's clearly more spiritual than
me I'm like really cuz I've always cared
more about other human beings I've
always just like when we were Christian
I was more Christian and more attached
to Jesus and now I'm like actually I
experienced the truth to this at a
different level you can't even get there
because you you have like you won't even
acknowledge your shadow side and be
there and if like there's just a very
big difference between striving to be
something and allowing it to come out
and they're they're kind of diabolically
opposed if you have an idea of
perfection that you're living towards in
whatever way you're living towards it
that's not the same as looking to be the
best you it's like she's been looking to
be the best businesswoman and mother and
wife and emotionally like these versions
of this instead of who are you actually
like stop trying to be the perfect wife
and just be you in a relationship and
try to make it work like like you being
the perfect mom actually makes you a
worse mom like if you watch kids whose
parents are rich and powerful and look
like the perfection they have a really
hard time because they can't live up to
that you know their parents and
society's metric and it's like that's
not gonna falling apart and giving your
kid permission and so Christian to be
human and so my kid anyway so the three
things are like our projects and she's
like well we can't talk about capitalism
I'm like projects out you're not you
can't talk about your eyelashes if I can
talk about how we're gonna dismantle
capitalism into create a world that
works for everyone
sorry I know no desire to hear about
millionaires healthy millionaires
parenting which is like your ways always
gonna be right in my way it's always
gonna be wrong that even though I'm like
I can see the results of my whatever I'm
doing my benign neglect seems to be
working out fairly well my kid is loved
and she is like a force of nature
she knows who she is she knows she is
loved she is intelligent in a way that
though Katniss I'll be measured with
grades is like oh my god how did your
mind come up with that how did you like
think out of the box like that her
problems
solving capabilities and your personal
skills are huge and now that
homeschooling and working on her school
Ian's a whole other story
her take care and schooling all other
story but I've heard her story close
last very it's now we're working on
numbers and letters I'm like okay we
need this foundation actually this
foundation that I'm somehow that's it's
led through the cracks because I could
when she was going to world school
because she would have learned it
eventually in the her old school clothes
was like oh right you're great too you
don't have to read it she needs in
regular public school and so parenting
is off the table and then my health and
like like I said I'd like to her about
that condition of my health I didn't sit
there and complain about my health to
her cuz I knew she was the least
sympathetic person I can't complain she
what brain tumors I'm not gonna complain
she'll being tired and in pain even
though like she's like body on her vibe
just like it's all and like you have you
ever anytime my sisters in pain the
world needs to come to is into it to an
end emotional physical it's like she's
like I overcame a DD you don't overcome
a TD you never had it you just like I
overcame anxiety and like you had an
anxious afternoon is not anxiety or
you'd have compassion for people who
have anxiety I do have anxiety of how do
my whole life and I've overcome a lot of
it and so I Benchley if I can touch
those do together I'll be able to offer
it to people right like here's how I
overcame anxiety she can't cuz her idea
was like I pushed through it that's
that's not it that's not the thing then
you can push through it and then it's
gone okay thread then it's not the right
thing and so that I asked for her to be
kind to me and to ask or if she's gonna
ask for a favor actually asked for it
and not make a demand and she did the
exact opposite which is actually on a
character like I mean it's in character
cuz it's all like like I love you and I
care about you but I'm gonna like throw
this on you and I'm seeing that and
seeing I was like and I could then see
that in every area of our life and every
part of that that that has cost me every
time I've diminished my light every time
I've shown up as less than so that she
could have the light and she could have
the privilege like even
oh because I was in this play when we
were really little kids and I really
liked acting but she got hurt her she
got upset that my mom cast me is the
lead when she felt she was entitled to
it so I like never acted again and she
kind of went into acting and became a
director and I was like so that's her so
I won't touch it and then I was like a
straight-a student and and in no way it
was she like well I won't maybe first he
went electoral pursuits in fact she
thinks that she hasn't went to
post-secondary she didn't get good
grades and she is intelligent but it's
like my family in no way accounts right
intelligence like I'm like I'm the only
one who's been to university gotten a
degree I'm the only one who got great
grades in high school even though my
brother's it's actually I would say more
intelligent than I am at that level I
could be he would have gotten the grades
except they didn't mark how key his
brain worked it was like I don't know I
just did the work in here I didn't put
on paper that like even the things I
went to university for science and
finance they go to each other for
instead of coming to me like hmm
interesting interesting and that's so
like spiritually she she thinks she's
higher than I am I'm like actually me
going through my health challenges me
just being present with whatever less
that I'm supposed to learn I have a
deeper level of compassion true
compassion for people that I've always
had and then I've also grown from where
I'm like I started higher and have grown
more just not under society's metrics
like I don't look spiritual I don't look
like I'm his dad master I don't look
like I'm calm and like I have my
together because it's honest it's I'm
not faking it like it's like right I'm
not trying to be a vision of that I'm
being the actual thing and this is
actually where I'm at and I'm constantly
reconnected to source I'm like oh look
how far I've come and look at how much
how much I spiritual intellectual by any
metric yes it's like I also I have brain
damage and I'm intelligent and it's hard
for anyone who's known me before and who
knows me now like it's it's a different
because if I use
be able to do something why can't I now
if I can do it on day one why can't
Sanjay wait on day two and that is what
it is have a chronic disability it's
also like you try living with my brain
it is a freaking roller coaster it's up
it's down it's like it works it doesn't
work when I allow it to do its own thing
magic happens in my area of genius and
purpose and when I try to force it
everything falls apart and anyway so I
asked my sister for one thing she gave
her the opposite which is exactly what I
needed and if I hadn't been through the
other thing with my with my neighbor
cohousing who when you have a chronic
illness you have these things run
through your head they're like what if
people don't think I have it what if
what if people think I'm fakie and one
of people this what if people that um
specially I'm socially savvy as well and
she said those things to me I mean like
she said like you don't have a
disability you're like a freeloader
you're and in her saying those things I
was able to heal a lot of them cuz I was
like okay there's Parts I do feel like a
freeloader and I feel like maybe I'm not
pulling my weight as much as I could and
I started sleeping and walking the yoga
studio and I was like this is something
I can do I enjoy it I can contribute in
this way I'm good and now I don't in any
get because no one else was like yeah
you're a freeloader
I was like a dog sitting watching
someone's house how was that for free
loner like they wanted to pay me and I'm
saying don't pay me anyway that if I
hadn't had that experience with her then
my sister doing this would have been
absolutely devastating because I already
had kind of like the baby version of
that if like this woman who I thought
was we were like at least acquaintances
and saying these things that I was
worried people thought about me but
don't say out loud actually saying them
out loud was like oh okay
and my sisters say and I'm almost like
okay but what I said was still true I
can't have a relationship with you if
you think those things of me because you
were gonna show up that I'm faking that
I'm it's my fault in everything and that
is it's like she doesn't take
responsibility for her own actions like
when happens in her life and she
says she takes responsibility she
doesn't she's not like I'm responsible
for this daughter who came and got taken
away and broke my heart
I'm not responsible for like having
chosen to go to Bali but if I did have
those same experiences than I'm
responsible and chosen like one bear the
others I do think I chose everything I
think I chose brain too
I think I chose my family I think I
chose being the middle child born two
and a half years after her because it's
exactly what I need I needed to be the
Forgotten middle child and to be
discounted and downplayed in every area
I'm strong in and as well as every area
that I'm weakened because I'm I keep
trying to go through this list of seven
things which where am I getting she was
already in art but like intellectually I
have the societal standard yet still
she's thought of it least in our family
like like I read this book so you should
all read it if I tell people to read a
book it's like oh oh ten years later
someone else' mention if you like saying
I heard about this yeah ten years ago
when I told you about it it's all good
it's all good and if she gives it that I
know it's not for me and that is a
powerful lesson to have but it's also a
hard lesson when she thinks her
solutions are blanket for everyone right
everyone doing this everyone concerned
eyelash business and make millions of
dollars no no no it's like anyone can
you eat healthy will remain healthy no
you were healthy that's not the same as
having a disorder and the reason I have
a disorder is because of my compassion
and my need to like be the beta here and
both in like that I acquiesced is the
word it's coming up to her all the time
it was like okay I'll meet you where
your money is I'll meet you where like
and there were times especially as a
parent that this came up right as she
came to surprise my like ninety five
year old grandmother who actually don't
really get along and that was not good
my grandmother appeared to have a stroke
and there's all this conflict between
her from like whatever and it was when
were her and my mom were yelling at each
other
in the living room where my trunk put my
daughter down for a nap and I was like
oh I can't be the middle child
peacekeeper and the parent parent is
what I choose and so I was like you guys
need to deal with your I'm not
dealing with it I'm like go for a walk
my kid needs to sleep and but then there
were also tons of times like after my
grandmother's we know my sister paid for
me and my mom and her to go to Banff
which was amazing again generous but
it was like I have this two-year-old who
needs to nap and is sick my sister the
one day we have off decides to do a road
trip to Jasper which is like five hours
away so my kids like fun hurts in the
car in a car all day I get a cranky up
til 10:00 my sister's like okay it was
like yeah sure we can skip that time it
we're gonna have a grumpy two-year-old
it's like mad at me cuz my kids grumpy
mad at me cuz she got sick he's like you
chose to do these things and now I
guarantee you now that she has a kid
it's gonna be like I mean it's on his
schedule
kids don't don't fall in life on yours
and that we're both like we are
different health challenge health is the
next one I mean she has a zero health
problems and I have all of the health
problems including the ones in our
family like I'm like oh I got baggage in
oh I got the brain tumors that no one
had but I also have like the eyes and
stuff of my dad and I have my mom's
other things it's like oh this is I'm
the show for health interesting
that's fun
including as a child I had tonsillitis a
lot and earrings a lot and she didn't I
mean and I chest pains as it as a
teenager again because of the stress and
feeling what's up so health wise it's
like she's she's always gonna be
healthier than I am
I however I'm still waiting for the time
where she looks oh when I start looking
older than her because we're not there
yet and she puts a lot of time into
antiaging social wise she's better she's
more popular she's just better at
networking and having people like her
but she has a little more conflict in
her relationships like like I've I don't
have friends John and a friend drama
she said friend drama her whole life I
don't really have relationship drama
except relationship drama her whole life
and so and then it spilled into and then
also though like her infertility the one
thing I was able to do without any
difficulty was have a baby and she
wasn't and so and then the fact that she
was breaking that she had just broken up
with this guy who has a disability it
was like all on me it's like all on me
that this is my choice I did it to
myself because he knew to himself and he
she wants she's saying that's him but
like if I said these things to her about
her infertility they would under
Stanly be absolutely horrible to say to
someone even though they all apply all
of them it's like okay again and I
didn't say my whole life gee I really
hope that I did say I hope I can't work
I want to UM passive income so I didn't
have to work looks like we got some
passive income for ya but you're
extremely passive and you get disability
money but family that was so family is
so maybe the one that I was able to have
a family but also she's money she can
adopt multiple children i I couldn't
never would have been an option for me
so you'd have money and show that you're
healthy which I wouldn't be able to show
but my body's healthy enough that it
could carry baby career she definitely I
mean she's the CEO of two companies one
of which was contract to be sold for
tens of billions of dollars I have a
degree but I've never worked in it like
I've never like I've been entry-level at
Starbucks an entry-level at credit
unions an entry level in the government
positions and now for any business I
started really work out financially
definitely she's more obsessed with
money ironically no I feel like I have
more savings like because I have a low
risk tolerance I'm better able to
weather this current star makovan
nineteen and she is both because my my
life is set up better or just
differently and because of like are my
surrounding community my community isn't
rich and the YPO thing I still can't
Pacific at like tell me about that your
millionaire problems please but now they
are actually having problems I mean it's
like how do you get the funding that the
government's giving in who gets what and
you're using too much of it and so in
every area of life she is basically is
better than me or seen is better than me
and it's like I from that position I'm
also like I know how he saved the world
and my family's in no way ever gonna
give me like I could literally be Oprah
everyone can know who I am and the world
could think that I saved it but my
family I'd be like what did you did you
take five pills today like yeah I do
smoke pot and I do and I deal with that
I'm dealing with it but it's it's like
talk to me in 20 years when our kids are
both adults and we'll see who's cute is
better and
again if we travel what it's a really
bad sample size it's I do think that
each of us I'm the perfect parent for my
kid and she is the perfect kid for me to
parent to teach us both exactly what
we're here to learn and that's not gonna
look perfect from the outside in fact
most of what I do that is better
parenting for her looks bad to the
outside look it's like that my kids on
an iPad all day every day no scientific
sight is gonna tell me that's a good
idea
but it's like it's how we get through
life she's happy she's learning skills
she's doing she's happy and engaged and
then yes I have to like by post-battle
so that's not the case and that's my
thing to learn and it's back and forth
constantly but to think you can like do
this perfectly parenting it's like
that's what parenting is basically so
what taught me that I cannot plan things
things aren't gonna go according to plan
they're gonna go perfectly and this
thing I was that's what I was hoping to
convey during this hour but it was also
what me processing and seen what's there
and I'm no longer near anywhere near as
angry it's just like oh yeah she is who
she is and she's entered all those
things on paper and I still have a
purpose that I'm here for that means I
have to listen to my own internal
guidance and not hers in fact it's I can
basically know that if she told me to do
something to not do that yeah that's the
path not to take and for someone having
taken her path and it cost me a lot
every my whole life that's a hard like
I'm the one who changed I'm the one who
stopped treating her as alpha I'm the
one who is like right I have spoons and
I can't just give you everything you
have money you don't give me anything
but you want me to give you everything
when I'm the one at a disadvantage and
went through but like the the layers of
learning that came out of this over the
next few weeks or this is happy a member
like I said I watch it's me Safeway but
it's all oven and like oh this is
although I didn't want this to happen it
was exactly what was supposed to happen
if it hadn't happened like what I was
asking was for her to be crying to me
because her opinion matter too much what
she gave me was her opinion not
mattering at all tea and that's exactly
what I needed but I wouldn't have known
that and it's like but how do you like
how do you forgive someone for doing
something they shouldn't have done that
was absolutely horrible and it was
exactly the perfect right thing to do
and that is kind of the the issue that
I'm dealing with and knowing that I'm
the one who had to get back to being in
a position of love for exactly who she
is which is lovable right like which is
Type A personality good and all of these
traits try and really like improved on
all of these traits like that looks like
she's in a better position she's the
right one she's because the university's
providing for her Mike right but I also
know that I'm given exactly what I'm
supposed to be given that this entire
universe exists to teach you the lessons
I am here to learn and everybody else as
well I'm not unique in that and okay
I've been on for like an hour
12 minutes up I could talk about my
sister for years years and years but I
am probably gonna be reaching out her in
the next week or so and putting the ball
in her card saying like I'm ready to
talk when you are because this didn't
this didn't feel emotional reading those
letters it was just like oh yeah that's
her that's what she said
and it wasn't when I read it I was like
oh god like this is it and it caused an
emotional charge of me even months later
when I would read them like this is a
horrible thing to say to someone
accesory they just poured their heart
out to you of like here's what I'm
struggling with and again I just equate
it back to like me being there for her
when she lost her her foster daughter
and went through her infertility and
even though I was low on spoons like she
needed to talk I was there for her and
being like oh you're in no way capable
of giving me that back and so if we talk
all we're gonna talk about is we can't
talk about my project because it hurts
your feelings to think that you're
richer than other people oh poor you
we can't like well my parenting because
you don't agree with it everything I do
is wrong I'm like there's nothing in my
life you've actually been supportive of
there's me going to Costa Rica me like
you wouldn't even look up the box for me
it's like all about he did I went like
went and volunteered that when I went to
Germany in high school it was all about
why did she get to go that's cuz she
asked you because she
through the process of getting into it
when I went to Australia same thing
issue with this job I think was the same
thing she wouldn't boxes that's what
makes sense for was I would I come back
home anyway hopeful that later alright
thanks for listening this wasn't a story
time like it entertaining it's part
story time processing billion my own
stuff um this is part of the
relationship with others knowing when to
be in relationship and when not to be
and when it's costing too much cuz part
of what I've gotten over the last year
and I think it broke my mother's heart a
little bit but there was a point where I
was like oh I'm doing better than I ever
had like I have in years it's like oh
what do you think has changed I'm like I
don't have my sister in my life that is
what has changed I don't have that drama
I don't have that need to have her on a
pedestal I don't have that need to
pretend I'm something I'm not I don't
have that meet and just her drama to
follow along with which I still get
second hands but it's um I kind of just
don't attach to it like oh yeah you're
bankrupt you will come
welcome to be more you might need to not
shop at everyone you might need to
figure that up and I don't want to be in
a place of like where it's almost humor
full and fun this is happening but it's
like it a little bit is like all the
rich people who can't afford their
nannies and I want to stay home with
their kids and can't afford to count
their house clean and now like they
actually have to clean it brings me a
little spark of joy much more joy than
it brings thinking of like the poor
people dealing with this it's like Oh
what you don't compliment money isn't
enough to pay your $5,000 mortgage for
you were you very sad for you again I
actually am like if there is actually
I'm like I get that that's actually
stressful for people and your world has
changed and no matter who and where you
are that's a hard thing to deal with but
also a little like yeah you don't have
nannies you don't have a house cleaner
and people like me who can't afford one
and have disability are the people who
can actually use one so the ones who
can't keep our houses clean with our own
accord we're gonna choose not to clean
our houses and like just yeah I still
to learn here it's never but needing I'm
at the point of diminishing returns like
I'm never gonna get to a hundred percent
before we talk and I'm at ninety percent
so it's tiny to stand out a conversation
and so many things have happened in the
last year I'm like we don't talk drink
over the bank to you were probably never
gonna talk again
I like cousin died my is a bunch of
other stuff and the cousin who died has
a bad relationship with her sister it
was like I said no not ready not ready I
don't think a relationship will ever be
what it was before and I don't want it
to be like we're never gonna be in a
position where she's on a pedestal she's
just not she's not in my mind in any way
I'm like so the world in society you
always will be
probably unless I do become you say if
it's around you my face and neighbor
node which I'm not tied to in fact it's
kind of anti what I want I don't want
popularity in power and me I just want a
better world I just want a world that
works for everyone and I know that's
coming through me on my journey so I'm
more this is my master like what is
coming from inside of me and what I'm
told to do is what I'm here to serve not
my sister's vision or my family's vision
or some group that I'm part of vision
it's like this vision the vision and
everyone gets one everyone gets to
follow their own path and live into
their version of the future and together
we're gonna create much more beautiful
world with or without our siblings
alright let's just say I love ya love ya
I do I do love all of humanity um
and I will see you on Monday