[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
what we talking about this morning in my
view is a design question how do we
create recreate the human presence on
the earth in a way that the future
generations can still enjoy a beautiful
so an appropriate response to this kind
of really complex design collection
needs to bring the different disciplines
together
everybody and we need to value all the
different insights but at the same time
not get confused in kind of kind of
trench wars between the best of
disciplines and so my my design is not
really a discipline in itself it's
actually with discipline that can
facilitate this transversal kinetic
integration facilitation and what I
would suggest is they're designed for
human ecosystems and planted of office
transdisciplinary approach to
sustainability and I will summarize this
on using for question the whole question
about today is what is health
what is sustainability the ability to
sustain what is design and how do we
decide to sustainability recently
published an article independent where
he kind of as Miss Vicky said it's too
late he could eat according to his
calculations which to a degree
centigrade temperature in this century
so what is health according to World
Health Organization responded helplessly
find the steady physical and mental and
social well-being and not just an
absence of disease data in so called
optimal childhood to work of
organization spoke about conditions for
her to name just a few
peace shelter education food income
healthy ecosystems sustainable resources
social justice and equity but if you
think about this who knows also the
prerequisites for sustainable human
civilization and also by talking about
the conditions for health we're moving
from a pathogenic focus on disease it
was a typical traditional were looking
at the conditions for health and then in
1992 the World Health Organization
permission on health and the environment
published the our planet for healthy it
was clearly stated that we cannot have
healthy individuals and healthy
societies then also
complexity theory is increasingly
emerging as a new medical in science it
is more listening and teaches us
important lessons of fundamental
interconnectedness interdependence and
also in
we have many different ways of scale
linking basically in a healthy firm that
I have themselves about the organized
nothing food is made of healthy families
and healthy communities that the
communities make up half of societies
within
so that is healthy somehow scaling
minute Tesla initially came up with this
channel on this idea of polar key which
basically is this
[Music]
[Music]
the most common resolutions the
Commission as the ability of the present
generation to me 10 minutes when I was
generalizing the ability of future
generations to meet their as this is
important because it brings in that
local community scaling approach we have
to think about future generations but it
is very much more it needs to create a
more operational resolution how much
[Music]
and social processes which again is
questionable but it needs me close up to
that this appropriate participation has
to be a design you have to think about
sustainability not to confuse in a some
sort of state in the future that we will
ever reach because because this is the
nature is constantly changing so we have
to constantly run to stand still to
catch up so sustainability is the
process of learning as community is and
focused on the conditions in specific
region ecosystems and the best strategy
to create activities to maintain the
Hokie of them have scaling properties
aneesa's sustainability implies not
challenging ecological thresholds from
temporal and spatial scales it will
negatively affect the resilience or that
the capacity of social and economic
assistance many work on to say that
undermines the super positive to
continue to deliver life support highly
illogical services to humanity and a
wide range of environmental conditions
so to summarize our current civilization
take full steam explore the storm as
people in the climate change so we
really need to at the core of our
society change
you know - a lot of people might mean
something about beautification of
objects but it's much more than that
design is at the Nexus of theory and
practice it's turning theory for
multiple disciplines into something real
design is that the nexus between
participants between the material and
the immaterial again 2007 and the nexus
between values and actually again and
also its other science explains how the
world is based on goes into the future
and considers how the interactions
relationship and materially this is
expressed through objects we can observe
the lifestyles the immaterial
we are designating meaning to the world
so to call all scientific enterprise
he has already the biggest design the
design of what you choose to focus on
bitches to study so we if we consciously
check and change our intentions than
they are acting at the way upstream
level of desire that's what I call
method design we are defining the needs
and it's thinking about foundations of
science looking really examining our
basic assumptions between what is the
self involves the world who are we in
students I think is part of nature or
tough from nature it's going and our
worldviews and how they affect our
dimensions are serrations
and what are real and perceived means
therefore shapes our lifestyles and our
traditions of our future and in my paper
at the beginning of the paper I'm not
going to go into this in much detail I
actually look at some of the approaches
where people like a physicist or the
psychologist play great with
biopsychosocial systems
as it happens within technology are
trying to look at ways to bring people
from a wide range of disciplines from a
wide range of both world views and value
systems around the same table and not to
say what is right or what is wrong but
to try to find a new way forward where
we can on
[Music]
it's about the construction ecology
community ecology and in my thesis I
actually looks at best practice examples
involving skills together
there are also scale thinking issues
among the economics energy food
production transport education was the
motor issues environmental restoration
settlement patterns of resource use so
as it suggests that sustainable design
has to be gained in to design of it when
you buy an architect and you consider
you know you have to look at the
products you used in construction
ecology of and the wider falls within
holds the whole thing which is you
building yourself you have to
the Industrial ecology and so on and the
same at last many of these fields always
ask questions down and up the scale when
you think about designing salute agendas
our health generating sign which
suggests that the system should be
connected to itself you should close
feedback feedback rules so rather than
taking a hundred twenty years to amass
water permitting fossil fuels does to us
to the atmosphere through senses and
everything you can create quicker heat
levels so so overall we try to increase
the conditions Hispanic health
syllogistic is like means created more
than witless situations you create
win-win-win situations where in terms of
game theory you're talking about long
zero-sum games most people and economics
our entire world economic system is
built up on zero-sum games there are
winners they're losers and so maybe we
have to rethink something that's this
disciplinary collaboration look looking
at the filter block between the
disciplines actually rather than most
transdisciplinary conferences where it's
like a talking shop everybody gets up
does their business sits down and
nothing happens the next step is to
actually talking and see how to
integrate this so integration and
synthesis we've got so much specialized
knowledge with many wishes which we've
amassed over the last 150 200 years of
reductionist science main initiative
should spend the next hundred years
mainly focusing on what happens when we
bring all this knowledge together
perspectives and the symbiotic design we
we really need to look at the design
lessons the nature can teachers their
approaches in ecological design
biomimicry bionics where this story
being applied and we can learn a lot
from the way that ecosystems of all of
us learning from nature
helping to create life support system
so in this
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
I think what you presented
disciplinarity it's a huge challenge for
for our time and very much needed to
sustainability but the problems that
they're likely associated
frankly at the University of Calgary
it goes against many of the ways in
which universities would be set up and
the way universities operate and against
the ways that merit is acknowledged in
universities and promotion and all the
rest of it I work in a multitude
interdisciplinary faculty which is very
much more than a lot of the scales that
you know you would give them they're
starting at the product level through
architecture urban design planning right
through to our landscape ecology design
and b2b the faculty was founded in the
early nineteen seventies on on the basis
of a very loose in the delivery model
and what we've found over the years as
the faculty has progressed is an
increasing tendency towards more
discipline specific programming within a
faculty partly for from Telecom press
upon the professions to incorporate a
lot more very specific courses in into
the into the programs particularly for
architecture for accreditation purposes
and an increasing tendency towards the
professionalization of individual design
disciplines from my point of view what
you're saying is essential but the term
professionalization and professional
faculties I think he's problematic and
maybe in order to to do what they're
saying we need to be count for a while
at least
Alec lives and dilettante in order to be
more experimental and more
-
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
so people just people to finally pop out
like the ultimate reduction is
discipline so if you go into the
fraction
-
[Applause]