[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis last time we were
discussing the actual age within ancient
India and we were figuring we were
focusing in on a pivotal figure of
Siddhartha Gautama the Buddha and we had
been talking about his particular story
we talked about the two modes of being
that were being represented in his story
of leaving the palace the having mode
and the being mode and we talked about
modal confusion and about overcoming it
we followed him to where he's sitting
under the Bodhi tree and he achieves a
deep kind of realization a deep state of
enlightenment along the way we had
discussed what mindfulness is how
mindfulness operates through attentional
scaling and how it can increase your
cognitive flexibility your capacity for
insight and then we were trying to draw
this all together with some cognitive
science a discussion of what is it to
experience enlightenment now I'm not
offering right now a complete account or
anything like a comprehensive theory of
enlightenment we're gonna be slowly
working towards that as we move through
this lecture series but I do want to get
into and can continue the discussion of
these higher states of consciousness so
if you remember they're very problematic
but that they're at the core of many of
the axial age world religions and
foundational philosophies this is the
idea that people have an alternative
state of consciousness that they regard
as somehow more real than their everyday
state of consciousness and that's
problematic precisely because we tend to
judge realness by how well we get an an
overall coherence in our intelligibility
how we're making sense of things but in
these altered states that are very
different from our everyday
consciousness and therefore do not go
here with it people do the alternative
instead of rejecting it the way we
reject dreaming for example because it
doesn't go here with our everyday
experience people reject the everyday
experience as illusory and they say that
this state of consciousness
somehow gives them and improved access
to reality and as you remember as we've
been going through the actual age
revolution and the sense of wisdom and
meaning that is attended upon it this
ability to transcend through illusion
and get connected to what is more real
is central to what wisdom means and
having some deep sense of connectedness
to reality is also central to what it is
to regard one's life as authentically
meaningful in some fashion so that was
the problem we had set up the problem of
higher states of consciousness now I
want to start by talking about what it's
like to give a theory that we talked
about this also
last time we want a theory that's most
descriptively adequate and
prescriptively adequate a descriptive
theory should tell me like give me a
good explanation for why these higher
states of consciousness have the
experience feel that they have why they
and why they're able to produce these
deep kinds of transformations because if
you remember what typically happens is
because people have sensed this deep
connectedness to reality and because
being connected to reality is one of
fundamental way in which we makes our
lives meaningful people will radically
transform their whole lives their sense
of self their interpersonal relationship
in order to maintain and enhance that
connectedness to this deepened reality
so we need to explain give a
descriptively adequate explanation and
this has to work at multiple levels and
this is where cognitive science is so
important because of the way it tries to
bridge between these various levels and
disciplines we need to give an account
of the psychological processes of the
information processes and ultimately the
brain processes that are at work then we
need a prescriptively adequate theory of
higher states of consciousness we need
an account that explains why it might be
considered rationally justifiable that
these states authorised and legitimate
such transformations can we see
why these states should be listened to
when they claim to give us access to a
deeper reality now in order to carry out
the first one seeing what the said
harder was going through right when he's
achieving this higher state of
consciousness this awakened state and if
you remember last time we talked about
how concept how comprehensively extended
this is not only qualitatively through
the world religions but just
quantitatively through the population a
30 to 40 percent of people report these
awakening experiences and the resulting
deep transformation so in order to get
through that let's talk about what what
does it feel like to be in such a state
and because we have these surveys and we
have the work of newburgh and Taylor and
we have lots of first-person accounts we
can draw some general pictures of what's
going on so there's three components we
want to look at we want to look at how
is the world being experienced how is
the self being experienced and how is
the relationship between the world and
their self being experienced so let's
start on the world side so people report
the following things they report a
tremendous sense of clarity and this is
both perceptual and cognitive so the
world seems extremely clear to them and
make sense to them in a way that it
hasn't before the perceptual part of
that clarity is often experienced as
bright things are shining and that's the
original meaning of glory for example to
go back to the Bible for example the
term that is most often used to describe
God is glory which is not a moral term
it's a term about how sort of shining
God is how how bright it is
now you remember that's a feature that
people also reliably report in the flow
experience that everything seems very
vivid and in bright and intense
now what's interesting is that while
people describe this clarity and notice
how this is going to pick up on what we
talked about when we talked about
mindfulness they talked about both an
expansion of vision so it's very
comprehensive they get almost like
they're somehow aware of the whole of
the world but they also are aware of
finite details so this is captured for
example in Blake's famous poem right to
see the world in a grain of sand and
heaven in a wild flower to hold infinity
in the palm of your hand and to spend
eternity in an hour
so you get this deep interpenetration of
sort of everything and the finite
details that you can see that so what
you're getting is this massive expansion
of that attentional scale in that we
talked about mindfulness enhancing and
thereby enhancing our capacity to break
frame and make frame and get fundamental
insight and pay attention to the word
insight seeing into reality so overall
there's an increased sense of making
sense of things right making sense of
things so the world is both intricate
and interesting in this extended and
enhanced and shining way so almost
universally people describe this
experience as the world is beautiful
it's deeply beautiful to them and we'll
come back at some point to talk about
the connections between beauty and truth
particularly the work of scar II about
this the world is very alive
it seems very alive during these
experience because it's so pregnant with
energy and significance and all of this
all of this comprehensiveness but
intricate detail the shining the beauty
the making sense all of this comes
together in the notion of oneness
there's somehow an underlying oneness to
everything there's deep and profound
integration which of course makes sense
given that very off
than when we are explaining something we
are finding what unifies and integrates
them together what's happening on the
side of the self what's happening on the
side of the self is people report a
profound sense of peace and this is not
peace in an empty just lack of conflict
it's very similar to what we talked
about in Plato and you're probably
seeing Plato's ideas about an agog a
resonating with this I hope you're
seeing that but remember in Plato right
that inner state of peace is one of
inner harmony when all of the various
components of your personality and your
cognition are mutually optimally working
together in concert and this is the kind
what people report the often report that
this is the greatest sense of peace
they've ever experienced in their life
and you remember in Plato this sense of
peace right is connected to and
resonates with this enhanced sense of
connectedness to reality and
interestingly enough that's what we're
seeing in these and these descriptions
people also described experiencing
profound joy now of course we've lost
the sense of what this word means we've
lost it precisely in words like
enjoyment where enjoyment means having
fun or pleasure but joy is not the
experience or fun or pleasure joy is the
positive emotion you have when you
experience a deep connection to what is
good so joy is the experience you have
of this is really really good
interestingly people often report a
fundamental change in their sense of
self and we're going to come back to
this they report two things they'll
often report that their normal sense of
self has disappeared
their eccentric autobiographical sense
of self has disappeared and if you
remember that's that's continuous with
what we saw when people are in the flow
state they report that
self-consciousness that auto-buy
graphical narrative self is disappearing
they often also report remembering in
the sense we talked about when we talked
about sati and remembering the being
mode they remember they say I remember
my true self I remember who I really am
so there's a profound connection inward
to the core machinery of the self that
is at one with a profound sense of
connecting to the underlying pattern
that governs and makes intelligible
reality people report that in this state
they have a tremendous sense of energy
and vitality again analogous to the flow
state and finally they report that
they're going state often use this term
there is a tremendous sense of insight
and understanding again
continuous with the flow State now what
about their relation so this is deep
connection profound connectedness deep
at one mint again like the flow state
but even more people feel so at one that
they start to feel that they're
participating in their reality that
they're connected to this they start to
feel like they're sharing identity to it
and this your way of thinking about this
is when we talked about Aristotle's
notion of the conformity theory of
knowing there they feel so deeply
conformed to this underlying reality
from the very core of their being that
they are experiencing an identification
with it but this participatory knowing
is so superlative and it's so profound
and so transformative that inevitably
people to say that the experience that
this connection is ineffable and we we
noted this last time we were talking
about how is it that these experiences
that have no right articulable
declarative content
they're ineffable you can't put them
into words you can't put them into
propositional thought nevertheless are
considered so so loaded with so capable
of bearing the signature of ultimate
reality or realness for people so we
need a descriptive theory that can
account for all of these features the
features of how the world is experienced
of the self is experienced and the
relation now what I've been showing you
already of course is deep continuity
with the flow experience I'm not
claiming it's a flow experience it's
more than that
but I'm showing you that there's
continuity just like I showed you that
there's continuity between the flow
experience and the insight experience
and that's why when people are having
these higher states of consciousness
they are also proposing a very profound
insight and notice how often when you
have an insight it's also ineffable to
you you don't know how the insight arose
or what comes how it came to be you just
like ah I just see it now some other
important things we should know about
these states these states are often
preceded by disruptive strategies
disruptive strategies
these are strategies that are designed
to disrupt your normal cognitive
functioning and to alter your state of
consciousness so they can range from
very long-term strategies to very
short-term strategies long-term
strategies can be the ones we've already
described likes it harvests it hard I
was engaged for six years and these
practices these mindfulness practices of
meditation and contemplation and they
bring about right a very long-term
incremental but nevertheless also
profound disruption in your normal state
of consciousness and cognition people
are also can pursue very short-term
disruptive strategies these include
things like fasting sexual and sleep
deprivation the emember we talked about
how shamans will make use of these
strategies in order to induce the
shamanic state there are they will
expose himself to drumming chanting all
of these things disrupt your normal
level of cognition and of course when we
talked about this as well people will
make use of psychedelics precisely
because of the way they are so deeply
disruptive of your normal cognition and
your normal state of consciousness so
what we know is that combinations well
sorry that's a little too strong what we
have good some initial good evidence is
that combinations of these strategies
can be very good there was a recent
experiment coming out of the Griffiths
lab in 2018 in which people who were
practicing mindfulness and then took
psychedelics tended to have a more
enhanced experience than people who are
just taking the psychedelics for example
so you can combine the strategies
together they can be mutually supportive
now what's important for this as we'll
come back and take a look at more
carefully in a few minutes is disruptive
strategies are also central to setting
up insight and that should make sense to
you given what we've talked about you
have to do a lot of break
frame before you can open up the
possibility of making an entirely new
new friend there was a recent experiment
run by Aiden and now in 2017 they had
they has 701 participants 69 percent of
them reported this what I called on to
normativity this sense of the enhanced
realness of their higher states of
consciousness and this was actually
predictive of significant improvement
across many dimensions of their life
right there was significant improvement
in family life health sense of purpose
spirituality and will and I release from
the anxiety and fear of death so the
claim that these states do guide
transformation has received empirical
backing now Yadin also brings out
something important than that study that
you don't see very well articulated in
Newberg and in Taylor and this is one of
the disruptive strategies that are that
people are often using and it bleeds
into the phenomenology by that I mean
the experiential feel and structure of
these experience right and this is the
notion of decentering so when people
describe these experiences they shift
from right a very sort of first-person
orientation and egocentric to an a low
centric so they are not so egocentric
this is why this is called decentering
they're speaking more from like a
third-person perspective and right
allocentric
so let me just give you a quick
understanding of the difference between
these terms I can describe my motion
egocentric lis right things that are in
front of me behind me to the right of me
to the left of me right and that of
course varies by how I'm oriented
because it is relative to me but I can
also describe my position allocentric
lis I can say where I am relative to the
North Pole for example right so the
first is a first-person egocentric way
of moving through the world
the second is an
eccentric third-person now extend that
out people are much less egocentric li
oriented when they're describing the
experience of their state then they are
normally they're much more allocentric
li oriented and that makes sense given
how intensified the experience of
reality is to them it's like the
salience of reality is finally capable
of eclipsing the narcissistic glow of
our own ego and for a moment at least or
for several moments we get release right
and this is an important idea Nirvana
means to blow out to extinguish or the
vedanta term moksha is release we get a
release from right the imprisonment the
self idealization by the super salience
and therefore the bullshitting of our
own ego centric perspective I mean do
you not sometimes wish to be free from
the prison cell of the super salience of
your own ego so
as I've been suggesting to you these
higher states of consciousness have a
lot of features of insight I've already
talked about the insight member we did
the nine dot problem for example those
aha moments because you get in that
moment of insight you get a flash of
insight you get sort of super salience
things are making sense to you you get
insight as it's almost visual into an
underlying pattern a unity a oneness
that wasn't there before your sense of
what's relevant and important has been
altered and this ability to radically
make sense to find coherence an
underlying intelligible integrative
pattern this we now know from current
work is directly predictive of the
experience of meaning in life so
Samantha heinzelman whose work I
recommend to you I also got to meet
Samantha in person
and got to talk to her about this but
what she has is good experimental
evidence of the following if you give
people a bunch of scenes that make sense
to them that they can sort of determine
an underlying pattern - and then ask
them how meaningful their lives are they
will rate their lives as more meaningful
the act
do you understand the act of making
sense of finding coherence actually
makes people experience their lives as
more meaningful they're not being shown
profound pictures of or deeply dramatic
or narrative scenes or emotionally like
they're just showing some very basic
pictures but the act of making sense of
finding coherence elevates the sense of
how meaningful their lives are so start
to put this together if you were to have
an insight that would give you an even
more you know sudden increase in your
sense of meaning in life and what if
it's in flow well it's going to be even
more
enhanced sense of meaning in life and we
already know that the more often you
have flow experiences the more
meaningful you find your life
and now what if it's beyond that what if
it's a higher state of consciousness
that brings you this radical sense of
deep intelligibility not only of the
world but of yourself in both directions
at the same time well that was going
that is going to give you a profound
sense of increased meaning in life now
if you get try to put this together
if you get enhanced meaning in life
coupled to an enhanced sense of
understanding and that actually does
guide you in improving your life that is
going to build a tremendous amount of
confidence in you that you have found a
path towards self transcendence and
wisdom we can start to understand some
of the Buddha's confidence now what do
we know about these flashes of insight
well tow Belinsky and Reber in 2010 this
is a different reaper not the implicit
learning reaper right talk about how
insight is a fluency spike although it's
related to flow it's not the same thing
fluency is a general it's a general
property of all of your cognitive
processing so how can we understand it
well initially people thought that
fluency was a sense of how easy it was
to process things so the basic idea is
if I make it easier for you to process
information you will rate that
information as better more trustworthy
more believable regardless of the actual
semantic content so for example it
compared this right to this
the contrast isn't as great and if I
were to get you to read some test text
in black and the exact same text in the
orange you will rate what you read in
the black as better you'll have more
confident it more likely to be true the
semantic content is exactly equal it's
because it's easier for you to process
the black and white contrast than the
orange on white contrast now it turns
out it's not quite ease of processing
just because simply repeating the
stimulus doesn't trigger this sense of
fluency it's more like how accessible
information is how applicable it is I
would argue that it's how well your
system is zeroing in on right the
relevant information how much has the
information before matted for you so
that you can zero in on relevant
information a way of thinking about this
to help make sense of it is with our
discussion of psycho technology's
alphabetic literacy made your cognitive
processing more fluent and that improved
your ability your power your cognitive
power and by improving your cognitive
power that gives you an enhanced sense
of how real and important the
information you're processing is so the
idea here is when you are fluent you are
processing information very efficiently
when you have according to toe bilinski
and Libra when you have an insight
experience what you're getting is a
sudden spike in fluency you're getting a
significant increase in how fluently
you're processing and therefore you
start to judge the information that
you're processing therein as likely
being more real now is this is this an
absolute perfect rule no but the fact
that it's domain-general
the fact that it seems to be part of our
evolutionary heritage and there's also
some independent logical argumentation
indicating that this fluency
heuristic that your brain uses is
actually a very good strategy
it's very generally the case not
perfectly not certainty but very
generally the case that in real world
situations if you are processing them
very fluently you are picking up on the
real patterns so insight is we zeroing
in and then we talked about flow as an
insight cascade which is even more
zeroing it and it's an it's coupled to
implicit learning in which you're
picking member you're picking up on
bigger patterns that you're not
consciously aware of you can't put them
into declarative utterances do you see
what's happening here so in the higher
states of the higher states of
consciousness like flow you're getting
this enhanced fluency so your brain is
working very optimal E and the implicit
learning is picking up on very complex
patterns and you're tending to zero in
on the causal ones rather than the
correlational ones I'm using all of this
machinery we've already discussed
because as I've mentioned in the flow
State you're starting to get a lot of
the features of the mystical experiences
and ultimately those mystical
experiences that can be transformative
it by enhancing meaning in life and your
sense of connectedness to realness you
get the at one mint in the flow State
the radical loss of self-consciousness
you're not egocentric you although you
know there's tremendous energy it feels
effortless to you it's graceful there's
a super salience it's intrinsically
rewarding it's like evolutionarily
marked in its domain general and
universal all this stuff we've talked
about this is all being triggered in the
higher states of consciousness okay so
this leads to a hypothesis I want to
present to you okay this so
this hypothesis is a continuity
hypothesis why are we doing this why are
we doing this we are doing this because
we want a scientifically legitimate
scientifically plausible explanation of
what's going on when somebody claims
enlightenment like Siddhartha Gautama
when somebody claims radical self
transcendence like Plato because we want
something that gives a good explanation
for what's actually happening and a good
justification for why somebody should
follow and be guided by these
transformative experiences okay so
what's the continuity hypothesis the
continuity hypothesis is the idea so
this is a hypothesis I'm giving you
although I as I was doing research on
this Newberg independently for me we
haven't spoken has also come up with is
a version of the continuity hypothesis
it's not as developed as the one I'm
going to give you but it's completely
consonant with it so the idea is fluency
gets enhanced an insight insight gets to
enhanced in flow alright so you've seen
all those arguments already and then the
idea is as I'm trying to show you flow
experiences can be enhanced into
mystical experiences and then there are
mystical experiences that can bring
about a transformative experience these
are the higher states of consciousness
in which people right are willing to
transform will come back to the problem
of transformative experience so the
continuity hypothesis is basically the
same machineries being used but it is
being exact 'add remember excitation it
is being progressively exempted into
more and more powerful processing that
can afford what I'm going to argue a
rationally justifiable
guidance into the kinds of
transformation that we are seeking when
we are seeking to cultivate wisdom and
enhance meaning in life when we are
seeking to awaken from the meaning
crisis we are trying to invoke one of
these awakening experiences and remember
that's what Buddha means the awakened
one so Newburg argues that if you have a
lot of these kinds of experiences what
he calls little enlightenment
experiences or regular insights that
this will eventually produce these kinds
of experiences and I so this is not only
a continuity hypothesis this is a
priming hypothesis and I support that as
well
the more you are practicing mindfulness
which we know is predictive of insight
and flow we know that mindfulness
practices are predictive of mystical
experiences we know that they're
connected to transformative experiences
the more you can prime this pump the
more you will be able to bring about
this enhance connectedness this enhanced
and agar gay alright so this I think
idea of the continuity hypothesis will
help us to begin to explain what's going
on in the higher states of consciousness
and eventually use the very same
machinery that we talked about in
explaining it and to justify to give a
rational justification for it all right
so we know for example that in flow
there has to be a relevant expertise all
right remember we've talked about this
the flow state is when your skills your
expertise right can meet the demands of
the situation if you don't have the
relevant skills you can't get into the
flow state right so I can get into the
flow State as a martial artist because I
have cultivated the expertise I can get
in as a flow state while lecturing
because I've been doing it for 24 years
I have the relevant expertise so what we
might ask and what you should ask me
right now you say well join like what
flowing in these higher states of
consciousness what's what's what what
expertise are you using well what I want
to argue to you is it's a fundamental
kind of expertise one that's central to
your everyday experience of making sense
of the world on a day-to-day basis so
this ultimately goes back to work by
Marlo Ponte especially in the book the
phenomenology perception but the people
who I'm going to most often refer to the
work of Herbert Dreyfuss breakfast is
famous within cognitive science for
bringing the work of Marla Ponte and
others into cognitive science and also
the work of Dreyfuss and Taylor this is
the Charles Taylor that we've already
talked about with connection to the
extra revolution in a book called
retrieving realism so what process is
being optimized here okay so Dreyfuss
and others talk about write what they
call optimal grip now that's so I mean
they meet it metaphorically because
they're talking about cognition but that
is such a wonderful Lee felicitous term
because again it harkens back to the
conformity theory of cognition a contact
epistemology that of course Charles
Taylor introduced us to now what do they
mean by that so part of this is the idea
that when we're let's talk about it
first perceptually when I'm trying to
perceive an object especially if I don't
know what the object is initially I
don't remain static okay I'm gonna move
around the object until I get to a place
that gets into a tradeoff relationship
remember we've talked about these
trade-off relationships before
what trade-off relationship I want okay
I want to get to a place where I can see
as many details of the cup as possible
so that was sort of zooming in right oh
wow
but if i zoom in too much I lose on the
other end I don't get
a sense of the gestalt remember that I
don't get a sense of the overall thing
so what I do is I move the cup around so
that I get a place where I get the best
optimization for my needs because all
it's always relative to what I'm doing I
get a best optimization between the
overall grasp of the cup its Gestalt and
a grasp of its details so I'm trying to
get a dynamic balance between that's why
when you draw faces you draw them from
the perspective of the optimal grip you
have on them you represent a face in
such a way right you draw a face in such
a way that you try to get as much of the
whole and as much as the detail together
you don't draw a face by like drawing
someone's eyes really in detail and you
don't draw a face by zooming out right
too far you try and get exactly that
right balance so a lot of perception
you're unaware of this because you
learned how to do this when you are like
a young child but think about for
example again if you're learning a
martial art okay just as integral
earning how to perceive your opponent
part of what you're trying to do is try
to get an optimal grip on your opponent
so right in Tai Chi for example we
talked about Tiger Eyes we you don't
want a hard focus on the person's face
one of the mistakes that many people
make going into a confrontation is the
hard focus on face are they hard focus
on weapon we know this from
psychological research by the way you
get people who have been held up you
know what they can give you an accurate
description of the gun not the person
who was holding them up because they
hard focus right
they lose that soft vigilance right so
what you want to do is you want to get
the right and it takes practice right
you want to flow over the person you
don't want to be sort of flowing in a
blurry fashion you want to get this
sense where you've got a sense of their
whole body right but you can zero in on
details and then you also are trying to
get an optimal grip on your own body so
for example
gonna take a stance right and the point
about the stance right is to try and
give you an optimal sense right give you
an overall sense so now I'm aware of my
whole body right
but I'm also aware of it in connection
to the details of like where my fingers
are where my wrists are what my joints
are doing and I'm taking a stance that I
can ease that's multi apt I can easily
transform it into what I need to do I
get an optimal grip you do this
cognitively Eleanor Rosch pointed this
out in terms of the categories you use
so you will describe things as a cat or
a dog that's how you'll usually talk
about it you usually won't go a level up
and say oh that's a mammal so this
creatures walking by on the road and
somebody says hey look at the mammal
don't be weird
right now they might go down to another
level like there's the cocker spaniel
but generally they're doing that because
they have some intimate familiarity most
of us would say hey look at the dog wash
calls this the basic level why do we
default to the basic level in the way we
talk about why is this a table why is
this a marker right why do we default to
the basic level because it's how we get
our cognitively optimal grip you see
there's two things I want to trade off
in when I'm categorizing things here's
my category right I want as much
similarity within the category as I can
get right but I want as much difference
between two categories and those aren't
a trade-off because as I go higher up
right I get much more abstract and I
lose the specific differences when I go
down here right I'm getting too specific
I'm losing the broad generality we've
talked about this before you're always
trying to balance between getting
remember the higher the higher states of
consciousness and as detailed as you can
and those are always in a trade-off
relationship so you talk about dogs and
cats because that's your way of getting
an optimal cognitive grip on the world
remember we did this the cat remember we
talked about how you're simultaneously
going up to the gestalt and down to the
detail you're optimally gripping between
the Gestalt of the word and the features
of the letter and you're doing it right
now you've got a way of paying attention
that allows you to read and you had to
practice that optimal gripping you're
going into a first date what do you do
well you're trying to get a sense of the
person now here's where the term optimal
grip is a little Ian felicitous but so
don't don't read anything miss read any
sexual misconduct into my use of the
term I'm using in the technical sense
but you're trying to get an optimal grip
on the other person and it's very
difficult notice how your your toggling
your attention and your interaction and
you know this because of the kinds of
advice your friends give you they'll say
things right I happen to be straight so
they'll say to me for example you know
look into her eyes but not too much
smile but not too much laughs not too
often ask the questions but not too many
and mix it up between these strategies
but not chaotically and you're like sort
of uh and yet here's the thing you do it
it works at least sometimes you figure
out you find that sweet spot where
you're getting the sense of the person
both as a whole and in detail
I'm giving you multiple examples you're
always engaged because you're always
trading between these trade offs
you're always optimally gripping so you
have to do this domain-general you have
to do it in every domain when you're
swimming going on a day reading right
looking at an object you're trying to
get an optimal grip and you have
practiced this skill so that you're
extremely proficient you do it without
realizing it Herbert Dreyfuss is one of
his favorite examples you know how close
to stand to somebody how close should
you stand to somebody in order to get an
optimal grip on the interaction there is
no algorithm it's like always stand 4
inches that's ridiculous
always stand one foot it depends on the
context it depends on the person but you
have that skill most of you are not
socially awkward so here's what I'm
proposing to you what if you didn't when
what have you got into a flow state that
wasn't if there isn't the flow state of
doing a martial art isn't the flow state
of playing music like a jazz or
something what if what you were getting
into a flow state about was the ability
to optimally grip the world what have I
made it really challenging by altering
your state of consciousness disrupting
your normal framing and then opening up
because right don't remember what's
happening in this higher state you're
both opening up your attention and
zeroing in to see the world in a grain
of sand what if you were all what if you
had this all optimal grip but it
wouldn't be on just one object it would
be a dynamical flowing optimal grip on
the world and yourself the most
comprehensive attempt
to make sense not intellectually
theoretically but optimally gripping
reality this deep conformity so what I'm
proposing to you is that what's
happening in a higher state of
consciousness is that people are flowing
in their capacity to cognitively
perceptually and even with the very
machinery of their self get an optimal
grip on both the world and themselves
and that's why this relation is
experienced as so intensely powerful and
so intensely revealing now this would
help to make sense of things because
again if there's a deep continuity
between the higher states of
consciousness and things like flow and
insight that would help to explain why
the disruptive strategies are so
important for getting into the higher
states of consciousness because
disruptive strategies are central as I
mentioned to insight you have to bake
break up the bad framing now you can do
that by using mindfulness and breaking
frame you also are naturally disposed to
do this your mind wanders your mind
distracts you from your task and many of
us find this annoying it's like ah why
can't I keep my mind on something but
why is mind wandering so hardwired into
us and one of my former students and now
colleague and good friend Zak Irving
he's becoming one of the world experts
on mind wandering I would point you to
his work if you want to go into it in
depth what I would want to say for here
and I think Zak would agree with me on
this is that one of the things that mind
wandering does is enhances your capacity
for insight because by distracting you
from how you framed a situation it can
help you
return and break up that fixated frame
and there's work by Siegel and others
showing that moderate amounts of
distraction actually enhance your
cognitive flexibility the reason why we
mind wander amongst other reasons I'm
not saying it's the sole reason but one
of the things it does is it helps
disrupt our framing so that we can break
frame and make a new frame that's often
why and and and this is why people have
built a whole mythology around incue
bation go and sleep on it or go for a
walk or take a shower basically what
you're doing is a disruptive strategy of
distraction right as I mentioned you can
deliberately more deliberately engage in
a disruptive strategy through
mindfulness practices we know
experimentally that if you give a person
problem and you introduce entropy noise
into the problem a moderate amount that
can help them have an insight and we
know for example that when your brain is
engaging in insight there's good reason
to believe as I've mentioned that
there's a significant shift we talked
about this between the left and the
right hemisphere that's an internal
disruptive strategy so your brain has
all these strategies and you can learn
some psycho technologies that enhance
all this powerful disruption so the
disruptive machinery that's integral to
insight can be exacta dand enhanced to
bring about a higher state of
consciousness so what what these all of
these disruptive strategies do with
insight is what's called d
automatisation
so you remember with the nine dot
problem you automatically and remember
this because we're gonna need this when
we talk about other things like stoicism
you automatically unconsciously saw it
as a square you framed it in terms of
the square
you automatically unconsciously right
formulated it as they connected on the
problem and then that automatic framing
blocks you from solving it and in order
to get out of that you have to do
Dymatize your cognition now we talked
about this when we talked about
attentional scaling and mindfulness just
reminding you that what's happening in
these disruptive strategies is very
significant the automatization something
else is going on with these disruptive
strategies what these destructor
strategies do is they increase the
variation in your processing often by
introducing a lot of noise right a lot
of entropy into your processing you're
increasing the variation and what you're
paying attention to what processes
you're activating in your brain you're
just increasing the variation now Y is
increasing variation good increasing
variation is good because what when when
I increase the variation what I can do
is get more awareness right of what's
invariant as I the more I vary what I'm
doing the more I become aware of what's
not changing right so as I move around
this object right
lots of stuff is varying but its shape
is remaining constant to me throughout
the variation and that's why I think of
the shape as more real because it's
invariant through all this variation so
when I increase the variance so I pick
up I'm more able to pick up on what's
invariant now the thing we need to know
is that there are two kinds of invariant
two kinds of things that are not
changing in your attempts to get a grip
on the world there is good and right
there's good invariants and bad
invariants okay
what's good invariants by opening up the
variation I pick up on bigger patterns
that aren't changing that are real
patterns in the world this is what goes
on in deep learning networks right you
pick up on much more complex patterns of
invariants you get more in contact with
what's really going on again think about
what you do when you want to make sure
what something is you increase the
variation not only am I looking at it
and looking at it there I'm touching it
I increase the variation to find out
what's invariant because if I have
increased variation and I find out
what's invariant in it that often tells
me what's more real that's good right so
that can get me real patterns but
there's also bad invariance bad
invariants right it's like what's
happening in when you're trying to solve
the nine dot problem you keep trying to
solve it and you keep failing to solve
it because there's something you need to
change that you're not changing bad
invariants are ways in which you're
formulating your problems framing your
experience that's actually blocking you
from solving your problem
so Kaplan and Simon in 1990 talked about
a heuristic a strategy we use called the
notice invariance heuristic this is the
idea across all of your different
problem formulations that are failing
you keep doing this and you keep doing
and I can't get it I can't get it I
can't get it when you increase the
variation you can then apply the notice
invariance here
what am I not changing in all of these
failures what am I not changing in all
of my failed framings because very often
what you're not changing is precisely
what you need to change and so the
notice invariance heuristic can help you
break bad framing that has been causing
your failure now this of course requires
humility on your part this is why the
deep connection between wisdom and
humility I would I would suggest paying
attention
remembering your failures such that you
can apply this would be very helpful now
let's talk about this is one problem
they were talking about Kaplan and Simon
but what if what if I don't just have
one error here but I have a whole system
of errors
so very often when you look at cognitive
development right you take the
two-year-old it's alright
four-year-old because they can count you
count out the five candies they can
count they know that there's five here
and there five here but they will
reliably choose that row five candies
why because the amount of space taken up
is super salient to them we've talked
about this before it misleads them but
they will just make this error with
candies they make this error
systematically they make this error all
over the place in many different domains
it is a systematic error so I can
reliably predict that the four-year-old
will not only be making this error
they'll be making errors about Sirian
about trying to line objects up in terms
of increasing height they'll have
difficulties etc so it's not just one
error it's an entire system of errors
and the way you go through a
developmental change what kids do is
they find right they find a systematic
pattern of errors and they find an
insight that's not just about one
problem but an insight that will apply
systematically to that all of those
interconnected interrelated errors and
when they have that systematically
penetrative insight when they found that
nexus of errors so they can massively
intervene on themselves then they go
through a developmental change and they
grow up cognitively they mature and that
is what can be going on in the
Enlightenment experience by opening up
the variation massively you can not only
connect to what's more real and feel
more connected to the world remember the
world you can get below the ways in
which you are being held back in your
own development you can zero in on the
systemic errors and afford a radical
radical developmental change as the
adult is to the child this age is to the
adult you can go through
you can get one of the hallmarks of
wisdom what McGee and Barbara called
seeing through illusion into what is
real okay so we're still not done this
discussion because this is pivotal
trying to understand these higher states
of consciousness it's pivotal to
understanding the power the legacy of
the actual revolution and therefore what
we need to selvedge from it we do not
believe in its two world mythology but
we cannot afford to abandon all of this
powerful psycho technology of interval
intervention of self transformation of
self transcendence of the cultivation of
wisdom and ultimately the deep
enhancement of meaning in life by
bringing about a developmental harmony
within and a powerful conformity and
connectedness to the world without so
next time I want to continue and
complete the discussion about the higher
states of consciousness thank you very
much for your time
[Music]
you
you