so I've been setting up the debate for
you between these two positions that
pick up on traumatic primary metaphors
of what India is that they between the
third difference framework where our
thinking is like moving through space
and thus altering what we're thinking is
like being realizing attention and
perception and as we've been doing that
we is progressively getting clearer
about how we're going to operationalize
thinking in terms of problem solving and
what's at the core of problem solving is
problem formulation is problem
formulation deals and cognitive
explosion and ill-defined intense and
then we started to take a look at
central issues concerning problem
formulation the question with the two
positions is whether or not the problem
or relation process is itself a
computational process interesting
process
searching for train where people are
going to say yes it is and the result
people to ultimately know it is not a
computational process that those
provocative heuristics are really not
computational processing processing at
all and we took a look at how that might
be the case we can look at search
inference frameworks main candidate for
a heuristic that means nth eristic and
I'll show you how its functionality
which depended on first of all problem
formulation is for the build upon
situation into a well-defined situation
and that the aspects of the university
itself
depend on proper formulation in order to
prevent them from the monkey alert in
nature once we set that all up we went
into the debate
I filled you in on the other side the
salt framework we looked at the work of
polar and dunker and Burton Murray and
we thought aggressively working out of
some notion of insight as a
restructuring and that restructuring has
something to do with transfer and we saw
that while there was a lot of important
observations and some good experimental
results your soft framework seems to
last any kind of coherent unifying
theoretical picture nevertheless bigger
soul framework did present a challenge
to the search engine framework a
challenge that was taken up by Weisberg
elbow in 1981 an experiment that I
claimed to demonstrate very clear under
measurement they keep the claim rather
than just like this suggests we need to
demonstrate that there is no such thing
as fixation and since there's no
explaining atomization this is the
gestalt tradition are defined it's like
is the overcoming of fixation there's no
such thing as inside we then took a look
first at theoretical difficulties with
that argument we took a look at
difficulties concerning Weisberg and all
those alternative which was
compartmentalization and arguments that
the compartments themselves would
require solving illogical to find
problems requiring a lot of insight etc
and therefore circulars in plain sight
problem solving in terms of use of
departments however I didn't find out
that the connection between searching to
the search space and searching through
organized memory that is being
emphasized by wiser birth at all that is
an important point we're going to keep
coming back to we've answered a look at
Alan's point that is highly unlikely the
answer to a problem is we found in the
integrated fashion somewhere
memory is much more probable that
different pieces from different
compartments in different areas that are
not contiguous to be properly brought
together properly restructured to fit
together so they apply to the problem at
hand
etc so that will on special is not
properly addressed we then took a look
at work it's on us he pointed out that
wise we're going always seem to be
confusing necessity and sufficiency and
that seems to be driven by assumption
that there's a single difficulty that
has to be overcome in order to solve the
problem for example instead probably the
case that there are many different
interacting constraints or issues that
have to be simultaneously or a
dynamically integrated fashion dealt
with in order or the problems result
welcome back to look that specifically
later works like a shop and also finally
we took a look at the fact that wiser
than always clue think outside the box
may not be the right type of clue
because it being propositional in nature
whereas the process in change that is
needed is procedural in nature it may
not be inference of propositions it
means better to be attention that is
altering the salient kind of like what
the consultants is arguing and that
might be the relevant issues that need
to happen in order for inflation curve
and that is why the procedural cube by
Councilman admirer was facilitating for
solving the nine problems in contrast to
whites were the all black
failed okay any questions about that
before we move on we talked a long way
of a lot of things like graphic
suddenness versus for on logical side
note so these issues we'll come back to
that the court arguments of
anything else that be addressed alright
so now I want to turn to the
experimental responses to Weisberg anova
because what i'm trying to get and show
you i'm trying to model something i've
been very clear and explicit about
welcome scientists lines involving this
ongoing integration between theoretical
debate and experimental competition so
now we've done theoretical debate side
and we'll see how it interacts with the
experimental condition so that
competition begins primarily well with
the work of janet Metcalf
went on to I don't know if she's so
looking our she's retired that Metcalf
became a very pivotal figure in the
emerging field of work on metacognition
with the target sector it's plausible
that this is one of the first areas
where fear God is initially loose so
Janet madcap we're going to take a look
at three externally okay and now the
thing you have to remember about the
middle of experiment is just like the
middle book in a trilogy or the middle
there's exceptions to this rule most
people think that the Empire Strikes
Back was the bachelor for three movies I
don't include the critical which were
punishments for Humanity's in and think
is inflicted on us but generally this
the middle book of the trilogy is on
sideline because many things are
unresolved it so when I'm teaching you
the second experiment
it will feel unresolved to you and
there's a reason why it feels I resolved
to you because it's unresolved like the
experiment comes to certain clued the
experiment has to push its results but
the theoretical issue is not fully
resolved in the second experiment it is
only going to get to the third
experiment
stat that count would be able to bring
it to a more satisfying theoretical
claim all right
so please remember as I'm doing the
second experimental will be starting
lightly this satisfying right and then
we'll get into the four for the third
experiment and then we can sort of take
it as summation now of course along the
way you're free to ask their application
questions in they challenge questions I
just wanted to forewarn you of a sort of
habanero this way to unfold all right
okay let's take a look at the first
experiment which is 1986 1986 a because
we're gonna start with two experiments
to set up or at a different time so did
not get music so Metcalf 1986 a
no this experiment like I said seems
like it suggested to I think this is
where here of career magnetic cognition
really started to take off because she
was going to make use of a metacognitive
probe in order to study in session so 30
seconds a day we don't have all of this
sophisticated machinery fMRI and EEG all
everyone didn't have that in 86
so probing cognitive processes requires
a quite a bit of experimental cleverness
so what met HAP uses is she uses a
cognitive probe upon ultimately
metacognitive probe and what a probe is
right it's an independently studied and
replicated and confirmed phenomena that
you can be reliably confident is
operating in a certain manner so here's
the one that you all know because you
get to it's one of the things you have
on your membership card when you probe
to the philosophy sort of psychos party
I don't know what the philosophy
department we even have cards it's made
the cartoon exist I mean you go to the
psychology department parties and one of
the things you have to do is you get to
talk about you know feed with points or
five so that the bogus Percy right the
other one of the other things you have
to be able to talk about about the drop
of the Hat is just rude about the most
studied phenomenon in psychology I kid
you not this has been actually
investigated empirically call deposit in
the 90s there are review of all the
troop effects in the 90 that was all
read to like I think 500 it's been
ongoing this it's my favorite example
since I proposed is that a study
entitled the following the effect of
lunch on the strip of veteran apparently
you have lunch the Stroop effect isn't
just that I don't know that all civilian
talks about the Stroop effect I think
that's just a general property of lunch
but very well steady phenomena okay so
you know what the strip of that is and
because you know how to operate and this
is how accused it uses a probe what you
do is get interactive of the processes
seeing other processes effect it cetera
and then that will tell you something
about those processes so for example
because the shoe perfected such a
reliable Pro about the automaticity of
processing amir as was able to use the
Stroop effect as a probe to recently
provide some of the first clear evidence
for the injective existence of hypnosis
okay how did you do that why is the you
canada researcher because what is was
hypnotized people and told them when
they're looking through the words to not
pay attention to the meaning of the
words but only to the color and you
can't do that you can't placebo that
because of the automaticity of the
Stroop effect and when you can show
reliably replicated like three times is
that if people aren't properly
hypnotized they can significantly reduce
the sugar back there you go so you
understand how a cognitive robots
because wow hypnosis must be real
because it can really change the Stroop
effect mr. professors with real
phenomena so it gets become famous in
the next week I live in Christ okay so
she was doing the same thing like rats
uses the Stroop effect to study hypnosis
she was using feeling of knowing to
study inside ok so feeling of knowing
it's always pronounced even though we
have this acronym it's always pronounced
fearing of going for obvious reasons it
open up the acronym
okay I'll be up okay
or feeling of knowing now here is the
basic idea of personal what is feeling
of knowin feeling of knowing is if I ask
you something and you can't currently
answer me you will often get a feeling
that you nevertheless know it how many
of you know what I'm talking about
okay so just a bit of research dialogue
we've been quite a big display the
research done by the time that covers in
this experiment that's actually an
accurate thing you have your feelings of
knowing is a quite good predictor of the
the fact that you will later be able to
produce these information so it's not
like a lot of we get lots of feelings
with no tracking we need to know that
your confidence in your memory is not a
measure of how accurate to measure how
meaningful it is so you're gonna call I
know this what's the person who shot
Agnes I swear toward others other person
because reconstructive nature of memory
blah blah blah you darling
okay black I like that I like your
confidence
respect meaningful the information to
rather than exact URIs a feeling of
knowing it an accurate predictive and
accurate predictor that you will be able
to write and it's reliable its robust
okay so that's one of the peelings
you'll have good reason to trust whether
you should not trust your confidence in
your memory because it is not a proper
of accuracy but you should trust your
feeling you're going because we've got
good evidence reliable replicated
evidence that it is predictive of your
ability to actually recall the
information yes keep your mind
today's one instance but not all
instances where you have feelings of
knowing by our top it with some
phenomenal example that will I made a
joke about right when I talk to you
preparing for tests if you will study
something you come in look at the
material ago I know that I know that I
know that your brain goes not right now
I have to see yes that's an example it's
not so much tip at the time it's not
like a wet right but it's like you knew
this I know that I know this but that's
not the same at me else to actually
produce this is out that all right so
here with the idea yes in terms of my
confidence and I radiate meaningful
accepted doctrine about what is your
like fearing of cognitive memory is
related to your feeling of knowing it
could be they doesn't seem to be that
that's what it's generally tracking so
what people's experiences and you can
train yourself as what you're said no
I'm saying like what if anyone is like
generally like what did you think
um like I mean you can say that your
content that lefteris are act but at the
same time it's because of a feeling of
knowing this amazing information that
was provided
so generally yes generally the feeling
of insert sort generally that's not in
case but I can't say to you that it's
never the case which is what you're
asking but in the experiments which
people have been possible
even will have very high confidence
ratings and they can't have a feeling of
going because they actually remember
what you do you like example classical I
mean if you give people a bunch of
thoughts happens so and then what you do
is you show them a dot pattern that they
have never been presented that
represents a mathematical average of all
the dot patterns or Big C they will be
highly confident that they have seen it
before even though they never did so
there hasn't they had not learned it but
they have a high confidence with it they
have seen it before because it's
tracking how much previous information
can be meaningfully integrated to make
future predictions now I can't do the
opposite which is what you want I can I
deny that in some instances the
confidence might be colliding from
building up again tonight what hang on
is there like as a natural fiber you
just wanted to make that point you make
the point I just want to make sure I
thinking about any implications I'm
thinking that Katie called in sick you
know something
or less you remember something depending
on the members relationship it could be
are you feeling of knowing seems to be
not the same thing as your confidence in
the accuracy of what you have remembered
okay okay
so here is what met caps arguments is
that this probe and the feeling of
knowing seems to be predictive of a
successful memory search reliable
predictor of successful memory sir
[Applause]
okay so let's let's straight track your
reasoning okay I'm okay
successfully predicts that you're going
to have a successful memory search now
why it's broken all the claim that
that's all inside is a successful memory
search so why is proven all about
basically saying inside is successful
memory search after that and for
successfully research and successful
memory search is predicted right by F
okay you following the argument so far
so what should a poke a be predictive of
is that so that's a straight prediction
using the probe let's see if insight is
what Weisberg Inaba says just the
ability to you know complete a
successful memory search and feeling of
knowing is predictive of that the
feeling of knowing should be predictive
on inside so what she did right is she
gave people a standard memory card
feeling of knowing for standard memory
top and then feeling of knowing for
giving being given an insight problem so
you put people in a situation where
they're in the right they have to
remember something they currently can't
remember you get them to give they're
given the memories rating and then you
see how predictive of that is of the
successfully remembering looking into an
insight problem solving situation that
they can't currently solve you can see
the structural parallels here and then
you ask them a feeling of knowing that
like will they scale and come up with an
answer to
the answer now let's put you down
yes you know an insect problem is a
problem that requires right that you
substance change the problem formulation
in order to solve the problem okay
now part of what we're doing Duda is
we're trying to work out more and more
carefully what that is going to meet
because one of my criticisms of course
is that the cultists have pockets talked
about is in relatively major now we have
a couple of things we made progress on
that one I think necessary but not
sufficient namely one of the there's two
things that an inside problems does for
you and they could be together lately
separate one more support things and it
changes a combo disorderly explodes the
problem formulation into a non compos
composition it might also be or it is or
in a particular might be changing an
ill-defined problem into a 12-time
problem okay all right so what did she
find
well first of all she replicates the
cognitive probe she finds that there was
a high high correspondence for memory so
people again feeling of knowing strongly
predicts that people will successfully
finding memory and needed information
the results of the insert columns was
low in fact it was not statistically
different from zero for insight columns
now that's right that's a pretty
powerful miss confirmation of why bring
it all with specific pieces that right
inside problem-solving is just a
successful memory search of course is
why this experiment said yes is the
highest correspondence for memory
retrieval so feeling of knowing strong
predictor that they will remember
something that they can't currently they
can't currently find it in memory but
they will find it in memory and that
really wide right now my house because
Weisberg and although remember they
proposed that all insight is the insight
doesn't actually exist insight is just
as a memory search through the
compartments well that's the implication
of the conclusion is that now let's be
careful what madcap isn't saying she's
not saying that memory search is not
involved inside polar solvent that's
religious and that's not an implication
experiment what she's saying is there
must be something other than a memory
search involved in inside promise or
that's what you are there has to be some
other process at work in order to
explain this very stark difference in
the results
okay please remember that okay because
one standard mistake people make as soon
as the date of the past is they will
take this as and they will make the
claim that this show that memory
searches not involved in insects that is
not what it is showing picturing that
memory search why bring an ant all those
alternatives is insufficient to explain
what's going on into some other kind of
processing is that work yes yes yeah the
god replicated in this experiment - I
don't know I don't know what else is
good for day um I don't know I need you
to randomly by seeing it without what it
well like your political allegiances but
the only theoretical motivation would be
right now that I think that way under
the way the contract is described would
be towards memory search knowing okay so
that's what she's relying on is that the
standard presentation so that that's
already independently asserted and
particularly in the literature and she
replicates that again in the experiment
position it's legitimate for her to talk
that way
secondly is legitimate for her to talk
that way because that's exactly the
proposal or wise for after what happens
but your question is good you see how if
you didn't know that theoretical debate
though you'd be missing a lot of what's
going on in this experiment you still
get it in one sense but a lot of what's
going on - sister with the other world
would be getting then all right so that
was really interesting I was really
interested and like when this came up it
made a lot of noise as it should because
it seems to be you know a stark contrast
to the wise words in all but in one
paper okay so Mike have followed this up
am I not shocked there
so this is down Metcalfe 1986 BFF ever a
little world is right next kappa gonna
put a people side up
okay so Metcalfe was interested in fact
that feeling of knowing is very much
like a snapshot it's a end of them it
sort of the is a one-shot sort of take
on what's going on in cognition so if
you'll allow me to use a metaphor she
wanted to try and replace that snapshot
with a film she wanted a more online
moment-to-moment at least every 10
second measure of what's going on so she
wanted to turn the probe from one shot
probe into an into a continuous probe is
that right because she was trying to she
wanted to determine like how is this
metacognitive you know where is
interacting with problem solving it's
obviously not a simple predictor of
simple differences okay
so again what she did she waited to the
search inference framework to try and
see if she could come up what from the
search inference framework a theoretical
motivation for a contract that would
allow her to do what she wanted to do
and so what she's doing is she's
basically going to replace feeling of
knowing with a feeling of warmth
okay so she took a look at the work and
we already done this so I can remind you
she took that there were local workers
of the work Simon from the GPS and
general problem solver and then Simon
and we talked a bit about this last time
admitted that the median heuristic
requires write something that is telling
you you're getting closer or farther
away from your goal and he this is a
direct quote from where he go to many
that examination of path produces clues
of the warmer colder variety and of
course what he's alluding to there is
the game's warmer colder which it's up
there to be how and while at the game
flat you know it's like to put much
beefier people drive you people move
around you say one more gold or what
we're older and then they actually get
to the object because they followed your
war record instructors yeah okay so
anyways um what the cache theorized then
is that people as they're attempting to
solve problems right are constantly by
not just a one-shot feeling of knowing
their class is doing a feeling of warmth
by getting closer or farther away closer
or farther away from a goal so I think
this was varied again various on that
house part she wants to reformulate this
and she's in critical dialogue with the
surgeon constrain work she hasn't is
brought out of thin air she was the
search inference framework at health in
order to generate the new theoretical
construct she's playing weally weally
matrix Lee I think by the rule is really
really clearly really well
so what she then decided to do right to
use this more ongoing processing probe
while people were solving problems so
what she did is she gave the
participants were all attempting to
solve purported insect problems these
are problems that had generally been
called inside pops now we're going to
come back to that Jesus has already
brought out that there's a problematic
notion I want to foreshadow that is it
really cated that something has been
critically on its own an insect problem
because that's something we should
reflect on we're going to come back to
that point the literature catches up
sorry we're speaking from the
omniscience of hindsight the literature
shouldn't catch up with that and realize
that that's an important issue the
person is actually is going to raise
that question if it keeps coming back is
Weisberg okay so we're going to follow
that the beta so right now I'm asking
you that's a legitimate concern put it
on hold because we're working towards it
again because we're only building 86
letting you even reform them okay okay
so what that cap does is give people
purported insight problems to solve and
then they have to provide a lump rating
every 10 seconds it has to provide
warmth rating everything in sight now
remember what I said this is the second
experiment and it won't be satisfied
okay so
there were two finding okay and then you
know and be careful because they sound
like the contradictory they're not what
contradicts they're not contradicting
with give me Chancellor you want up
first of all the first finding is
there's enough rough increase in warmth
ratings right before a solution is down
so if you're looking at the ratings they
look like this and then boom just before
the insider
second right strong a strong feeling of
war predicted failure to solve the
problem rather than success so although
you get this right before solution right
a strong feeling of warm actually
predicted failure to solve the problem
rather than success now what you have to
remember is to distinguish rate from
difference this is a sudden rapidly
setting here's what we're not trying to
be you know it is compatible with an
illogical different it's at least
graphically sudden right which might be
different from just an overall high
feeling the warmth rating right right
like this recommend beginning
don't confuse rate with difference those
two those two findings are not in
contradiction to each other
in fact the rate issue seems to be more
predictive than the overall amount of
warmth so make up said that this was a
confused rule of defect let's go along
here this is confusing right so what she
argued is in these situations where
there's a very strong feeling of warmth
overall but does it predict success she
speculated the people are satisfied okay
so this is a good opportunity to teach a
concept we're going to need a divorce as
well that satisficing okay this is a
notion drawn from again the old insider
Jose what do you do with in satisficing
satisficing is you'll take a let's say
you want to reach a goal right but
getting to that goal is very hard for
difficult what you do is start slicing
is you sell or goal that somewhat
similar to the actual goal that you want
it but that is easier to get to
that satisficing satisficing is you
don't you to go for this school that's
really hard so you we can you go to this
what you needed to do and then you are
satisfied with that lesser goal and
you'll probably realize that this you
can explain a lot of your days behavior
yes like the strong feeling of warmth
all the way through to be formulating
the problem wrong from the very
beginning and our thinking was doing it
right that's what she's saying stop
oppressing Oh Deb it look exactly what
they're doing they have made a step but
the problem is with the chromatin inside
problem is there's no specific answer so
if you formulate it this way and you
move towards that you think oh I'm going
to get there I'm going to get there and
then you don't actually get there but
it's not just people that are
consciously saying okay I don't know how
to solve this problem
I'll move towards this solution right
now some of them might be some of them
might be doing what you're saying and
the point is for her argument it doesn't
really matter because what she what she
did was is is a compound here namely
that she has not controlled how people
are approaching these problems
she hasn't control for that variable
yes under people who incident for cancer
they would with our eyes for this simple
cause you mean across different problems
not among so they would start off free
high and then you realize that they are
also may be sure to make this pretty
picture and drive it so they're like
there cuz then they go down like this
and then I was like that there might be
I don't know if she reports that
specifically or separately
hello ma John Belushi does why did you
ask like um for us intriguing respondent
maybe people would like come to realize
today that despite there being of one
today are actually prevent in my life
recorded today actually encoded before
just before you that's good yeah I
honestly don't remember I haven't looked
at the original the primary data in a
long time so it might be something to I
don't believe it's in the discussion or
the problem sure it might be I guess in
fact it's sort of an a priori argument
there that always that probably might
have some initial like high and I it if
the question is about its duration and
its impact select the question I mean
that's a good question they should be
actually I think empirically
investigated even using this sort of
design program yes over the level of
like one that recorded
so they think they know the answer then
they'll get warm if we don't it looking
cool
that's right that's right right now so I
think what he was suggesting what's your
name cute cute
anybody is suggesting it like in a lot
of insight problems people initially
think they know the answer then they
realize they don't and then if they saw
that they get this like a dish is that
correct yes is that a general also
important thing not so much bad example
of more so like uh like good to depend
more solid subject because I felt they
whether like the subject believe that
they're knowledgeable that depending
would would determine - oh crap I'm not
quite see I mean because these people I
mean this is not tracked until it
definitely shocked at like whether that
is right right it's like if that makes
me translate their belief that answers
right right they feel so depending on
it's the subject under hangers right
whether it's read a lot that would show
the crap more so than actual like
accuracy abash sure but the problem is
these don't this graph doesn't reduce
excessiveness does okay so that one
actually does protect like a lot of yeah
okay so so if it was just what you were
saying there wouldn't be a difference in
the success of the two right
but what she wanted to know is why why
like they turn it around not to twist
your words or anything but both of these
are sort of getting strong ratings
towards the end why are these people
largely an actor these people are
largely active so what she's speculating
is that because these people are
satisficing this is bec second it that
they're they're misrepresenting the
problems of the stuff they're miss
formulating the problem okay great good
this is true today so you get a whole
debate mixed up with experimental
competition you have not this stuff okay
so what was needed was what we got to do
is try to control for and here's what
the experiment is called
theoretical debater gonna keep hammering
each other right
it's like what we got to do is control
for this so that people will treat right
some problems as inside problems and
only there's a problem okay now again
that goes back to Jesus question about
well but what is good inside is it
objectively this now madcap sort of does
what people often do which is legitimate
for a while is she sort of did an
experimental hack around about
theoretical problem and I think it was
cool that she did it because it was
needed to be done it was an eidetic he's
getting picked up what you do what she
did was she win the third experiment so
this is Metcalfe and I don't know how
it's pronounced we be wide I don't know
I've never heard it 1987 I mean I know a
lot of we you know a lot of like it it's
written this way that's good for now
sweet let's go with weed then we have a
nice pocket very moderate so so what she
did was to find she got inside problems
and then she got naughty like problems
she had people trying to solve both and
it gives even the warmth ratings for
both so she's trying to pull these two
apart how did she pick up nan inside
problems what she did was she found
well-defined problems that has been
analyzed and modeled by programs using
the means interest she went in and said
well what kind of problems doesn't even
heuristic doing well at again she's
using the search inference framework
itself so these are the kinds of
problems that the meet them too
well Act I'm going to use them as my
model or actually you're nodding that's
correct she sort of there's an intuition
that is good is it not too theoretical
exploitation all right okay so she goes
in and she says basically we're going to
is you're going to have this problem
that operation was not inside problems
we're going to find the problems that
have traditionally been I'm going to
tell people like to solve them and give
feeling of one training and then I'm
going to compare these two okay so you
know control group pulling a particle
pound you know this is how you do good
good son and like I say this is a good
experimental hot the intuition is clear
you understand why it makes sense and
it's fair because she's painting the
ocean from the searching for spring
result so she's not just you know
pulling their to thin air but ultimately
ultimately she has not answered his
question as to yes but what is an insect
problem and and are off are there
problems that are intrinsically in their
homes okay another keep carrying on that
point because I've made it clear that
it's going to be addressed that it's
important okay all right so what where
are the predictions due to predictions
so let's just get clear on the names
talkable
okay so this is an incremental curve it
goes up incremental e alright and just
gonna brush curve is that Alright
working for that so the first prediction
was an incremental versus an abrupt warm
pattern or it's not in sight versus
insect so the idea this is what people
would get for not in sight and this is
what people would give for himself plus
you second prediction you'd have
accurate metacognition for non insight
problems whereas you would not have that
for inside problems so now she's going
back and trying to gather what was also
to the first 86 then okay so the idea is
this is going it's right this is going
to be accurate and inaccurate this is
not the same thing as whether or not
people fault the problem like in this
second experiment this is accurate about
people's predictions about probably
going to do okay
all right so take a look at this does
this make sense okay so basically what
she's saying is feeling the warmth and
feeling of knowing ultimately work for
non insight problems because they are
probably mostly standard memory search
they're not going to work for inside
problems and you've got to get this
sudden abrupt change it's likely because
something other than the end of memory
search is going on and both of those
predictions were welcome to go through
those predictions were welcome drew yes
they ever done people to have like
[Music]
depends different inside problems have
different so happy cheerful ribbit I
don't want to talk is a different
property the problem in general is what
what happens in the slight variation of
our ability to a permanent solution to a
problem okay and there's a complex
answer to that and it has Khalil of
politics that problems and memory are
interacting because obviously the
relationship between the insider memory
is not critical pets they for the
relationship so there's an answer coming
okay yes um why do you do all right
accurate accurate for uh accurate and
inaccurate yeah this is there is only
need to predict that they're going to
solve the problem forces this all right
so now the first thing happens well the
first thing you want to happen is
replication and as you know we've talked
a lot about this program only time and
we didn't do it very much which is why
psychology is going to a replication
presence right but this is one of those
things for which they work with
replication and it was replication and
being a theoretical event yes um con
confused because it'll be a one that
insight accurate for like English moment
where you are you have people along the
way when most of their predictions
they'll say I'm not going to another
dose or naka de oversold I'm not
available solar you ask people here I'm
really able solar so you get a lot more
accurate predictions than you do here
wait but it's not inaccurate they're
wrong about being able to solve it no no
no a so-called if they saw the problem
I'll be something on is it this is not
yeah these are not Arabs or so like
right now this is not the same graphs as
in the second experiment she's pulling
the two things of particle Connors
sorry for that okay so let's get back to
it
all right yes these drastic tears my
hearing is connect I made a
metacognitive critical phases right not
firing
really so there's also the metacognitive
port way to solve this problem and then
you're also given your giving raises but
you're also actually going to solve this
problem so here's a plausible thing that
when is like this there's a thing leave
you that can easily extrapolate that
you're probably going to come to a
solution thinking of you where as there
isn't such a thing here okay yes yes so
in an insight problem you're feeling of
warmth doesn't work until only until the
very end
but because when it suddenly goes up
here people start to say why I'm going
to solve this and they can have to be
right so it's not like they just don't
have a feeling of warmth beginning thank
you very well very minimal yeah so the
insight home doesn't induce that feeling
of I have this in my brain that's right
yeah okay until then until done that's
exactly what the graph is showing is
that just a clarification okay resolving
annoyance a problem to resolve your math
however more critical in Maxwell we like
going to the troops in your hand and we
like okay so I like three quarks going
through the steps that you can see that
has a short where is I probably don't
know I'm going
that's right but we want to do is we
want to get beyond what you did concern
up for your question
but we don't want you the are there is
what happens is inserts the Dartmouth
okay so I noticed again
that's bound up with Jesus question
about well what we actually mean when we
tell them something is critical and
again we're working toward that because
we're doing theoretical debate external
competition right it's going to take us
like seven lectures to get close to
what's going on in them and it should be
hard because if the argument so far
right top the process by which
restructuring and problem formulation is
being like manipulated is the core of
your problem solving the problem it
happens right well that's part of what
we're saying when we don't have an
independent way of talking about it it's
not quite circular in that what you're
saying is there is something that people
call inside problem that needs to be
processed differently than I'm a regular
problems and now I want to show you the
recognition is a reputation as to that
sensitive okay so
there's a sense in which and we've
talked about this we already talked
about it in the discretion of
arabic-english confidence this is all
you know this is a universal pejorative
term that really isn't well thought out
but it's a bluff this is very subjective
okay so the thing is we people are
reporting something but it actually
reflect any kind of difference in
processing well again it doesn't have
the machinery back then to look at the
very very carefully but what happened
was public interesting studies the
axle-back did this in 1989 versions of
this 1994 desolate I don't know clean
absolute rice I don't know these these
witches other than this work 1995 so
these are the three studies and what
they want what they did was they they
set up the same experiment right we have
people solving not inside problems
inside problems you have people giving
the feeling of more frames but then they
were also check measuring heart rate
heart rate because typically heart rate
actually reflects you know metabolic
differences in processing etcetera
etcetera
- other things but you look well you
going to look for some tightly the heart
ring for example is tracking the ceiling
the wall is it the heart rate is
actually reflecting is - you know
concordance means right the two graphs
that I would have put them one on top of
the other they would have closely
superpose yeah if I have high
concordance that means the heart rate is
actually measuring there's something
actually physiological going on that
corresponds to feeling of what that's
what they found
a down those two things they found for
the audience I promise heart rate went
like this and for the inside Papa's it
went like that and then they also found
that these heart bearings grafts had
hiked accordance with the feeling of
warmth grafts
so result they replicated in three
studies Metcalfe's original experiment
which is good and then secondly in three
study they were able to show that
there's something objective going on
with doing the warm there's different
processing occurring in solving sets is
it's showing-up and you know highly
concordance physiological and okay so
that impressed people all the sets of
things are like something's going on the
wise work and all the claim that there's
nothing going on inside it's now
becoming impossible not not been going
on it's not standard their research is
even making a physiological difference
the ceiling of work difference is real
and so objective set so what is the
difference what's going on we can't just
say there's nothing different or special
about the inside okay we're going to
take a look now another set of
experiments and once again I'm going to
as we go through the experiment we'll
look at it but I'm also going to point
out a looming theoretical flaw in the
experiment just like the issue about the
objectivity of an insight problem is a
looming issue by the way although this
has been brought up on a related issue
which was the result of an employer is
whether or not the class of things the
college that problems is homogeneous or
not
so we're going to come back to both of
us connectivity that experiments have to
do with right the relationship between
insight and verbal overshadow now here's
my theoretical forewarning and we're
going to come back to this some of you
know this from 250 because I do this
argument more extensively in public
activity even though this term shows
Hopkin textbooks
I think verbal overshadowing is a
horrible theoretical Monro and I'm going
to come back and I think very seriously
criticize the constructs nevertheless I
want to look through the experiments
because they show important things ok so
the experiments are going to rely a lot
in terms of on this notion of verbal
overshadowing I'm going to come back
later and say that the notion that is
overshadowing is done by something
verbal I'll show you on the way way
that's misleading language itself is not
an interference effect right and then
the notion of overshadowing
implies the model of attention that is
overly simplistic and does not capture
what needed to understand what's going
on and ends up all you need to do right
now is just put opinion verbal over
shouting reveille he's going to come
back later and destroy
it's
experiment I want to talk to the expiry
of experiments have to do with work done
by Schuler we've been an advocate for
the first one is from Schuler Olsen in
Brookes from 1993 the publication dates
and the production dates for the data do
not track which is a little bit view and
usually published and when they were
actually done doesn't track okay for the
first one is smaller Olson and Brookes
[Applause]
1993
okay so what you're basically doing if
they were making is in that cast
difference between people solving inside
problems and on inside problems and then
they are going to eventually zero in on
what you're going to call that
individual differences methodology which
are also teach about what was happening
that this study is they were comparing
the effects of concurrent verbalization
on solving inside problems and solving
non inside coffee
[Applause]
here what there's always cheaper
globalization include of globalization
is where the notion verbal overshadow
come from concurrent mobilisation is as
you're trying to solve the problem
you're speaking aloud you're giving them
like writing protocol analysis basically
right what you're doing what's going on
in your mind what are you doing as
you're trying to solve the problem doing
concurrent verbalizes
and they did a series of studies and
what they found was that concurrent
verbalization markedly impairs insight
on solving it really impairs inside
problems not just that in the inside
words fail you and sometimes words going
to fail right we're at comparable
ization had no effect on not instead
focus on so you seem to get a reliable
difference on interference between
insight where you've got a lot and not
inside problems are you getting very
little perspiration now two things come
to mind that are going that are going on
in this exciting one right you just
think about the sort of thinking and
it's plausible or nothing they're saying
something in Platteville is that you
know insight is largely an ineffable
process and therefore speaking might
somehow interfere with inside because if
I ask you how you have an insight you'll
go well I didn't have an insight and
then I did that will be your explanation
right and we can come back to this is
leading in it so now that I think that
that sort of the level they were talking
about it but there there might be
something else going on and this is
again to foreshadow what we're going to
talk about later that lines up with what
we talked about when we criticize right
wipers are always on and us to criticize
them which is the idea that insight may
be much more of a procedural process and
a propositional process it not not be
verbalization versus the ability it
might be that insight is a very
procedural process that can be interfere
by propositional process in fact one of
the best ways to interrupt people's
procedural abilities is to get them to
go into propositional process so if you
experiments are video martial arts a
good thing to do is to say wow that was
really good move how did you do that
and then they'll try to answer you and
then they fall apart they can't spar or
if I were to ask you to tell me what
you're doing while you're writing your
notes what you're doing with your hand
in order to do it you little yes no this
is an argument that I'm making and I'm
making this argument to try and
foreshadow to give you some tools for
getting a little bit of alternative ways
of thinking about their interpretation
of them so they're presenting this very
much as it's just a verbal overshadowing
there might be something going on there
another way is me putting this to you is
is it languages per se that's causing
the interference which is what they're
asserting or is it that certain types of
languages trigger certain kinds of
processes
these languages per se that these
appearance or is it that certain kind of
language use triggers certain kinds of
processing and those kinds of processing
might be interfering effects there's a
difference between these two hypotheses
right okay that's all I need you to get
right now okay okay all right so there
is something going on here they
interpreted in terms of verbal or
soldering I'm suggesting that might be
something else going on in terms of type
of processing we'll come back to that
later okay
so sure and Melcher 1995 they have to
have all these protocol analyses like
you know right all this protocol
analysis you can do right because you
have all these reports of people to do
so that's the Shuler notes are 95 and
then I presenting this in terms of the
logic of the studies
so they compared it on inside and inside
protocols okay so the Nanyan site
protocols contained a significantly
greater proportion of what they call
arguments what they need by that are
inferential strategies like logic
content analysis there is very little
use of inferential strategies and the
insight protocols so what we're seeing
is lots of inferential strategies here
not very many here
oh yes what do you need my internship so
using logic right using math using means
interest using anything where you're
checking the logical relations between
propositions in order to try and advance
each getting to the goal State so one
way you can try to move from an initial
state to the goal state is by moving
logically between propositional
representations of states but that might
not be the only way you could look to
your goal state and of course it's not
primarily the way to go to your goal
state computer shopping procedure is
okay for now
great I forget your name okay now the
reverse
there was a reverse where you found
something you need said for those in
didn't find very much or not in phase
protocol much higher proportion of
positive and metacognitive reports for
insight so if people are much more often
pausing right not doing just like
nothing's happening and they're doing
metacognitive reports they're reporting
on what's going on in their mind so
there's a shift in insight right on to
the attention onto the cognitive medium
rather than just onto the problem
yourself people are actually paying
attention to the cognitive meeting
they're stepping back and looking at it
rather than looking through it so if you
allow me an analogy that I've asked you
later we talk about mindfulness so this
is an analogy it is an analogy it is an
analogy is age understanding I'm going
to come back to this idea of here
right now I am looking through my
glasses in both senses of the word we
are them and by Mesa specifically
invoking both senses of the
I'm looking through my back because
that's actually what's happened I'm
looking beyond them and I'm looking by
means of them is that okay now sometimes
right I've been rained out too since I
was black glasses a long time I can't
get back and I can't do the later sugar
because of specific sort of weird he's
got some eyes so classes and I are but
sometimes what I have to do right is
right I do this right now that my
glasses are transparent I'm looking
through them sometimes I step back and I
adjust my attentional focus which in
this case is also perceptual focus like
a visual focus on you I adjust my focus
on looking at my glasses rather than
looking through that means that I'm not
looking through them I'm stepping back
and looking at them and is there almost
allows me to pay attention to what's
actually going on in the media right
like to do things like clean my glasses
and then of course when I put it back on
right
I can see differently to them before so
what I'm suggesting to you is that's
what's happening people are engaging in
something like a core process of
mindfulness they're stepping back and
looking at the cognitive medium let's go
a lot in their mind rather than looking
through those processes directly at the
problem yes how do they know that things
happen all right
how do they know that they are doing
this because they're giving
metacognitive reports they're saying
what's going on in their mind rather
than talking about properties or
features of the problem yes
so the experiment involves a prop right
and then as a matter of feedback to get
the Proctor the only prompt is tell me
what you're doing I'm beginning to so
there's an initial talk and then you're
just let run and then what they're doing
is they're looking through all of these
protocols this is everything that people
have said and looking for what was
President did wanted absolutely oh so
the first difference and first of all we
haven't even determine if it's predicted
or not what people are saying we're
doing what they're doing the same thing
okay the first prima facia what we see
there's a difference what the
differential process ain't going on and
the not ESA problems and there seems to
be this transparency opacity ship is
kind of metacognitive directing of
attention at the cognitive medium rather
than through it in inside problems a
plausible like at least initially
plausible speculation which will they
have to try and turn into theoretical
argument and empirical evidence is that
people are stepping back and trying to
look at how they're formulating the
problem rather than looking at the
formulation to formulated problems in
terms the final look at the problem
formulation of in formulating the
problem rather than at the formulated
problems okay so as I've mentioned
before what people say they're doing and
what they are doing and right are not
the same thing this is like intersection
as inside as the main way of trying to
do psychology right before the
behaviorist because infrastructure is
shitty sorry scrappy intersection does
not work well because what people think
they're doing and what they're actually
doing is can be very different this is
by the way why you should always you
shouldn't ignore it but you should
always question any evidence that is
real preferred then that's produced by
self-report questionnaire
because while you're getting access to
do is people's introspectively available
information which can be completely
other than what they're doing or what's
actually generating their performance
yes what you mean by other types of
things for which introspection is
generally more accurate than others
which especially we're after than other
types of else or if you ask someone to
live with oh what's it like having walls
on a linen they just actually thinking
they write down like exercise that would
be pretty accurate to say slipper that
versus someone acting on how you solve
an insect problem which is like the
opposite like schooling experiences you
can you know how often that's like a
feeling of knowing because you know
creases versus like something you think
but does it works because your feeling
of knowing is implying that situation
yeah I don't know I don't know if I have
enough knowledge to answer your question
my concern is that generally it seems
acceptable that needs to be held at
working memory and since a lot of your
processing a lot of the time is going on
outside of working memory that even when
you make accurate to some degree there's
still going to be quite misleading
I mean there's a sense in which I agree
with you though because I mean if what I
want to do experiments on people's
awareness of like the conscious
experience then of course introspection
is going to be effective only it isn't
my house and I want to study down but
for example your interest asking you to
introspect while you're doing language
processing turns out to be largely
useless because most of that processing
all that syntax and all that stuff is
going on largely unconsciously even
though you're very familiar with
languages you do it all day long so
sorry that's not a conclusive answer
it's an honest one
perfect so let's move from what people
say to finding out what they say
predicts their success because of what
they're saying they're doing is actually
highly correlated with their success
then it is plausible that it is actually
what they're doing in order to produce
the success okay so what they did was
they checked the degree to which problem
elements you know arguments that I've
put on calling inferential processes or
pauses of metacognitive reports are
predictive of the success of both types
of problems or if it's a problem so for
not in big problems use an inferential
processing with highly correlated with
success for not instead problems the use
of inferential process it was highly
predictive of successful the people say
they're doing this in parentally they
are doing it inferentially and that's
what's actually paying them to the goal
page
for insect problems there was no
correlation zero between the use of
inferential processes and success it was
on Polish the fact and this is going to
push to the second experiment right
there was very little that predicted
successes that problems is very little
in the protocol analysis that predicted
it there's a weak correlation between
pausing and success and inside problems
that might be like they say when people
are trying to disengage from the problem
step by
okay so again I seem to see that there's
very very computational processes going
on inside problem not good evidence but
that's going on in audio credit problems
now one temptation here I'm just going
to really say what it is and then change
with what type H is is what give you an
assertion constrain work is to say aha
but that it's actually computational for
both it's just that an insight the
computational processes are going by so
fast right to be an escape verbalization
and consciousness this is known as the
speeded reasoning you that in proposed
sets of problems you're using these
computational processes but for insight
right happening so fast so rapidly that
it can't be brought into your language
and consciousness speeder these things
give the formal come from before we come
break and we'll come back after the
break and talk about the experience at
experimental for the empirical response
to that first of all think about it in
terms of the theoretical probability now
you need an independent theory as to why
were you going to get fed problems you
can speed it up inferential processing
and why don't do it for non-exempt
problem 38 it has not been the case that
as we have produced machines that get
faster and faster at unconscious
inferential processing they have become
more insightful in the province of yours
and you are local using such machines
right now
so it's an improbable hypothesis to
begin with and then we're going to see
it's going to really imperative this
population see it reasonably in
subjective I'd female extreme subjective
mind movements between the very studies
but because you have a wicked subject
design you can check you can check how
people are doing about the inside and
then on inside problems so if both types
of problems using the same processes of
both the non inside problems and the
inside problems are both using your
inferential processes then except on
northern side problems should be
predictive of success on inside problems
if you're using the same machinery and
always you're doing is speeding it up
and inside then there should be a
predictive relationship between success
the opportunity for in knowledge their
problems and success for right using
that machine on inside problems right
so what they did is they looked for when
people were solving these problems right
and they're using the inferential
processes from the monitor problem is
their success on the non inside problems
crawled into their success on the intent
of what's the degree of the correlation
between them and the degree of the
correlation between them was not there's
no correlation
so it's both an implausible thesis and
it doesn't seem computable conformation
so the question then emerges what kinds
of processes if interracial processes
are not predictive of intercom solving
what kind of processes are so suppose to
work all right
and culture in 1993 they used what they
called an individual differences
methodology an individual differences
methodology so let's talk about process
a and skill means I'm sort of always
what we're doing right here that it does
sound like a hand grenade going on okay
so I I'm going to swap first I'm going
to examine contribute and project so I
bet some process a and then I'm seeing
if it's a component to skill B so what
we can do is you can see in process a
the decision goes like this in process a
is involved is a causal factor in skill
B then performance on tasks involving a
performance on tasks involving a should
be predictive of tasks requiring skill B
so you're trying to figure out what are
the processes out work in this and I'd
say well I think this process is that
working this is that's the case and
performance on that should be predictive
of how well you do with this does
everybody understand everything okay
so what they wanted to do was what they
did was give a bank of tests and we're
going to see people that are sort of
completely using the individual
differences methodology they're going to
give a bank of tests to see which
processes are predictive in
problem-solving and attempt to try and
get clearer about what are the elements
within what are the component processes
we need enter false promises
so another way of putting that is the
individual difference methodology is a
way and method of trying to analyze a
process down into more basic processes
going to analyze the skill I'm using
that word because the potential that
insight is procedural in nature into its
its component skills okay so they
consider three potential insight
processes restructuring I'll tell you
how the operation lines in for even a
minute field independence and
unconscious search okay
so yield independence is when when
you're doing a different bending task
and you're saying what the hell you
talking about how many of you have
played as a kid or you have younger
children in your lives who have to do
Where's Waldo how many of you know at
least what I'm talking about
I thought it over
why is it why is it hard to find Waldo I
guess there's a like this is not a fun
look wide open time you're out Waldo
there's Waldo
okay why is it hard to find Waldo
there's lots of other people right
there's lots of ways there's lots of
things around Waldo that seem to have
some of all those features but not all
of all those features so you're
potentially extracted so it's embedded
what you have to do and you have to
learn how to write in to do something so
that Waldo's stand out last one is
unconscious search and that's the idea
that somehow you're connecting things
that are not directly connected
unconsciously alright so how did they
how if they operationalize this yes
restructuring restructuring field
independence and uncontested welcome yes
when you're when system when you're
trying to find Waldo you're doing a
field independent task you try to make
Waldo independent from his field you're
trying to say there's Waldo I can see
him right he's no longer embedded in the
field like people and distractors I was
just using it because it's the most
common version another field independent
that's it we decided to make a cultural
thing one of the things that binds us
together is a culture things like a
Waldo and Star Wars
what we stand for
okay okay so they tested restructure
this is really clever they tested
restructuring by giving people
out-of-focus pictures so I'll give you
an out-of-focus picture and then you can
do even doing even better versions of
that now but I gave you how to photos
out of focus picture and you do
something it's really cool people will
do this well I look at it and I sort of
oh that different I'm like oh okay now
you probably know that you can now do
that you can do this even better because
of this baller services you can do like
really course pixelation of a picture
and then you sort of look at it neither
and then you can sort of do this thing
in your head and you go oh that's
actually la okay now there's ones that
seem to combine them that are really
cool right
so you look at a picture that's just a
bunch of colored splotches purple with
red and all pencils and you stare at it
for a while and all of a sudden it goes
3d and it's a 3d picture before that's
jumping out of the ocean how many of
you've done those I'm an easy okay I
mean you've done those and you can't get
it to work okay so we're going to have
to take you away okay so the interest
thing about when it works and when it
doesn't work and what's that's
predictable about I'm not predictable
okay all right so how did they do the
field just embedding they just gave
people things variations on like where's
Walter
so they need to be vetted figures test
you have all these lines and yes sir oh
can you see the three-dimensional square
oh there it is yeah you can see three
things for the unconscious search they
did a remote associate tax so a word
that all three of those are associated
with
like old blackboard like oh so then
those are called remote the associate
tax return has a wonderful acronym a rat
cat
okay so there's games are on the market
now that you can actually play this game
called tripods where you have to do this
given three things you have to say what
do they all have in common
okay then there's now interestingly how
this has got picked up into the general
literature these are a little bit
confused we'll come back to them then
this category instance generation so
I'll give you a category okay so maybe
category the category of gems the first
one is diamond quickly give me two other
category numbers gems
the first one is diamond give me two
more shots on out come on
there's emeralds rubies sapphires okay
those are going to go to the people the
ones the coffers are the ones that you
should buy for your significant other
but they don't come up very quickly
don't buy that good here aside towpath
good and then the last one which I and I
think other people argue is to be thrown
out if it's terrifically confounded with
anagrams they're using this as an
unconscious search and Graham is when
you have a word that's mixed up and you
have to reorganize it that seems to be a
mixture of all kinds of these other
tasks it seems to be confounded it's not
just a memory search right after
restructure if you feel this is bedding
you're doing possibly some remote
associate so the an investor's be thrown
out there is compiled identity
all right so now what we have is we have
a bunch of things yes each to name the
name of the second topic is a category
instance generation you have to generate
instances from a category all right
so yes all adults are under
unconsciously
all right so let's get going
so perceptual restructuring turned out
to be the single best predictor of
insight performance the better people
are on perceptual restructuring the
better they are at some insight problems
now whether or not as perceptual
restructuring is probably a bit of a
shake because a lot of problems can be
posed viewed an abstract form and you
can still solve them so it might be
attentional restructuring the rapture
talking about maybe measuring something
more basic like cognitive flexibility so
don't lean too much on a perceptual part
of that of this but what's going on here
is that this is your ability to do this
is a very good predictor of how you live
inside problems we're going to need to
do that weird attentional thing where
you redistribute what salient was
foreground what's background all that
seems to be predictive Club regret
evidence to suggest predictive of your
ascetical second best is yield
independence test be able to find Waldo
really well is actually predictive of
how good you are in solving suppose
now it's not clear that that puzzle in
the center you get you prove well all
day long you'll get better at solving
inside problems something like that has
cleared now remote associate tasks were
predictive of insight but much less and
fielding dependence and restructuring
now here's why I wanted to stop apply
this or a set that does predict insight
clearly that's what be able to show but
it's much it's much much weaker
predictor can feel this embedding or
perceptual restructuring now why is for
making going on about this because many
researchers use this as the task for
insight console which is somewhat
problematic why are they using this one
when the other two are more predictive
of insight problem-solving is probably
easier okay so and that's that's a real
thing right ease of experimental design
is a real thing in science so I'm not
I'm not ridiculing you understand what
I'm doing is setting in a reminder for
you when you leave this that this is the
best okay not theoretically the best it
may be better the logically easier to
use but that doesn't mean it is
necessarily getting clearly app
essential functions of inside okay just
remember that okay category generation
records of not throw out anagram
category generation was not was not
predictable inside
again you need to confirm that searching
through the compartments is not the
primary thing you do in order to solve
an inside problem so yeah another
replication sorry an empirical dis
confirmation of the Weisberg and all the
theories of how you recycle
okay so category generation searching
the category box does not particularly
now with interesting is it goes the
other way the perceptual restructuring
and embedded figures tests are not
predictive of non inside problem solving
your ability to do perceptual
restructuring your ability to find Waldo
is not predictive of how well you will
solve non inside problems
category generation as well as other
international processing measures such
as m80 scores which do not predict the
insight do predict success on on inside
problems but which are basically getting
is processes that predict success on
insight do not predict success on on
insight and vice-versa
you're getting something close to adult
association okay which is pretty good
evidence it's not conclusive but it's
pretty good evidence if you've got
different processes at work in factually
ruptured come to a conclusion that's
almost as strong as last version
although and it's amazing how these two
click through the direct opposite but it
was this is what they say the two types
of processes draw unfolded the two types
of problems drawn qualitatively
different processes and I'm going to
argue later I think theoretically
they've got the wrong way around
but nevertheless you understand what
they're saying that the processing
that's going on inside or inside problem
should be very different to the
processing going about acknowledging
said problems but anybody other way
around is I think we have different
problem solving processes and when we do
one we call the insight or we use the
other we call the audience
[Applause]
all right
so we'll come back to again the issue of
verbal overshadowing when we come back
if you get to look at some wise words
steelhead the responses to this
empirical work is again my sister
developed by empirical experimental
composition at the Olympics trying to
show you how they weave back and forth
through each other part of the reason
I'm doing our course is part of my
pedagogical responsibility is not only
to teach you the material but to teach
you how to be a good scientist because
in the end the second thing is more
important to you right now the content
stuff is more important to because it
needs you what you are means your degree
we needs possibly a job and your job
means weather how people will eat with
you reproduce with you right but right I
get that and so that's why I'm trying to
teach you a lot of the relative content
but down the road and a lot of this
content is going to be overturned or
come to be obsolescent or this disrupt
the screening this is what they street
plan shows that knowing how to do
theoretical debate an experimental
competition will always be evaluated
that will like always give access to the
pursuit of knowledge okay so another set
of experiments is the individual
differences methodology to try and pick
up on this thing we talked about briefly
before its scent of leaping in an in
psychology I don't know I don't know I
know what happened in between a saying
so it's interesting is this is this is
the metaphor I was leaping metaphor that
is trying to metaphorically integrate
the search the search infants framework
and the perceptual network because
you're moving through a space but you've
left the ground
so you're break so it's trying to
combine like leave visualization because
you do in one place and suddenly you're
in the other put it with that you've
moved through space what you're trying
to pick up on is this gap in processing
now interesting enough the researchers
are going to try and operationalize that
and to theorize as to what's going on in
that gap and to propose some interesting
beginning of an alternative to the
computational framework we're trying to
understand what's going on
it's beginning so this work was done by
our agreement computer if I remember
next I'm going to do the review so we
show you later set by now think is that
a baker and CP 1996 so they want they're
going to use an individual differences
methodology to study what they call
inductively thing now because I'm a
conduction to be an inferential process
I think that the word they're using
there's incorrect I shouldn't be calling
a conductive weeping because of the
whole point of what they're trying to
progress so I'm going to recommend to
avoid confusion especially those who've
used and some working on logic as what
what induction and deduction are etc I'm
literally sake recommend it we call that
they're talking about cognitive leaping
rather than conducting
okay so let's talk about how they
operationalized leaving and then what's
the theory behind it was concealed
ethical argumentation behind us so what
they did was they need people a series
of cues oh sorry with the senator
protocol to bring to show you this is a
direct visual imagery well are you sure
usually itself it just goes to some a
bunch of dots on the screen to look at
you go like this and then I'll fill the
more dots we place it on the little bit
and then more dots and it's somebody
will hold that to soap up understand a
tactic so what I can do is I can write I
can try right every 10 seconds or so
more dots are added and your instruction
is the following try to use pure cues
before we're playing it or try as soon
as you can to tell me what this is going
to be a picture of the other tip will
fit with word stems but the pictures are
I think less confounded does everybody
understand a pack now a good cognitively
/ is somebody who is uses fewer cues but
will largely get the answer by the way
on your test put cognitively / if the
question comes up it's funny the first
time but by the fourth or fifth time
reading about cognitive lepers and
they're not funny here the kind of
distressing okay
all right so here's the proposal people
who are better at being cognitive
leapers we can use fewer cues but yet
accurately come to the right answer will
be better at insect problem stories so
first of all before we go on they
received goodies leave receive good
external confirmation for that but there
you are anything the better you are at
office all okay so let's look let's talk
here and now I'm going beyond what they
say in the experiment I'm going to start
with what's directly implied by what
they're saying and then I'm going to go
beyond in a way they might not have
thought to talk about I don't think it
did consistent with what they're talking
about
okay so this is slowly progressing more
more into my voice out of their voice
now what they're initially talking about
it looks like is your compact is your
capacity for pattern depletion
and you panicked a pattern completion
right it is very interesting ability
that you have one thing you should know
is the ability to do this is one of the
best tests we have for your general
intelligence Ravens progressive matrices
right yes are typically consisted but
are not consistent enough to generalize
someone has ADHD or that there's a
really specific problem sure at the pump
that they can't forgive the comparative
standards right so areas that are using
some types of problems on the nitrous
but not in others well I'm not quite
sure I agree with the second thing
you're saying but before I address that
let me just the first thing right I mean
none of these measures are perfect but
there's no measure the in psychology
that's better than our measures for gene
in terms of its predictive capacity of
idiot nothing comes close to Jesus ility
to predict your academic success or life
success you're like your health success
it is our most powerful predictor so is
it perfect no but it's really strong
it's really powerful so it's getting at
something so I think it should be
treated that way
secondly the idea that there are
different types of intelligences it is
that what you're suggesting okay let me
address that person that is a very that
as mom received empirical confirmation
that hypothesis so the multiple
intelligence ideas etc there let's say
if you're not saying so what is it other
than that that Europe
properly what I'm saying is like it
because of someone who has ADHD place
them with pattern conclusion based on
working memory other types of
problem-solving ability so you get 99th
percentile in one and like 38 percentile
and the other not an accurate measure
unit of problem-solving let alone of
like different types of life skills so
because you're not measuring obviously
flip through certain types of learning
disabilities also that can follow
similar pattern that is obviously
between that type of higher education
problems on another type of problem
solving and what song to do but but but
I mean first of all if you're talking
about pathological cases and the top of
our table all of you might be exactly
that's what's breaking down is the fact
that in general there's a strong
positive manifold between those tests
how you do on these tests is strongly
predictive of how you doing all the
others suggesting there's a general
ability under underneath them and once
again that general ability measure is a
very powerful predictor across many
domains so the fact that in some
individuals it might be breaking down is
not evident depression or the way he
doesn't exist it might be that what's
actually being affected is the
generalizability of the ability right
well you don't what is it you want it to
you you're not saying that that your IQ
is unaffected by learning disabilities
or things like that I'm not you saying
well I mean that's one part that can or
can't be depending on the Texas for you
but like that's not how to say like if
there's a difference between that just
there's obviously something that bears
on some of these measures but not others
and like how
ah Asians that look at you really well
in one too badly the other really well
the other evaluate the second most and
they're not completely in problems on
this something that's causing the
ability of them not to be associated
sure sure they're different no that's
not good evidence it's good evidence but
they're not identical but this claim was
never that they were identical processes
the subtests are all somehow capping
into an underlying core general mobility
that's what explains the consistent
positive manifold and the ability again
for that mindful to predict across all
of many different domains of life so I'm
not quite sure what the thesis is you're
criticizing or what you're like the idea
that there's a general ability behind it
the evidence for that is very strong so
what you're saying is somehow in certain
individuals that get skewed so that the
general ability goes here but it doesn't
go there yeah I agree with that what
what follows from that
well expose be different so that you
know it's introducing that they're not
allowed to further inland would it be
different because we can get different
results but why would the general
ability for something action if you're
saying like it can be one way or the
other through the something that's like
affecting that's Cuba before I was just
thinking like obviously the results that
are produced this correlation that is
always because like that has to be
accounted for in some way and if they're
saying that they do right so here's one
way so what also is highly correlated
with measures of general intelligence
are measured measures of working memory
capacity and things like attention can
alter how working memory is being used
so ADHD could skew working memory which
could then skew the general ability is
being
that would be one way exactly did I
understand the question and again there
is a dependent measure so independent up
things like Ravens progressive matrices
these independent measures that working
memory use is also highly predictive of
your general intelligence abilities and
we know of course that attention alters
how you're using your working memory so
if you had something that was affecting
attention you can see working memory
which could then affect your general
intelligence be implemented in one way
rather than another right okay for an
answer okay there was another question
is um everyone might notice like
initially measured capacity for poverty
completion I was just wondering with
what that is so before I got into the
discussion with Chloe what I was what I
was saying is that what we're measuring
what what a percentage NTP are measuring
in experiment I would say is plausibly
pattern completion and when I was saying
is one of our strongest tasks for your
intelligence ability your ability to
solve to solve problems is a pattern
completion test and Ravens progressive
matrices and then that's how we got into
the discussion about sort of measures of
general intelligence okay now what's
interesting about pattern recognition
and okay this is meant to be again
stepped towards a theoretical
formulation is that prior completion
abilities were actually have
traditionally very difficult for
standard computational machines to carry
up the reason for that is that product
completion had a pattern completion
problems are all often but are called
multiple simultaneous constraint
problems
I notice we should be thinking about
this because we already put aside the
idea of a single constraint multiple
simultaneous constraint problems okay so
let me give you the classic example and
then let's talk about how it was solved
okay so you can do things like this so
you can read that and what know what
does it say okay here you read this as
an H and you read it here add a name
okay now this was actually a very
difficult problem because if you try to
represent this sort of initially
inferential e you can get into weird
kind of binds because this is what you
ill said in order to read the word I
have to meet the individual letters but
in order to disambiguate the letters I
have to be the word which means reading
is impossible because until I read the
word the letters are immediate but I
can't read the word until I can read the
letters
therefore we need two possible so it's
an illusion what you're doing is this
available okay now what the answer was
what is the answer by the way what do
you don't pop the answer I'm interested
what like how do we do this what do you
think Jess you write to simultaneously
pop down the bottom our process begin a
self-organizing fashion pattern
recognition seems to involve having to
be able to mile multiple simultaneous
constraints by doing self-organizing
processing that is working
simultaneously top down and bottom up
I'm using a non-controversial example
okay
now the machines that turned out to be
very good at doing this in contrast to
standard computational machine and the
people who first solve this problem of
people like David Romo heart and
Geoffrey Hinton because they were able
to get neural networks to solve this
problem very relevant because their own
networks work in terms of parallel
distributed processing many prop many
types of classes and going on
simultaneously and if you have a
top-down and bottom-up passion in a
self-organizing fashion now then right
now this is suggestive and that's all
I'm going to do with it right now but
this is suggestive because as many of
you know real network Theory has
consistently presented itself as a
theoretical alternative to computational
process yes so you're not actually
focusing on that anyone is shaped when
you are trying to go
in other words thank you to race level
instructions yes the words without you
know exactly
so here's yeah but that's because you
already have some model of the whole
word which you're using your Covenant
where's that coming from
some top-down process because with
little words right so okay so what's
going on right is the idea that now
again this is now me doing cognitive
science extension beyond a percent of
the people that maybe what's going on
when you're cognitively right pattern
completion some pattern completion is
using this kind of simultaneously
top-down bottom-up stuff organized
process that can be implemented in
neural networks which is very different
than the logical inferential processes
propositional processing that is central
to computers it's a very different model
than the search of this Rindler because
it's not inferential II driven it's not
riven by inference is operating on
propositions which could employ like a
self-organized dynamic relation between
top-down and bottom-up process
now that's interesting because that
suggests a potential I'll get you a
question insight that suggest a
potential source for a rigorous
theoretical alternative to the search
inference computational framework that
was never provided by the gestalt people
yes I can catch I guess how humans have
like power distribution processing right
computers are oh and let's be careful
what I'm not saying I'm not saying that
you don't do computational processing
I'm not making that claim what I'm
claiming is that a better model for how
you do this kind of thing is the kind of
thing that's going on in neural networks
which is a cell is a process in which
you've got self organized a
self-organizing relationship between
top-down and bottom-up processes right
in here when doing the Hat and notice
that there is an aspect of your
cognition that has this bottom-up
top-down self-organizing accustomed to
it namely your attention so one of the
things in which this this kind of model
is frequently involved is attention
attention is both bottom-up so that like
you that grab your attention but I can
also drive a top-down house your right
big toe doing right now okay
and of course the two right are always
interacting you're trying to grab your
attention you're trying to direct your
attention but as you're directing your
attention that will grab your attention
and people are talking more and more
about attention being this kind of
simultaneously bottom-up top-down
self-organizing process so we might have
the potential for an alternative
understanding of the core processes that
are going on in restructure this is the
beginning yes
so Islam Baker and CeCe's task is
related to like you know account
recognition
and purpose that pattern of recognition
is like related to in is items only and
if you know it's what they're measuring
is like kind of indicated with like IQ
and pattern recognition gear like you
would like this insights problem-solving
and IQ blatantly different there's a
problem with that and this is one of
Sternberg's criticisms of it so standard
IQ measures are not predictive of
insight because guess what most of the
problems are in in standard IQ measures
they're all well-defined problems and
very few of them involved this what
surberg has done is he has taken and I
do more this in 371 he's taken standard
IQ tests and then added to them insight
problem-solving and produced a measure
that combines the two and that turns out
to be much better predictor than
standard IQ measures for academic
success blah blah blah blah blah and
stuff like that autumn so like with
arabian psychometric ski like on example
like something that's very good because
it feels like it would be like very it
should be both yeah yeah yeah I think so
too and that this this is leaping ahead
so I can't immediately justify what I'm
going to say but a lot of people are
arguing that what you're measuring when
you're measuring sort of especially like
the fluid aspects of G is you're
measuring cognitive flexibility right
and that cognitive flexibility turns out
to be the single biggest predictor of
your capacity for insect problem solving
okay now all of this is encouraging
right because it means that we're on the
right track then if we're getting at
this core ability and it's pointing us
back to sort of core measures and core
theoretical constructs for intelligence
then we're on the right track then we're
on the right track but letters are also
right indicating we're also on the sort
of the cutting edge this is where a lot
of people are proposing what needs to be
done next and what's not what has not
yet picked up we just good for you right
because you want to know what your
teacher as much as your past yeah
compatibility neural network model more
scientifically German sighs yes okay I
mean I don't want to be a better person
exists I should be using no variability
but that absolutely you're saying it
aligned with it yourself
I need my ideas that scientific
interpretation yes Electra with a
certainty and what what I haven't you
establishment or even giving evidence
for believing it all I'm saying is this
is now that we a rigorous alternative
that would give something that has given
vocabulary a conceptual vocabulary to
the resultant so that we could start to
get the debate going even better in fact
in that and this is where without the
other
1996 180 you did 250 with me why is this
an important day for neural networks
Geoffrey Hinton 1996 the wake-sleep
algorithm is invented the saying here
those it's good knowing the best way you
want to provide software when I was
learning in neural networks all this
stuff is happening at about the same
time yes is it possible that you can
have like a an inferential question that
ends up being answered by insights yes
ok yeah so there and people can move
this bracket approach between them
interestingly enough there's been some
recent research I'll talk about it later
in the course that you should trust you
should give quite a bit of trust when
you solve your problems by insight
process but they do tend to
better solutions than your intramental
we'll come back to that again it is
within certain up within certain
constraints all right let's get back to
Baker service and see all right so again
what did they said they gave a bitch up
they just embraced up they
operationalize anything I think this
means it would inductively permit to
stop with the sofa table that's not
induction that's like some induction
that's maybe abduction but it's quite
induction well you're not like you not
think I have this pattern of dots then
they're all black so all these are
private it's not induction right so
let's put that aside
so these not positively thing and then
it's plausible especially given the way
they described it at what they're
pointing to is the powder completion
ability that sort of strong predictors
inside and I point out that tire
completion seems to involve like these
with multiple simultaneous constraints
right and right we have an alternative
theoretical construct for talking about
this and that is you know
self-organization of top-down bottom-up
processing within neural networks final
point on that are visible case
recapitulation of the Lord and welcome
point on that maybe another thing that
neural networks have been better at then
standard computational model is at
procedural knowledge skill abilities
in fact almost all of the ranae songs
that's going on right now in AI not all
of it that's a lot of it people one of
my students one of us all others and
will impress on the work that either
write is about coming up with very
powerful machines we're dealing with
procedural abilities if you see the
skills also tend to like when you know
how to catch a ball seems to involve
again this kind of problem multiple
simultaneous constraints that are
unfolding dynamically and itself America
passion and your cognition has to deal
with that in order to be able to know
how to get the ball is something so
maybe this is also why I can maybe right
now we're just trying to convert a you
know a plausible conceptual carburetor
we have to do this because you saw
people don't have it right now maybe why
insight seems so procedural in nature is
precisely because it's exactly this kind
of processing that we're talking about
all right now you may expect the search
efforts fragrant disk is a little over
and off there you go
you're right I especially 96 be good
sorry this doesn't need to be
self-promotional but people weren't
considering that you know all of the
stuff could be sort of easy to get me
theoretically in terms of dynamical
processing with internal networks
because that would be anachronistic
it was just beginning to get those ideas
as I said Jeffrey hitted introduces the
self-organizing dynamical system into
neural networks in the definite ten year
1996 in the way of thinking giving them
a capacity for learning that is now
generating a lot of the success that
Hinton and his protege are getting in a
lot so again I'm try not are not being
an epidemic comparable
alright now the search inference
framework around right around this time
sort of after Metcalfe left before
children Belcher and before that figure
seventies he has one of its best replies
to the work especially of Metcalfe and
we mentioned this all day but let's go
into it again and this is the worth of
capital sided right from 1990 okay and
this is indeed left by men from Newell
and Simon and now I hope you understand
better the joke in the title of their
article the title of the article is in
search of insight
an academic joke that tells you what
what the title is bro
tells you what your stance is there now
admitted they've given up the Weisberg
and all the businesses but admitting
there is such a thing but what are they
ultimately going to do if it happens I
will be in search of incentive going to
show that it can ultimately still be
handled by the search inference
framework again see how even like you
can get into stuff more deeply if you
situate experimental competition which
is theoretical today okay so they are
going to study something I talked about
my foreshadowed busy squirming when I
mentioned this to you before in the
first class we talked about they use the
mutilator transport problem
remember the mutilated transport problem
remember you can cover it with the
dominoes that you can move the two
corners and the inside is to realize
that you shouldn't formulate it as a
covering problem you should formulate it
as a parity problem and if you do
because would be coming from it closer
to their capital so they're all nodding
your number yeah now what's interesting
first of all is that is to look at their
theoretical response because okay this
is absurd putting a lot of time right
watching the pulp just but what I mean
it okay what they're doing is really
cool and if there's maybe something sort
of wrong about what they're doing their
theoretical move I think I'll try and
give you on
but there's something really right about
it because it's prescient it's really
impressive they come up with something
abstractly that's going to turn out to
be discovered concretely and what's
going on in the brain it's really cool
so although I'm going to be sort of
criticizing that theoretical road and
also on I hope it comes across because I
have a lot of respect for is actually
for showing something really important
in a very prescient man and I think it
might I'm not sure I can't even able to
trace pastry although this article is
very influential I think it might have
even influenced him even as others work
and stuff like that ok all right
yes very related dialectical really
doesn't published in 1919 and that was a
response it's a response to Metcalfe
so what they do remember is Jay agreed
that insight exists they talk about it
as restructuring a problem formulation
and then the operations problem
formulation as a search for a problem
formulation and what they do then is
they divide well they divide problems of
inside bomb solving into two levels of
analysis there is a primary level and
then there's the metal level so the
primary level is the level at which
you're searching for a solution to your
problem so one thing this is not wise
for going all this memory
compartmentalization even though I'm
drawing these boxes this is not this is
a different thing a lot more respect to
this like I start going to argue later
that is prescient it shows again a value
of theoretical debate it's a poor child
and a time for war in the future
okay so the idea of complement and Simon
is there's a primary level you trying
this is where you're searching for a
solution to a problem you can't get a
solution perhaps
combinatorially explosive what you then
do is you shift to a meta level this is
not the level of a formulated problem
this search space is a search stage
through all possible problem
formulations
so this is the subspace of profit
formulations this is the search space of
a formulated problem
the main idea the main idea is this is
what you try get this doesn't work you
switch to this space you find a
alternative problem formulation you
bring it back to here and then that
affords you solving the problem and
that's what inside is inside in this
movement to at right and then back from
the next phase that restructures this
problem space so that it becomes
solvable for you first again this is
going to turn them kind of shifting
right it's going to turn out to be
relevant notice how this is intelligent
because they can possibly say that the
shifting is what's reflected in the
sudden spike shifting when you come back
that's when you get it right so very
plausible like I said it's going to turn
out I'll just force you out then this
seems to map on to sort of hemisphere
hemispheric shipping and processing that
seems to be correlated with in stuff
which also seems to be correlated with
the mess yes ok now he is putting her
finger on the very narrow theoretical
phrase the Kaplan and Simon are trying
to stand on the razor's edge because in
order for this to all be computational
the same kind of processing has to be
going on here and yeah right that's what
they want to argue but if the same type
of processing is going on here and here
and if if this space is a small space
now it's probably what kind of space
how much are responsive
so exactly the same thing is going on
here and here is that going to make any
difference which is your point efficient
so what they need this is the hard place
to get into they need the process going
on here to be different in try to
prevent the infinite regress because you
don't want to say well you know I do
here I go to another space to look for
brought the formulation ok so the way
pretending you're going to address is
that there have to be an important
difference in kind is in one stage in
another stage right so what they need to
say one part of their mouth if I can use
that metaphor we speaking of deciding
another time one side has to say the
process is going on here has to be
different in kind from the processing
going on there that's in order to
prevent the infinite regress but the
other side of your mouth has to say ah
but this is all just computational
processing because that is how we are
defending the search inference framework
against the dish stalls alternative now
let me be really careful here because
then this is subtle I get this
there's a subtle in abstract thinking
which is hard I get that too I am not
accusing them of the contradiction
because I technically have not shown you
a contradiction what I've shown you
though is that this is a very very
narrow theoretical space they have it
somehow to say it's different in kind
right for the infinite regress is
blocked but it's basically still the
same stuff the same kind of
computational processes and that's not
technically a definition sorry I had to
contradiction but it's getting really
close
did that pick up on your point
okay so they're in a very tight space
okay one more time although I'm
launching into this criticism
nevertheless this is not wiser than all
the right this is not the compartment
submit on your cam research okay
secondly there's something again this is
brilliantly depressive just or see
something that seems to be the case this
shifting idea seems to be a really
important one it may correspond to a
shift between computational into non
computational processes now did somebody
in the question over there maybe ask if
you go on and suppose your wife isn't
why is it a contradiction because there
may be a way of saying it's like see
because the line between differences of
degree and difference in the kind is not
one that philosophy of logic has been
able to actually specify called pixel
righties paradoxes okay here's the
technical reason okay if I have if I'm
not bald and I removed one hair from my
head does that make me bald
no so removing one here from a non bald
head does it make people so I'm not
involved I remove another hair and so
not all so I should be able to move all
of my hair and still not be oh but I'd
be bald good night that's that's a
paradox okay so at some point a
difference of degree becomes the
difference of time but to be know
exactly where that is so they could say
well it's a really big difference of
degree but not completely a difference
of kind and therefore it's not a
contradiction that's a technical reason
to be fair is that okay
people obstinately do something useful
stuff okay now they know this they know
this problem so to bring it up is fair
so why do I need it
excellent because they themselves bring
it up they realize right that they place
up up now I want to be clear then I'm
not miss attributing something to this
is a direct quote whether it's from a
376 in the original production the same
process is that ordinarily used to
search within problem space can be used
to search for a problem space a problem
representation which we call a proper
partnership so I'm not disappear you see
that is the statement of there's no
fundamental difference between the two
okay however they get that done that the
level is combinatorial explosives and so
they don't want to stay to prove the
cracks and problem solving is
selectivity in search
so what they want is they want like
something that gives of a kind of
selectivity here it will operate
differently than what operates here and
so they propose a heuristic that
operates at the meta level that's not
operating at the primary level
so this is the you're putting all of
their theoretical baskets into this
EurAsEC it's called the notice invariant
heuristic talk to some of the invited
men will wrap up this part of your
circuit of a book
full of too many thoughts well I can
tell you what any of them individually
get okay so let's just talk about I'll
just briefly talk about it and then I'll
introduce the sort of point then we'll
come back and pick up on it and I'll
give a sort of going momentum in the
next class okay the idea is that what
you do is you try what you're going to
do is you're going to look at failed
problem formulation here's a built on
formulation is a network build problem
formulation and here's another failed
problem formulation okay so what should
you try to notice what you can variant
across all of these different failed
public relations what is not changing
what's not changing is this base for
example you see this pictorial
okay try to notice what's not changing
across your failed problem formulations
you want because you're failing there is
probably a common cause to all of you
individual failures that come cause
possibly probably will not certainly
probably is related to what is invariant
in your comments on relation what you're
not changing that is preventing you from
solving the problem so you try to notice
what invariant and then that is what
you're going to change in your problem
formulation
and that that is what you're going to
bring back down here to see that we
formulate your problem that make sense
that's kind of cool
first of all so if they're going to take
two more minutes how much you go okay
notice how this saltiness heuristic is
but notice I mean actually magic and by
the way you cannot use it it's very
defaulting so adding on an English what
is that subject to a German word crystal
[Music]
now take a look at permission you can
use the adjective consulting if first of
all is notice which is an intentional
salient German not an inferential pop
additional term
and notice sort of hot how is using
right like for example kind of field is
inventing that was predictive of inside
problem-solving just like people from
the gestalt tradition surely Melcher
people had shown this is a very
destructive heuristic it's not really
operating very computationally that is
also in addition to that right there's a
logical problem how many things remain
invariant across right something that's
changing completely combinatorial
explosive so again it has to somehow be
zeroing in on quite a subset of all the
possible invariance
okay so what are we getting - we're
getting to this point let me just wrap
it up one one more minute and I'll let
you go what we're getting to is this
idea that the surgeon turns framework is
coming back and they're coming back
really strong they're coming back with a
theoretical you know advance but we've
got it we've got this two levels we've
got the shipping relationship and then
right as Devils goddess we've got a
different kind of heuristic searcher is
they operating at the metal level it's
going to turn out to be a really
important idea by the way to notice and
very seriously let's give all of that
and this shifting idea and a different
kind of like attentional processing this
is all precedent because one of the ways
you can reliably talk about the
differences between the impact of the
right hemisphere is in terms of their
attentional processing of information
that seems to be the best sort of
evolutionary account for why you have
left while you have lateralization
in the left in the right hemisphere okay
we'll come back to all of that so that's
all great that's good
yes problem with this is it's really
questionable whether or not they've
actually succeeded in what they wanted
to do did they get did they find a
landing space in that very narrow space
or as they actually come up with a
gestalt process that's really not
computational in nature
okay that's it for today thank you very
much for your attention you'll pick it
up next time did you get depression
really good involvement I appreciate it
nice the class enjoyable for me as well
and I think it helps you focus today