one very obvious thing that we notice is
that all the early civilizations don't
still exist whether we look at the Mayas
the aztecs the Egyptians the Roman
Empire the Greek Empire the they they
all collapsed and so the precedent is
actually that civilization collapses not
that it maintains the real difference is
that this is the first time we have a
completely global civilization there
really is no such thing as USA or China
separate from each other when you
understand globalized materials
economies technology economics where
there's actually no country in the world
that can make its own consumer
electronics right without the mining and
manufacturing and you know technology
that happens from around the world so
our process of civilization is one that
has inherently self terminating dynamics
built into it when that happens at a
fully global scale it is a basically the
catastrophe is just unbounded where it
has always been bounded as big as the
Roman Empire was when it fell it wasn't
everything and limited by not only its
total geographical size but the level of
Technology it had it caused
desertification throughout the noble
agriculture but it wasn't able to
destabilize the biosphere writ large in
a hundred years of industrialized
fishing we've removed most of the large
fish species from a water planet right
at 3/4 water planet took three and a
half billion years to get those fish
species and so you recognize that we're
operating the same way that has always
led to war and environmental destruction
and collapse of civilization just
factoring exponential technology and so
when you start to think about
exponential rivalry rivalry dynamics
that lead to polarization that ends up
leading to war but now exponential
warfare it becomes larger than a finite
biosphere can handle and it becomes
existential when you think about
exponential extraction and exponential
pollution which means depletion and
accumulation from open loops in a
network diagram you go to an ecosystem
there are no open loops every thing is
the food for something else there is no
unknowable resource no waste our
civilization is characterized by a
materials economy that's linear not
circular so toxicity is depletion on one
side
elation on the other whether we're
talking about on the depletion side
whether we're talking about species
extinction or biodiversity loss or any
of the issues that we look at there and
on the accumulation side whether we're
talking about co2 levels in the air or
in the water or nitrogen runoff or
degraded uranium or whatever else it is
those are all specific instantiations of
open loops in the way we do civilization
in relationship to the closed loop
dynamics of the ecosystem that both have
a civilization that is increasingly
fragile and that is making an
increasingly fragile underlying
ecosystem is basically debasing the
substrate upon which it depends and so
when you think about exponential
extraction exponential pollution that
obviously gets larger than the playing
field can handle when you try and think
about exponential expansion of the
monetary supply that has to be based in
goods and services that can't keep
happening when you think about we
compete using narrative and information
when you start to think about
exponential information tech used for
disinformation and for population
control you get to a place where the
information ecology is so broken that
what's actually happening with North
Korea or not are we going to have
nuclear war what's actually happening
with Syria what's actually happening
with Putin's relationship to the Trump
administration how long do we really
have before all the coral die-off like
all the most important questions as to
whether we make it or not as a species
nobody really knows how to make sense of
and so when you have a situation where
you've actually got an exponentially
decreasing sense-making capacity right
an information ecology that is
increasingly more broken with an
exponentially increasing capacity to
make big choices right technology is
basically a lever of our choice making
so a fist has one level of harm and I
extend that to a stone tool it's a
bigger harm to a bronze tool to a gun at
the level of an ICBM it's just a really
big extension of that type of
choice-making capacity but when I have
exponentially increased choice-making
capacity with exponentially worse
sense-making
that always runs into a cliff and so the
underlying dynamics that are leading to
the self determination that people feel
and sense right now are not different in
kind than the ones that we've been
facing since the
what we call civilization they're
different in magnitude and in the speed
of process factoring the exponential
curves involved and what is because some
people talk about the shift being we can
talk about intermit irreal terms or we
can talk about it in terms of an
evolution in in consciousness or the way
that we operate what you sense is that
leap that we need to make in terms of
how we operate you actually have to
think about it on all of those levels to
be able to make sense of it in a
meaningful way otherwise it's kind of
like asking when we are talking about
the health of a person whether that
means the health of their liver or their
kidneys or their blood it's like that
doesn't even make sense you can't
separate those things from each other so
when I think about what economics is
economics is our value system codified
as value equations that determines how
much we value one thing relative to
another thing that determines what we're
incentivized to do and what we confer
power to so if a dead whale is worth a
million dollars on a fishing boat and a
live whale in the ocean is worth nothing
that's a value system codified in a
value equation that then incentivizes
behavior but it also incentivizes
psychopathology right psychopathy
actually I have to shut empathy down
because leaving the whale in the ocean
it I hope she isn't even gonna stay in
the ocean another guy's got a hunter it
out right so I've got a tragedy of the
Commons so I have to kind of deaden to
be able to do the thing that is
incentivized by the system or somebody
else does and I'm just not effective in
the system so you can't think about the
evolution of human consciousness in the
evolution of economics differently but
if you look at the way economics then
needs to protect its own profit stream
in the way it will learn how to
influence media to control people's
sense making frameworks in the way it
will influence governance again this is
getting to consciousness or the way it
will influence legislation on the nature
of what happens in education to prepare
people for the workforce and so the
paradigm shift is basically everything
we need new systems of governance if we
just I mean we think about how much we
love the word democracy and we love the
word democracy because it's better than
tyranny and it's better than the other
like really horrible
systems that we've experienced at any
scale but when Winston Churchill said
democracy is the single worst form of
governance ever created save for all the
other forms what he was saying that was
really insightful was that getting lots
of humans to agree on anything is just a
hard thing to do and we suck at it and
we've never actually done a good job at
it and this is a really flawed system
now we like it because like we said it's
overcoming things that were even more
problematic if you think about democracy
for a moment and whether we're talking
representative democracy or liquid
democracy using a voting currency or
binary vote fundamentally of a process
of saying ok we can't get everybody to
agree beyond a very small number of
people Dunbar number tribe you can get
everybody degree because they can all be
in a conversation together beyond the
level of which you can have a
conversation together you can have a few
people control everything and they can
be in a conversation together some type
of oligarchy or meritocracy but then
you're like no we want most of the
people to agree at least right that
seems like a good idea but somebody puts
forward a proposition to do something
that they think is important based on
their limited sense making that is never
everything that proposition because it
wasn't informed by comprehensive sense
making will always in the process of
benefiting something also damaged
something else and so some people love
that based on if what it's benefiting is
directly relevant to them and other
people hate it based on if what it's
damaging is relevant to them you just
created inexorable polarization because
you made shitty propositions and then
ask people to vote yes or no by an Arri
on a shitty proposition so you notice
people actually don't all get to
contribute to the sense making of what a
good proposition would be there's no
kind of collective input there there
isn't even a generation of what would
good mean here and they so really even
their choice making is just yes or no on
a frame that was already controlled and
typically who's going to be able to even
put forward a proposition as someone who
has vested interests and so you're stuck
with polarization in that particular
system right so we need new systems of
governance that are not any system of
governance the world has ever done so
far there are systems of how do we
individually and collectively make sense
of what's going on make sense of what we
actually value and how those values can
be synergistically satisfied rather than
a theory
trade offs with each other progressively
better and how do we create design that
are optimal synergistic satisfiers so
that's totally new thing governance wise
we need totally new systems of economics
we need totally new systems of Education
healthcare all the way down to at an
individual level a new basis for
identity values our own individual sense
making choice making as long as I think
that I'm an individual that is
fundamentally separate from you and the
biosphere and everything else I can
think about optimizing my own quality of
life independent of and maybe even at
the expense of your quality of life for
the biosphere or anything else as soon
as I get that I start to say okay well
I'm not that tree but what would I be
without trees why would not exist right
well there would be no atmosphere if
they weren't plants photosynthesizing so
I fundamentally am not even a meaningful
concept without plants so if I think of
myself as me that is not fundamentally
interdependent with plants I'm actually
just not even thinking clearly right
it's just a bad ontology it's a bad
semiotic s-- and then I start to run
that and say well what about soil
microbiota and what about and it turns
out that my life depends on the whole
thing right so I am really I can be
better thought of as an emergent
property of this whole thing right not
just a biosphere because what would it
be without the Sun and so as long as I
have a sense of AI that is separate and
maybe even rival ris'n rival risk
competition for some scarce status
resource attention partner or whatever
it is then we have a fundamental basis
for war and in a world of exponentially
increasing technology which means that
the warfare gets to be more and more
consequential that will self terminate
so rival risk dynamics multiplied by
exponential tech self-terminate
exponential tech is inexorable we cannot
put it away so we either figure out anti
rivalry or we go extinct human
experiment comes to a completion that's
like that's the core thing figuring out
anti rivalry is a psycho-spiritual
process inside of ourselves can we
actually even get along with our family
members can we pay attention to our
emotions and triggers that hijack us
from sovereignty because the moment I'm
getting pissed in my value system is not
be an angry person I'm actually hijacked
right can I pay attention to that and
actually have some sovereignty over my
own interstate and how I show up in the
world and
can we figure out how to do that a
collective as well
you
[Music]
you