[Music]
it seems we're in a very paradoxical
time that in some ways you can look at
many different kind of indicates and say
this is the best time to be alive and
yet at the same time you and a lot of
other writers that I'm following have a
real kind of apocalyptic tinge to their
writing are those two things true at the
same time that's a very good question
let me see if I can puzzle it out so one
of the metaphors that I've found is very
helpful is the metaphor of a caterpillar
voraciously devouring leaves so from the
point of view of the caterpillar there
is a the experience of becoming fatter
and fatter and all things are going well
it's good to be a fat caterpillar now
from the point of view of the leaves
things are going rather poorly and if
you zoom back out you will look at it
and say hmm there's a paradox that on
the one hand has never been a better
time to be a caterpillar and on the
other hand I'm noticing that the leaves
are getting ready to go away and so
things are about to get very bad very
quickly but then there's even deeper
insight which is that caterpillars
devour and just destroy everything
around them in the process of
endeavouring to become a butterfly and
so I think that's actually the deeper
notion that if you look at our
civilization from the perspective of it
is a caterpillar it is becoming more of
what it is
so it's flourishing on that basis it is
rapidly consuming a substantial fraction
of the environment that's necessary for
it to continue being where it is and
then this ends up in one of two possible
states either it hits some kind of wall
where some piece of that support
structure fails in which case it just
dies or it actually enters into this
moment of metamorphosis and it
transforms into another kind of being
altogether I think that's the
perspective that I bring I can't speak
for anyone else what are the indicators
that make you think that things are
getting much worse than maybe they
appear on the surface well I guess
probably the most important is is the
fact that I've been looking at this now
for quite some time and so the models
that I've been using to try to make
sense of a number of different college
of systems for now divergent pieces or
characters because of the world have
predicted a number of things that were
at the time didn't seem to be reasonable
let's go with like the Trump election
this is kind of a very concrete one so
the models predicted brexit the models
predicted Trump or something along those
lines not exactly the events of those
characteristics or specific my specific
models right
and so I'm in some sense I'm kind of
simple if I have models and the models
are predictive and particularly when
they're predictive in a way that is
contra conventional wisdom I give those
models more credence so I run lots of
models I don't have like two or three
I've got lots and lots of models and
some of them have been increasingly
accurately predicting circumstances and
others have been less and so these have
begun pay less attention to these and
give more credence to these and as I
watched these these are the ones that
tell me that we're on a particular kind
of trajectory and that trajectory has
well it has characteristics that you can
use to say okay here's what it looks
like it has how it would play out and
more importantly it actually has a very
specific finite endpoint so that we're
on the kind of trajectory that has an
ending to it and that many of the
metrics a minute of the phenomenon that
we're witnessing in many different ways
right now it's showing up very
viscerally in terms of the way that
culture and society are showing or
feeling particularly the West are
indicative of their of the fact that
we're kind of far along the curve on
this particular dynamic so that's the
that's the way that I'm going about
doing this
and there's a lot of unfortunately into
explaining that double-clicking on that
is not easy I've actually spent some
time critics and YouTube videos and some
medium posts trying to actually take a
particular set of concepts and like
making them small enough to convey in a
in a byte and I guess some of that's
been successful but if we're talking
about a curve and you're saying that
we're far along this curve and it has an
endpoint what what is the curve what is
the endpoint well the reality is there's
actually many many curves and they're
not all of the same meaning that they're
not they don't have the same basis and
was the same causal structure behind
them so I'll give you three one curve is
called the Tainter curve the Tainter
curve is was used by an anthropologist
to try to figure out and describe why it
was that complicated civilizations
collapsed he actually called the
collapse of complex civilizations but I
have to modify that for four specific
reasons and we can investigate if you'd
like what this curve is and why it works
and how it shows up but it has to do
with the way that human beings design
and reinforce the kinds of institutional
structures that we use to meet our needs
and there's a particular set of
characteristics of how these structures
become bound meaning they become those
oils an example so in the beginning we
use oil partial for kerosene by the way
to light things up and as a secondary
distillate we have gasoline we don't
really use much gasoline and it's
actually kind of easy to get you're in
Pennsylvania and a little bit of effort
you can get some oil out of the ground
so then we begin to say repurpose
gasoline in it being fuel for cars and
so this increases the utility the value
suppose expands the potential of our of
our civilization so we kind of moved up
this curve or our energy usage the
amount of energy we have to spend to get
the oil and convert into gasoline
returns a substantial return on energy
investment and so we do right so when
it's up happiness
two distinct things simultaneously one
is we actually expand our underlying use
of this energy source we build more cars
and maybe because it makes it easier for
us to grow food we grow more food then
we have more people so we expand the
base that uses it relies upon this
capacity but at the same time we're also
plucking the low-hanging fruit of access
to the resource so it gets harder and we
have to actually drill deeper wells or
we have to frack to be able to pull out
the kind of oil now what's interesting
is that this is why I said it's complex
this is not a simple thing it's actually
the second order that matters because
what we'll do is we'll say okay what's
gotten harder so we'll invest in R&D so
we'll get smarter so we we get more we
get certain advancements in the
underlying technical basis that we use
to extract the resource so we have a
curve on the technical basis but what
ends up happening is is that as we're
picking the low-hanging lowest hanging
fruit at the resource level we're also
picking the lowest hanging fruit at the
R&D level - there's a certain period of
time where our R&D is kicking ass we
spend a million dollars on R&D will get
massive advances but at a certain point
in time that has what's known as an
s-curve meaning that we've picked all
the low-hanging fruit in innovation
space we've figured out all the easy
wins and now we're starting to have to
work harder to get harder wins we
figured out how to do drilling that goes
diagonal and that was one really nice
win and we got you got that one now we
have to do fracking now I have to do
whatever is next right so just gets
harder and harder and harder so at a
certain point what happens is is that we
may have to spend a hundred million
dollars to get a two percent increase in
performance while simultaneously we're
now really picking deep fruit so it's
getting deeper and deeper and harder and
more expensive to extract and in the
meantime over on this side of the house
we've built out an entire gigantic
global infrastructure that absolutely is
fully fundamentally dependent on
gasoline from virtually everything like
if your car stop tomorrow you couldn't
get groceries all right so we've become
more dependent on the resource we become
we tap out the R&D site which in the
beginning looks awesome we're getting
massive gains until we've reached the
end point and we've made it we've gotten
to the end of the easy pickings and so
things are getting harder and harder
harder so what happens is we generate
fragility we generate an environment
where we're having to spend more and
more energy either in terms of R&D or in
terms of just absolute activity
maintain where we are but it's actually
getting harder and harder to hold and
the consequences of falling back become
worse and worse now this curve actually
has one of their characteristic to it
which is we're now way over our skis
like it may have been that call it in
nineteen twenty 1932 to shift and go
from a gasoline economy to say an
electricity economy and we don't get
committed to cars but we've we've passed
that fork in the road so all the
different choices we could have made in
the past and have become narrowed and
narrowed and narratives we just have to
double down more and more and more on
this so we've actually kind of like
become an addict we've come in dicted to
a particular approach and just like an
addict that approaches starting to give
us diminishing returns and so that hits
a wall and so that the Tainter curve in
a nutshell and there's this can happen
across particular domains so you might
show oil an oil might show up in just
the domain that I described which was
technology resource and economy but you
might also see how it shows up in
geopolitics and it may be that we have
to actually go out and say use our
military to sustain the Saudi regime not
because we like them or think they're
filling a lot but because they have oil
and if we don't have oil our economy
collapses right so now we're generating
externalities in the environment and
we're creating pollution and we're
generating externalities in geopolitics
which creates systemic fragility in
other places the point is that as you're
creating something which becomes more
and more and more fragile with more and
more and more impact you're setting
yourself up for a for a bad situation
and you can't back out of it elegantly
right you're very much having to go
forward and so it is if happening is is
that rarely on some some very rare
circumstances there's enough
consciousness and enlightened choice
making to be able to recognize that
things are not working out and then we
need to step back and shift and maybe
that's happened two or three times in
human history is a very rare thing most
of the time what ends up happening is
that we run smack into the wall
particular because quite often the
decision makers are in a position where
they feel like they can actually
insulate themselves from the negative
consequences and so it's okay to run the
hoi polloi into the wall because we're
going to be ok what they don't realize
is that they are actually sitting on top
of the hoi polloi and it's all a
seamless web
and so it ends up happening is the
elites basically drive us right off the
cliff because they don't fully feel the
consequences of the choices that they're
making so that's the the Tainter curve
another one which is reinforcing it is
something I'm calling the Bryce
Highsmith model I have the two
individuals who explain it to me and and
it works kind of like this you have a
basically a series of phase transitions
in game theory so in the beginning you
have a group of individuals who are
tightly coherent and are able to
maintain their ability to do that or if
you know how the prisoner's dilemma
works but their ability to resolve the
prisoner's dilemma by not defecting on
each other now this happens due to very
well functioning called justice
mechanisms meaning people have a felt
sense that if they defect they will have
negative consequences so they they feel
like they're playing a multiple version
of the prisoner's dilemma game so that
if they act badly the consequences will
come back to them and so they choose to
act well and that generates the global
optimum which is better and so this
group is is thrives right so you've got
a group that's working well it can solve
collective action problems effectively
and so it happens is that it gross but
it thrives I'm so gross it brings new
people in or expands its population its
own basis whoever it happens to be and
so you might imagine let's just make a
simple version the first version is an
actual tribe so this is a tribe and it's
relating to nature and what happens is
that as it becomes successful the tribe
expands and it expands and expands and
expands until the mechanisms that it
originally used to close the loop on
justice to make sure that everybody took
responsibility for not defecting become
more and more attenuated until they're
starting to open up little gaps some
possibilities where I can maybe get away
with something and it won't affect I
won't have to bear the full cost or
there's some reasonable probability that
I won't have to bear the full cost so
the game theory starts to shift so now
you might imagine that the tribe was
relating to nature but now the tribe has
become the niche so will end up
happening is little tiny
crow tribes will begin to emerge who are
actually figuring out ways that they can
develop local selective advantage
themselves on the body or on the surface
of the nation of the of the society and
so what ends up happening is it you know
criminal gangs for example but also
bureaucracies and bureaucrats any
circumstance where I can begin to have a
local selective advantage by playing a
rule where from my perspective what I'm
doing is not catastrophic and I'm
playing a small win I'm not bringing
down the whole freaking society all I'm
doing is skimming a little bit off the
top and the society doesn't have the
capacity to enforce at a high enough
level of probability and magnitude
justice the loop coming back to me then
game theory says that people will begin
to play that game so the problem is is
that as you begin to do that it begins
to actually create a downward spiral
meaning that well if you're cheating and
I'm not then I'm losing and this is the
classic is called a multipolar dilemma
it's shows up in all kinds of different
stories about collective action problems
a classic example might be if we're all
fishing from a shared fishing resource
and if we all only fish a hundred fish
the resource works great if we all fish
a thousand fish the resource completely
collapses but if you can get away with
fishing 500 fish and I'm only fishing a
hundred fish then the resource base
survives and you win that's one that's
one example there's many many examples
as one of them the broader concept is a
Multi multi polar trapper multipolar
dilemma and it is ubiquitous like it
just shows up that's what happens in the
context where there are gaps emerging
the ability to enforce justice and force
closed loops in detection behaviors and
so what ends up happening is is that the
the body of the society continues to
endure for a while because there's
generativity involved in just lots of
people working together in a culture to
society but the cracks begin to form and
as the cracks form
it drives choice making meaning that the
virtuous remember the Game of Thrones
funny I'm sorry I have to have to invoke
it the virtuous began to lose remember
the the the Starks and the Lannisters
the Starks live at the border they live
at the border with nature they live
to the to the wall where winter is so
for them the the reinforcing mechanisms
to keep those justice loops closed are
pretty strong and so they obey the law
intrinsically remember at the very
beginning that was at Ned Stark the
leader said like you have as the king
you must enforce the law yourself and
this is good justice go all the way to
the center of Empire far away from the
border where the the justice loops
artists as the feedback loops aren't as
stark now you aren't next necessarily
going to be killed by winter if you're
living in King's Landing so now the
Lannisters down in King's Landing they
are experts at playing the defection
game they're experts at figuring out how
to play the crack so you can't quite be
certain that they're the ones who
you over and so they can get a little
bit of an extra win so if you're not
playing the game remember that was the
phrase in that poker game if you look
around the poker table you don't know
who the sucker is it's you that comes
from this space so what ends up
happening is that everybody begins to
either be a sucker in which case they're
the ones who get their heads cut off or
they have to start being a player now of
course as it's everyone becomes there's
a self-reinforcing feedback loop at that
point if you look around the table and
literally everybody is looking for
taking out the sucker except for you
then you're screwed right then you're
dead so now you enter into the final
stage the final stage is what they call
the fractal defection stage which is the
defection starts to eat at the very
fabric of what holds the society
together and eventually the entire thing
is in fact actually put into jeopardy
you can't trust anyone you can't get
anything done bureaucracy is
hypertrophied you have to assume that
every interaction is an interaction of
multiple layers of manipulation
coordination costs go through the roof
and again the whole society collapses
from the global optimum to the local
optimum of prisoner's dilemma and boom
you're done so that's another curve all
right and so we've got two distinct
curves and that seems like a process
that's being sped up by an actor like
Trump who is explicitly going from that
perspective like one of one of trumps
rules is you cannot trust anyone and so
he's building that that narrative into
the into the global system well I think
there's two things first is I'm going to
put an asterisk next to Trump which is
to say that
every quite quite often people tried to
think that they understand him and so
then they reify him into some sort of
artifact that I certainly don't know him
well enough to be able to say anything
specifically about him so I can do this
I can identify a particular character
that has certain characteristics and so
that's not a bad story there's certainly
a Trump character who shows up with his
characteristics you might say that he's
the the embodiment of a particularly
aggressive poker player who's happy to
play chaos right and understands how to
thrive in chaos and fundamentally is
kind of peak predator of that fractal
defection land that's just where he
comes from and so for him it's intuitive
and sensible that one behaves in this
fashion and therefore it's very
effective in this stage I mean it's you
know the Lannisters out-compete the
Starks until chaos actually happens
right until winter actually comes it's
actually better to be a Lannister than a
stark in King's Landing and so but then
yes it's the point that makes it
accelerate the process you know again
the it's actually sorry I think you may
be pointed out something separate which
is equally important if I am of that
sort if I'm playing that kind of game
it's in my interest so make sure the
game is of that sort so I actually have
an interest to break the justice links
to make things more chaotic because I
thrive in that niche I thrive in chaos I
don't thrive in order in order I might
in fact be called out and home from the
nearest tree so I actually need to spin
more chaos because that's where I thrive
so yes you've got both my activities
make more chaos but then even
intentionally I have an invested
interest in increasing the amount of
chaos just because that's what I'm good
at so that's an example of a second
curve then we've got other curves let's
take for example the the exponential
technology curve one of the interesting
characteristics about exponential curves
is that they go to infinity as far as we
know we don't have the ability to go to
infinity in say processing power which
means at some point they have to
actually stop being exponential they
have to be some kind of an s-curve or by
the way just a straight draw so when we
take a look at where we are on the x
button
on the technology curve we're getting
into pretty significant Exponential's
we're doing some very powerful things
and one it is for sure the case that at
some point in the not-too-distant future
by that I might mean a hundred years or
a thousand years we reach the end of
that exponential all I have to do is
sort of forward project Moore's law
multiplied by the amount of BTUs per
unit processing power and you get to the
point where the computational energy on
the planet generates enough entropy to
evaporate the entire atmosphere for
example or the atomic bound of quantum
mechanics can't actually produce any
more forward advancement so that's a
curve that has a certain characteristic
but let me talk about a variation of
what happens in that context so let's go
back to game theory so I have I'm
playing I'm playing a game to win and
you're playing a game to win and when
does the way this game works is it's a
zero-sum so if I win you lose if you win
I lose
so this shows up a lot right so if we're
playing that kind of game is kind of a
certain characteristic now in this game
I have a strong incentive to become more
effective because otherwise I will lose
and you have a strong incentive to so
one of us is going to be able to be more
effective than the other one we're going
to be the winner now if it's not a
catastrophic win I mean if I don't
extinguish it if I don't kill you if
you're still in the game then you have a
really strong incentive to be very
exploratory and try to figure out some
novel way to write around me and we see
this happening for example in capitalism
this is one of the virtues of capitalism
it uses this mechanism to drive
innovation yeah so if my company I'll
competes your company your company the
eyes are is going out of business or it
has to be more innovative well what that
does is that is what pushes us along the
innovation curve so increases the
exponential increases the rate of that
exponential now all is well and good
except for a couple of things one is as
we're engaging in conflict with each
other we're creating some set of
externalities and we're producing some
kind of waste energy into the system it
might be that just the simple act of
producing goods and services generates
pollution and stuff like that
or it may be that how I market my
product into the marketplace creates a
jams the sense-making systems the human
beings used to figure out what a good
choices for themselves
it doesn't matter like fill in the blank
there's some nonzero externality that is
produced and you kind of multiply that
by the power the magnitude of what we're
doing so if what we're doing is
gathering sticks to create fire that has
one level of externality if what we're
doing is nuclear power that has another
level of externality it's much larger
and potentially very significant well
what moving along the exponential tech
curve means is increasing our power so
as we move further and further to up the
curve which we have to because of the
competitive dynamic one of the things
that we intrinsically do is when
increase the risks associated with the
magnitude of power that we're playing
with so for example very concretely
right now we're in a situation where say
CRISPR casts nine has taken the
nightmares of germ and genetic warfare
that were just nightmares in the 1970s
like in the nineteen seventies we had
this concern that we might engineer
super viruses or we might engineer
different kinds of super toxins and
realistically only a handful of nation
states had the technical capacity to do
something like that and they were able
to contain that well now with CRISPR
cast nine in the next two decades or so
a reasonably well-funded multinational
corporation will have that capacity and
in the decade after that and anything
bagel deck exponential maybe a high
school chemistry class will have that
level of capacity well just stochastic
risk means that somebody somewhere is
gonna it up so we're talking about
massive consequences could just cuz the
magnitude of power and increasing
fertility you know even a small
deviation back in nineteen hundred the
totality in all of humanity if we all
made terrible choices really couldn't
meaningfully threaten the species the
worst war had ever fought had barely
been a blip in population growth even
World War two and all this ferocity was
not meaningfully significant in the
total survivability of the species
click past the invention of the nuclear
bomb and then the hydrogen bomb and then
multipolar hydrogen bombs and suddenly
we're in a situation where for the first
time in the history of history we did in
fact have the capacity to kill everybody
or at least mostly everybody and in that
case it only required that two people
have permanently choose not to push a
button at the same time to avoid that
problem so we qualitatively shifted from
one place where we couldn't possibly
hurt ourselves to a place where we could
but still it was a relatively easy thing
to do and we barely made it and we
barely made it past that threshold and
now what's happening is that as removing
that up that exponential curve the
magnitude of power continues to increase
becomes decentralized it gets pushed
further and further out to more and more
empowered groups smaller groups and
therefore we're moving into a state
where in the not-too-distant future
effectively everybody is going to have
to be enormous Lee wise and skillful to
avoid creating catastrophic consequences
so it's another curve and so the point
is that we've got a lot of curves and we
can actually take very small curves like
the Hubble curve with with oil reserves
we took a bigger curves like the Tainter
curve the brightest Ida Smith model or
we can look at a fundamental curve like
this relationship between game theoretic
rivalries dynamics and exponential
technology and how that relates to
fragility but all of these are kind of
pointing in the same direction which is
that there's something about the nature
of how we do civilization now that is
leading us to a circumstance where
fragility is being built into the system
in many many different layers and you've
also talked about the the way that the
dialogue is going the increased
polarization of the dialogue is is that
where we're staking out ideological
positions that are very difficult for us
to to communicate with the other side
well this is both a cause and a symptom
so let's take a look at it from the
point of view of being a cause
easy enough right if I in playing a
political game to win then I am
incentivized to generate a sent a set of
signals stories that create a maximum
intensity of separation between my group
and other groups
so long as microbes the biggest ice
opponents of having to be the natural in
a winner-take-all democracy where 51%
wins everything there's a maximum
incentive to generate a narrative that
creates a strongly bound group and of
course with this almost always implies
is to create a strong and bound group
that has a natural antipathy to some
other set of groups we have a natural
incentive to create strongly
oppositional groups and then what
happens is is that it'll sort of tend to
orbit around 50% on either side because
that's power shifts back and forth but
then it will tend to polarize because
that's just the natural dynamics that if
I'm the more polar the guys in the
middle end up getting dropped out
because the binding agent of extreme
threat is stronger than the binding
agent of extreme reasonableness under
most circumstances and this is not a
logical law this is more of a human
social associate political law but we've
noticed this it actually happens all the
time we see it happen all over the place
and it's happening right now for sure
we're in a level that I think we're
these days I don't even have to speak
about it theoretically most people I
think are aware of the fact that there's
a trend in their lived experience where
the polarization of the language is
increasing over time and it's self
reinforcing I mean honestly like at this
point in the u.s. UI there are what it
was too bright we're putting us the most
recent one ah
so if you're on the right that means
that you have blood on your hands
because you support gun rights and
therefore effectively have pulled the
trigger on killing millions of people
and simultaneously are effectively a
interested in is fully supporting and
directly engaging in genocide against
immigrants and this is this is the level
of the rhetoric right it's not level of
rhetoric of I disagree with you on
immigration policy level of rhetoric is
that you are comparable to the worst
things that have ever happened in human
history because of your beliefs and of
course the opinion is symmetric meaning
that if you're on the Left you are a
radical completely insane
when is it liberalism is a mental
illness completely insane authoritarian
hell-bent on simultaneously engendering
genocide against in this case white
people and for sure unborn children of
all races by the way so you're actually
nihilistic in that sense it has to do
with essentially kneel ISM essentially
you are fundamentally designed to hurt
and kill yourself and in the process of
doing that you are doing it at the
broader social level so it's really
treason why is it going so worse now is
it social media well again I think
there's actually a number of different
forces at play but let's focus on the
last one that you just mentioned so one
of the things that's not often enough
contemplated and therefore worth talking
about is the fact that we're we're in
the middle of a major transition in
media infrastructure and that has a lot
of impact there's a lot of of
consequences so the the legacy media
infrastructure and by the way when I say
media infrastructure I literally mean
the way that as a group as a society we
are able to collectively make sense of
what's going on in the world and then
inform ourselves about what choices to
make so it used to be broadcast still is
mostly but very much used to be only in
my broadcast I mean something like some
small group of individuals maybe even
just one have authority to speak and
everybody else says that has
responsibilities of listening so whether
that's a teacher at the head of a class
or it's a newscaster broadcasting over
television there's this relationship of
small number of speakers large number of
listeners and a sin and no inter
communication right so even if I'm
listening even ask questions I could
just listen and as a modality of
communication and of sense-making
this has certain effectiveness if you do
a very very good job of empowering the
people to speak who speak then they're
saying the right things and so you want
the most competent most honest most
clear-headed most thoughtful individuals
to be empowered and with them to be
credentialed you want some sort of
mechanism to credential identify them
you give them the speaker they speak and
everybody else gets the best information
that's actually not bad
we can go into your like some into some
depth on what the limitations of that
approach are and and how it can actually
end up being disrupted in highjacked
which of course it has but but for the
moment let's just say okay that's what
it has been for a long time and this has
implications for how individuals show up
psychologically developmentally as a
child we're very plastic and so as we're
emerging we're looking around our
environment trying to figure out well
how do we what do we do how are we
successful and if the way that you're
successful is either you get really good
at listening understanding what the
right beliefs are and then executing on
them effectively that's how you get
rewarded you get the A+ on the test by
doing it that way or you figure out how
to climb the ladder on being credentials
so you get to be the one to speak right
that's what success looks like they met
the kind of psychological model that
you'll develop as a human most of the
time unless something's wrong with you
and you can't ride that elevator and so
you end up with a self reinforcing
system or the topology of the overall
media constructs this dynamic and then
the developmental psychology constructs
people who are adapted to that
environment so they reinforce it on
themselves
now you shift obviously for the past 20
years in an accelerating curve we've
been moving into a completely different
kind of media topology that a
peer-to-peer network and the Internet
behaves completely differently no longer
has this model where by physical nature
a small number are the only ones who can
speak and everyone else must listening
cannot communicate back has a completely
different nature it's more like our
conversation I speak in this case more
you speak to the right needle to ask
questions you can direct the
conversation we're actually in a
conversation and so this is a different
typologies different relationship with
power and it also requires a different
adaptive behavior right so we can maybe
get into that in a bit and what that
looks like but the thing that you're
calling at is the fact we're in the
middle we're in a spot where the old
structure still largely controls most
psychologies and most the primary
institutions of power what you've cooled
what I've called the blue shirts exactly
the new structure is emergent right it's
coming up from the bottom it's happening
all over the place and they're
struggling it's just of conflict it's a
conflict at the level of sense making
it's a conflict of at the level of what
kind of psychologists are adaptive is
the comfort to the level of who gets to
speak and therefore the messages are
fractured and broken up all over the
place and of course this is chaos and so
and then we get kind of cycle back to
maybe the Trump phenomenon that when
chaos emerges the particular approaches
that are very good at playing in chaos
will tend to be more successful that
approaches that are better at playing in
order for example in a celebrated essay
for medium after the Trump election of
2016 Green Hall described how a new
online read religion was attacking the
consensus liberal reality the blue
church
you talked about the blue church and the
red religion as an insurgency against
the blue church where do you think we're
at well so since we have a little bit of
opportunity to be more explicit I want
to make sure to break a few things out
so identified a couple of distinct let's
call them entities they may not
necessarily be self-consciously
identifying as entities but they're
collaborative they're they work together
for some set of reasons so whether
they're happening to be working together
de-facto or intentionally as irrelevant
so there is at least three one I'm going
to call the establishment and the
establishment you might think of it just
the the inertial consequences of like
builds more like alright so if I go to
school at Harvard then I meet other
people who are at school at Harvard and
the people who graduated before me also
into Harvard maybe I met them too
because of the way the school sets up
relationships when I come out of school
I'm in a situation where I have social
bonds pretty strong social bonds from
them strongest that we form in our
current society with people I went to
school with and they're going to various
locations where they have vertical
relationships with former classmates
that give them some advantage so what's
happened is that basically I'm a very
simple vector I'm more likely to achieve
Authority in power because of this
particular moment this particular social
environment run that over a hundred
years which is more or less the
timeframe that we're talking about here
150 years or so and you have an
establishment you have a group of
individuals who have any relationship
with each other that are relatively
tightly connected and as human beings
are want to do tend to relate in a
fashion which is coordinated with each
other they have similar sensibilities
they have similar values they kind of
like each other because they're friends
they hang out in the same places and so
they kind of coordinate and work
together they certainly influence each
other enormous because you can only
listen to so many people
and you really care about people who are
socially connected right so if your
sisters husband is the current head of
NBC and you're the current head of
Harvard then he's gonna care what you
think you're gonna care what he thinks
because your in-laws and by the way
you're both in established positions of
authority which means that you have high
credentials to be important right so
that's just the establishment
the second is the deep state alright the
deep state which is astounding me which
is I think what five seven years ago
that would have been almost nobody would
have had that language in that concept
and now almost everybody does which is a
good indication that this something is
happening right the deep state is kind
of playing out the establishment
narrative but now talking about it in
the terms of institutional structures so
if I'm a lifer at the CIA and you're a
lifer at the FBI there's some likelihood
that we have interacted with each other
more than one or two times during our
time frame and if she's alive for at the
IRS then that happens too right so the
same basic idea there's a continuity of
relationship where I have beginning to
build sort of an institutional loyalty
to a set of what is this local culture
the CIA as a culture the FBI has a
culture the US military has a culture
has many different cultures and by the
way all the corporations that have
military industrial or government
relationships do - right so if I'm
thirty year exactly to the next song but
I've also done five stints at the
Department of Energy because that's how
it works
these things begin to bind alright so
that forms its own relationship you got
the establishment you got the deep state
they're very connected but they're not
exactly the same thing and by the way
there are many other structures that are
in the environment as well those aren't
the only two then you've got the deep
church and the deep church to
conceptualize that you have to think
about it at a higher level of
abstraction it's more of a psychological
type and a way of being and doing which
I described earlier but to recapitulate
there's a notion of there being some
very small number of people who are
authorized speakers the nature of speech
goes from small number to almost
everybody large broadcast and it's one
way there's no interactivity and to
become credencial eyes as an authorized
speaker is a very powerful place to be
model you can either get that by being a
member of the establishment in a deep
state or by being a celebrity which is
an odd artifact of broadcast media so
that complex those three together hang
together more or less loosely as this
phenomenon right so it's not just the
blue church but now if we want to refer
to all of that as the blue church we can
but just be mindful and I said the blue
church
is more of the the process that gives
rise to a particular way of making sense
and making choices and reinforcing that
as a social field so then in in contrast
to that this emergent dynamic this new
phenomenon so I I characterize that as
differentially as the insurgency and
also as the red religion and then also
as the decentralized medium so let's
take it as two peers think about the
blue church that Matt's - the
decentralized medium so I have a
different media topology and different
psychological typology that gives rise
to different abilities to send in to
tell stories and different kinds of
stories that are going to be upregulated
mean magic
all right meme magic is over here
talking heads and classic propaganda is
over here meme magic is over here and
they very different and how they're
shaped and who shapes them and how they
show up now under here the deep state
and the establishment have optimized for
the blue church right there that's how
you're successful is to become the ones
who have the ability to speak to become
the ones who have credentials and become
the ones who have control over other
kinds of broadcast style bureaucratic
institutions like pass the EPA small
current people get to pass the law
everybody has to follow the law over
here we have chaos we have a new niche
that has opened up and nobody has
figured out how to master it perfectly
so now it's wide open now it turns out
that if you're doing this well you're
not gonna play that game why would you
play a new game if the old game works
really well and you're the expert at
your control of this game so the people
who over here are kind of the
heterogeneous or the marginal in this
case the losers are the last culture war
which is broadly the the right
conservatives and so one way of naming
the alt-right which is semantically
confusing which is to say the people who
originally coined the term the alt-right
are one group the way the alt-right is
presented in this blue church narrative
is another one i'm about to present a
third and maybe problematic because it's
going to be confusing but the ideas
that's it's the way that these
particular characteristics of
conservativism add a little of
personality type and a level of core
values have begun to discover and Rico
here on this new framework or we could
just call it the insurgency and this is
the new right the new group of
individuals and institutions that are
forming over here that are very
different and they're just a different
set of sensibilities so now where are we
on that process I articulated this
narrative I guess right after the 2016
election in point of fact to actually
articulate several years before but most
notably right after the election and
described it in terms of here's a bunch
of fronts of what we might think of as a
war they're gonna be playing out there's
the front at the level of the mass media
there's the front of the level of the
deep state there's a front to the level
of globalism and there's the front of
the most fundamental level which is a
conflict between how we do collective
intelligence broadcast style versus
decentralized style and honestly I feel
like the things that played out pretty
much as described first the insurgency
both formally through the Trump
administration and informally through
the kind of cluster of human beings who
are gathering under this new medium have
overtly identified the mass media as
fake news I literally to the point where
which in the cost I think recently you
yelled while you you know when will you
stop asking the American people to call
us the enemy of the people or whatever
happens to be right since now we're now
on the point where it is part of the
consciousness that the mass media is an
enemy now you may agree with it or not
agree with it but it's in the
consciousness right and a way that it
wasn't 5 10 15 years ago I mean it was
in some level Rush Limbaugh has been
saying this for a while but now it is
the narrative and I think the most
recent poll showed that something like
75 percent of Americans believe that the
media is engaged in either over at
manipulation or reckless propaganda so
it's sunk in and we should just say that
these structures aren't decreasing Lee
credible and their effectiveness is I
think rather obviously becoming less and
less trite has less distraction so
that's one front and I expect that to
continue to accelerate
because I've noticed that they have a
really abysmal strategic sense so they
keep to just they seem to keep punching
themselves in the face and I expect them
to keep doing so so let's kind of check
the natural drift is away from mass
media to decentralized media anyway
because the technological technological
shift is going there and we're also
seeing it happen at the level of kind of
psychological attention and credibility
so then the second layer is the layer
between the deep state and the
insurgency and of course this is also
playing out right we've seen the
conflict happening at the at the top of
the FBI we've also seen it playing out
in the DOJ and the State Department all
those sort of usual suspects I don't
think we have much of this ability of
what's going on and say the CIA or the
NSA that's because their secret but it
seems pretty evident that a conflict is
occurring that is between what we would
very clearly identify as the deep state
the people who are in the highest levels
of some of the primary institutions
particular the level of law enforcement
and investigation which we have I was
going to try to decapitate the deep
state that's where I'd start and it's
more or less being successful right
they're beginning to be moved out and of
course the deep state is deep and is
large and it's powerful so I don't think
that we can call that one just yet but I
would say right now that if I had to
estimate it is substantially further
along in the was like the soccer game
World Cup so the insurgency is ahead 2
to 0 2 to nil and we're probably the 75
minute mark so the TVA's gonna have to
start innovating quite significantly if
they want to figure out how to make up
that lost ground and reestablish
themselves and part of the problem of
course is that the deep state is seems
to have been unwisely continuing to
believe that its ability to control the
mass media is a powerful lever is not
recognizing that's in fact punching
itself in the face by doing that and it
doesn't realize that it hasn't got the
right OODA loop the ability to respond
quickly to changes in the game and so it
just keeps executing on old strategies
it's like the the apocryphal Polish
cavalry charging the German
yeah Kaveri will used to kick ass we get
it it's not gonna work in this war the
war is change so I continue to expect
that the insurgency will win this
conflict now but not massive maybe 60%
probability then the Third Front which
is the the front that shows up as the
new nationalism reverses globalism again
same basic idea it's clearly a front and
I think that's pretty straight forward
and it's clearly progressing in that
direction and Italy and the EU continues
to have chunks of the EU shift from at
least EU European which in fact is
actually also globalist to nationalists
and that seems to be accelerating that
decelerating I mean look the palm didn't
win in France but she did almost right
she got in the zone I think Merkel is
right now you know challenged so the
energy seems to continue to be moving in
the direction of some new form of
nationalism which is contra globalism
and of course since the United States
has been the primary agent of globalism
to the degree to which the United States
is now moving in the exact opposite
direction that's really tough like the
globalist institutions don't have a lot
of ability to enforce themselves on
national institutions absent the ability
to actually control the national
institution national institutions
directly so barring some scenario where
things are more odd than they seem which
is plausible I mean certainly there's
many many possible scenarios I'm
describing one that one is going to
continue to basically be derivative of
the first two with a vector in the
direction away from globalism and
towards increasing multipolar
nationalism and then the last which is
the most important and the most
fundamental by far which is the shift of
the balance of power from the media
structures of broadcast in the blue
church to this new set of media
structures that are decentralized and
again that continues to move we talked
about the idea I mentioned there's of
meme magic that has moved from being a
thing that a very small group of
individuals used almost tongue-in-cheek
to a thing that I think almost becoming
a discipline
a guy would not be surprised to see like
a university course on me magic anytime
soon
or at least an online online course and
that makes sense because just everyday
more and more attention just straight-up
attention is moved to this new framework
and more and more people are we're at a
deep visceral level that the styles and
approaches and people that are most
fundamentally associate with the blue
church don't work lost for lots of
reasons like they don't feel like they
work they feel incompetent or
inauthentic and these new voices
I think you've talked a lot about the
intellectual dark web are showing up
almost surprisingly but they're showing
up surprising it for this reason which
is it there there's a new possibility
because it effectively what we're seeing
is the breakdown the breakdown of this
ideological structure yeah yeah yeah
that says there's actually a really hard
question so let me see if I can yeah I
think she's got out so let me see if I
can try to articulate it well well see
so we talked about the way that the the
broadcast works the way that feels this
just used actually school schools a nice
example cuz everybody's most people have
been in school so the way the broadcast
works is there's there's a person an
authority and that authority has two
primary characteristics one is they're
the one who gets to speak and they're
the one who knows what the right answers
are and so they hold good opinion and
they commit and their job is to convey
good and good opinions you just share
with you what is in fact the right thing
to think and your job the audience the
student is to learn and be able to
deploy good opinion whatever it may be
right now in a very well functioning
version of this good opinion includes
critical thinking but it's kind of a
weird dynamic where the psychological
the part of the brain the way that you
are actually interacting with the brain
that is associated with this style of
information transfer is dissonant with
critical thinking so it's like do as I
say not as I do think critically think
critically what did I just tell you to
do think critically right I'm actually
training what I'm actually training to
do is not to think critically regardless
of how much I say that I am in fact
regardless of how much information I
convey to you about how to think
critically right the way you learn how
to think critically is not by being
taught then how to think critically by
thinking critically in reality in
practice and learning how to really feel
in yourself when does something feel off
and okay what's uncertainty and feel
okay with them certainty but our actual
academic environment and say under the
regime of standardized tests as an
example under the regime of it's a
competitive landscape to be the one or
two people who get to go to the good
college they can get the good job like
this so under the like the evolution of
the way the education is operated in the
States the regime of standardized tests
so we we want to be able to be sure that
the school is doing a good job so we
create a test and with that it does of
course as it begins to make it so that
students want to optimize against that
test particular the test has color like
the SAT where you have to get a good
score on the SAT if you want to get into
a good college and if you get a good
college to be able to get a good job
anybody we have to get a good job to be
able to simultaneously live a good life
and to be a good person kind of that's
the story so this creates a gradient
right it Chris competitive landscape
where you have to optimize against what
are the characteristics necessary to do
well in these various in some sense
simple tests well there's a particular
style of brain style of mind or you have
to be able to very quickly and with high
fidelity be able to access information
and respond with the right information
effectively all right it's computational
Matt it's information processing mind
and information processing mind isn't
the same kind of mind is able to do say
have creative thought or critical
thinking it's different style of brain
many people who have criticized
education have been pointing this out
this is not me in any way so when we use
the concept we use the term ideology
what I'd like to propose is that
ideology is nothing but a pre-existing
manifold
information that somebody somewhere not
you has largely constructed and has been
presented to you as a preformed menu and
it's some list of stuff that Orient's
what is right and true and your job is
to receive it Shh figure out where you
are on that list and then choose
whatever the choices that's associated
with exactly like a computer program and
so in ideology is how to run like a
computer program and it may be a very
sophisticated ideology that has all
kinds of if-then statements and branches
so has a lot of ability to process
complex environments to some level of
effectiveness but nonetheless you're
thinking like a computer which is quite
distinct from thinking like a human
for example creatively intuitively and
so the blue church construct as a
construct tends to prefer and generate
this style of thinking and you just
think again about how it shows up in
school who raises their hand first who
has the right answer quickly who's able
to respond very perfectly exactly what
the teacher said if you're the student
who maybe has a different idea about how
this should be done you're maybe why
asking a lot of questions you're
probably not familiar with having a lot
of success in school it's quite likely
that you experience yourself as somehow
losing in some way that was mysterious
and that's the point right it's not
necessarily the intent it's the nature
of how this thing reinforces it's just
like an evolutionary nature just
reinforces a certain set of behaviors
and strategies and this shows up all
over the place so think about the
glibness of how things show up in news
or in politics right if news in politics
it's all about being able to it's almost
like stand-up comedy but the job is to
be able to say the thing that is the
barb or the gotcha or the framework that
delivers the emotional payload that's
already sort of been pre-arranged in the
computer program you're playing a game
you're playing a computer game it's all
you're doing and that computer game just
like any other computer game has a
series of states and it has a series of
moves and remember that old game I think
was called King's Quest or Dragon Quest
where it was a super stupid is like it
was a cinema cinematic would play and
you just had four moves up-down
left-right and your only job was to
watch the cinematic and go you know the
right direction it's like that level is
stupid
so then what happens this is the run
into two distinct dynamics
simultaneously one is when you move into
this new framework in this new
decentralized medium it requires a
completely different kind of mind that
kind of mind doesn't work particularly
well and the kind of man that it
requires is very different requires a
mind that can actually think it requires
a mind that isn't only able to be a
receiver but is able to actually be a
bubble to be both a receiver and a
sender everyone is roughly empowered to
be able to to express as well as to
receive and so you have to have complete
different set of capacities instead of
being able to listen record with
extremely high fidelity precise of the
semantic structure that was presented to
you identify what context indicate
that's the semantic structure to respond
with and then when it confronted with
those cement those environments to
respond with that like a computer
program your job is to be able to
actually discern what is actually a
thoughtful response to what's happening
here in an arbitrary environment it can
be completely novel how to learn how to
think and and then how to convey with as
much clarity and fidelity as you can now
that's the optimal functioning I should
mention by the way that in just the same
way there ways to hack the blue church
structure there ways to hack this
decentralized structure and we've seen
them various kinds of trolls and and
means are the ways to disrupt this -
precisely - degree to which mmm this is
actually very important precisely to the
degree that the decentralized collective
intelligence hasn't yet reached a level
of self capability to be able to make
sense on its own basis it is
catastrophic leave ulnar Abal to these
kinds of attacks the blue church model
can't do anything about me magic it's
completely invulnerable to that approach
and the emergent collective intelligence
is basically a child it's an infant and
so it can be attacked by this approach
however to the degree to which a
critical mass of into
vigils reach a capacity to have the
right kind of characteristics to
actually be able to participate in a
peer-to-peer fashion on this front
they then generate a collective
intelligence which is completely
invulnerable to those sets of attacks so
you're kind of gone through adaptive
Ally you've escaped the blue church
you've gone through the desert of mean
warfare you've come out the other end
with something which is categorically
cape more capable of sense making and
categorically anti fragile to this
entire set of attacks attacked almost
all forms of fake news are cannot be are
fully parsed by this new kind of
collective intelligence does that exist
yet not collective intelligence no knows
what I'm saying it's it's it doesn't yet
exist so it ends up happening is that
we've got a a dysfunctional because it's
breaking down and has blind spots old
form of collective intelligence and
dysfunctional because it has not yet
been constructed new form of collective
intelligence and we're witnessing the
middle so this new form is just strong
enough to wreak havoc on the old
structure and yet so weak that it can't
stand on its own two feet and so that's
sort of exactly where we are I should
mention by the way that we should also
be over here enough to destroy another
crazy yeah and of course destruction is
a lot easier to creation that's a very
good irregular way of putting it in fact
in some sense it can't help but destroy
because the the structures of sense
making of the old structure don't make
sense they aren't really good sense
making its you know I think Brett has
this idea of metaphorical truth let's
call it something like useful lies you
know it's it's a here's of reality
complex rich nuanced multivariate
multivariate etc let me sort of
construct a relatively simplistic
narrative that kind of subscribes it
enough to be okay and as long as we all
sort of accept this we can coordinate
that's the way the blue church operates
it's kind of like the way that GE
fabricates an organizational structure I
don't want you as a whole person I want
the vice president of marketing aspects
of you which are kind of fun Jabil like
the vice president of marketing aspects
of you aren't that different
the vice president marking aspects of
the 50 people next to you right you have
a certain set of raw capacities that I
designed an organization to be able to
interact with regardless of the human
involved instead of an industrial model
or a mass production model and the blue
church has to do that with everything as
reproduce breeds all concepts into
relatively simple ideological frameworks
not sensitive to nuance and so they're
not real they're not actually complex
and so what ends up happening is that as
a new kind of intelligence emerges that
has the ability to see that this isn't
actually rich it cannot help but be
corrosive to it now in the beginning it
shows up as as insane it's gonna show up
as not having any ability to discern
what's going on and so it's going to be
up regulating all kinds of craziness or
just white conspiracy theories that go
into the roof because it's it's it's
like like if you imagine somebody who
just got their spinal cord severed and
they're trying to figure out how to
retrain their spinal cord the signals
that are coming down or all crazy it
hasn't figured how to actually turn that
back into signal so it it can very
effectively critique the structures of
the blue church sends out but it can't
yet actually create really high quality
sense and we should be clear I said
member I mentioned earlier this is a
psychological thing as well I'm not
talking about we're going to be the same
kinds of psychologists and either side
of the Boers now like people who are
bleached shirt psychologists or
something in a jumper over here and
things will just look kind of the same
but better no no it's gonna be very
different the way that ideas form and
the nature of how concepts show up like
the idea of transparent igniting mind if
you remember that I do so we have a
story of a guy named Thomas Kuhn who
coined the term para structure of
scientific revolutions so the way he
talked about it was there's sort of a
linearity of paradigms we have the
Newtonian paradigm and it works into the
gist to the point where there's a bunch
of edge cases that it can't figure out
people like what's going on here and
some people want to be conservative and
defend the paradigm and kind of ignore
the anomalies and other people grasp the
anomalies and it meant a whole bunch of
crazy ideas and so a couple of crazy
ideas turn out to be enough so crazy and
then you get a collapse of the old
paradigm and the transformation to a new
paradigm and you know that's a cool
story we may be on that process and
maybe the blue church is a paradigm and
this
new thing this decentralized meme is a
new paradigm my proposition is that it's
actually a meta phenomenon which is to
say that it's meted two paradigms in
general that the entire concept of the
paradigm is a thing that emerges inside
a structure like the blue church that's
a there's a model of how you make sense
where you have a schema right a paradigm
is nothing but a schema of what are good
epistemological rules what does truth
look like and what are collectibles good
look like what are the good and what are
the true how we know when we see them
and we can sort of bind them very
cleanly in this new environment we're
going to be I propose now I'm sort of an
hypothetical and I'm making predictions
running a different kind of mind a
transparent American mind one that's
able to instantiate a microt paradigm
under particularly local conditions that
is adapted to the local environment but
isn't identified with that paradigm and
so that it can jump out of that paradigm
allow this to dissolve and instantiate a
new one or possibly even run two or
three differentially just like Modern
Portfolio theory in finance where I no
longer have to have sort of a particular
investment strategy I can abstract that
to a portfolio strategies and I can keep
abstracting up to a portfolio of
portfolios of portfolios at a certain
point I get to a trans portfolio concept
which operates it a completely different
information dynamic so the phenomena of
the intellectual dart web for example
seems to have arisen in in opposition to
this idea of the blue church this idea
of what we have is an ideology and a an
ideology in the media and an ideology in
in culture that maybe wasn't truly
visible but the eruption of sort of the
intellectual dark web has shown that oh
there is an ideology and this is sort of
a movement that is that is showing up
the floors and that ideology and that in
some sense there's a religion and you
described it in our interview really
well it's like what the blue church has
done has taken the idea the values of
openness and replace them with the with
an ideology around openness so you have
a certain set of things related to
openness that you have to believe to
actually be within the confines of the
blue church right so it's kind of a
religious mindset some ways well I mean
now we're gonna have to be very careful
because the term religion is not clear
what I've noticed I actually wrote about
this recently and I've noticed in that
dialogue and discovering what's going on
by I wrote it for the purposes of
finding out okay what people respond to
this is that the term religion seems to
have actually been complexified for good
reason it's actually by the way to
include a number of other kinds of
things that it is not at least three one
is mysticism mysticism a religion are
not the same if your religion is
mystical then it's doing the wrong thing
by the way if you're mysticism is
religious it's doing the wrong thing
another spirituality religion and
spirituality are also not the same and
then there's science and then when we
might say quite obviously religion is
not science but the point is that
sometimes these two lines are crossed
and vice-versa so my proposition is just
to define these domains and my
proposition is one is that these domains
are all real they're all by the way
necessary to any well-functioning human
civilization and that problematics arise
when we cross domains when we have one
of them trying to do the other ones job
or we have institutional structures that
cross domains and in depth mixing them
so for example a lot of the problem that
arose in the West was that the church
the Catholic Church broadly was doing
both was doing religion spirituality
mysticism and science all in a single
institutional container and ended up
crossing a lot of those domains so let
me try to find them this is worthwhile
so in the context of science what we
mean is the loop process where we have a
model of reality we then compare that to
experiments of reality for the purposes
of updating that model done that's it
that's science science is the process of
having a model and using experiments to
verify that model is a good fit to
reality it exists for the purpose of
having good models with which to operate
in reality by the way technology is the
inverse of that technology is the use of
good models of reality to generate
actions that are
effective in reality right so if I have
a model of if science gives me a model
of ballistics I can then apply that
model of ballistics to build ballistic
missiles so those two things fit
together quite nicely spirituality is
very different and it has nothing to do
with models at all has to do with
embodiment with a living and we might
say the spirituality is the way that an
individual is able to achieve
integration congruence with self and
then to be able to enter into
relationships with world that are able
to be integrated into self right so I am
how do I come in to be able to be in
relationship with myself where I am
fully integrated in congruent and then
as I go through life and have
experiences how am I able to ingest
those experiences to make those
experiences still part of a fully
integrated self I had a way avoid being
traumatized by my experiences how do I
avoid becoming disassociated as a
consequence with my relationship with my
experience was being in conflict with
myself that is spirituality that's the
essence of what that practice is
religion then is kind of the community
correlate it's how does self enter into
relationship with other selves to form
communities and then how do communities
entrance relationship with world so as
to be able to be adaptive to and thrive
in world right so it's the embodied
practices they give rise to enduring
communities right that is religion as a
function now notice what happens that
when we will run into problems so let's
imagine that we have these embodied
practices which are embodied practices
they're not stories we tell the stories
to be able to help us understand and to
convey and to reinforce the embodied
practices but if we think the stories
are where the truth lives and not the
practices we've now crossed the domains
we're now being to treat religion like
science because the stories are a model
if you are not living your religion if
it's not actually embodied in your life
you're doing it a great disservice and
your self great to serve is in your
community great to service and then of
course you can even worse because with
then what can happen is you can then try
to actually do science from religion you
can try to actually tell stories about
reality about the world and then of
course what you do
because if your experiments with the
world don't inform those stories do you
then use it to change your body
practices that seems like it's not gonna
be very effective because your body
practices have nothing to do with that
across the one in the wrong direction so
what I'd like to do is demystify this
damn thing that there's a thing religion
that has an incredibly important purpose
that sometimes we might oddly enough
some people have thought well why don't
you call it ideology at which point I
refer back to the definition of ideology
ideology is what happens when science
tries to do religion it creates a model
of how people ought to live in community
then tries to impose that model on how
people operate many a third way to do
things there's very good reasons why
that can never work it has to do with
the relationship between the complex and
the complicated or why don't you just
call it culture
aren't you just describing culture isn't
that culture and of course the
difference is that culture is what you
are doing religion is the doing nough
sin a way so as to achieve a particular
consequence so religion is the process
by which we develop a thriving and
enduring culture well that's not just
the same thing as culture we might have
a shitty culture and that's not the same
thing and religion is a vector it's and
it's an orientation to movement just
like spirituality is not the same thing
as just being a person spirituality is a
process whereby you would try to achieve
an integration of self with self and the
relationship of self with world okay
then you have mysticism all right now
religion quite often crosses the streams
with mysticism which is very problematic
because obviously what's happening now
is they're trying to create either that
becomes a variation of mystifying
science or becomes an ocean well when we
just talk about mysticism is it becomes
religion overcoating mysticism and
mysticism is the hardest I haven't got a
lot of clarity on this Jeff but let me
try it it has to do with the pure
relation of self itself how do we
actually become clear in self so as
opposed to head we become integrated
self in relationship with world with
your spirituality mysticism is like I
think shows that mostly in practices
like meditation where you're not trying
to relate self to world at all you're
just trying to get complete clarity on
the nature of self on for example here's
a concrete version of mysticism oddly
enough what are your values
where do your values what are your the
actual basis of your vows that kind of
doing deep into you not necessarily no
not at all what are your values in the
context of living but what are the
values that are actually at the depth of
you that give rise to you and their
their orientation relationship that
would be like a properly mystical
relationship and it's mysterious because
it has it is deep the only way you can
get access to it is to actually get
really good at listening to things that
don't have structure because they're not
coming from the outside world at all
they're entirely internal and now would
of course what happens is these things
relate to each other to the degree to
which I'm able to achieve clarity of
relationship to self I'm able to achieve
clarity to the nature of how that stuff
works well then I can use that in my
spirituality and so mysticism meditation
is a good practice to have as a basis of
a spiritual practice through it they're
distinct right they're not the same
thing a spiritual practice may rely on
clarity of self to achieve integration
of self relationship with world
and similarly religion is a good basis
to do science right you can't do science
very well to say if you're in a culture
that doesn't tell the truth if everybody
is a liar science is very very
dysfunctional or religion is about how
do you actually build people who tell
the truth how do you actually create the
embodied practices like child rearing is
a religious function how do you actually
raise good people what are the practices
and traditions and rituals that give
rise to that that can only really well
so far at least be developed in
evolution time meaning in relationship
with lineage that goes over a long
period of time this is the thing that
Jordan Peterson is I think most clearly
trying to articulate in that space you
know our archetypes our mythologies the
ones that cover a lot of cultures and
lasts a long time do so because they are
the things that have been most deeply
associated with what is worked
those cultures that do certain things in
certain ways endure and we perceive them
as stories so we can we can listen to
them but it's not the stories that
matter it's the embodied practices if
you're not living it you're not doing
the religious aspect and then we can
invert it right science if it's done
well can tell us a whole lot about the
nature of the world so science can tell
us like okay well what are
characteristics that give rise to an a
self that can integrate well with the
world
what are the characteristics of
different ways that we can make sense
and make choice as a community more
effectively thrive in the world its
information it's its ideas its knowledge
its insight but it's not living it right
you can tell us what a good choices
cannot make the choices so that's the
distinction between these things and
with that kind of a distinction now your
question becomes much more complicated
so what I would say is that the bleed
church was an ideology in a used
ideology to play and simulate largely
religious function that in fact the
thing that it largely replaced right
about the turn of the 20th century was
more of a religion a talk finesse set of
cultural practices that were largely
lived and received and taught by living
that were not really the subject of
information right they could be conveyed
you might go to church when somebody
might tell you what to do but it really
matters is that every Sunday you'd do
something or and then by the way there's
something may not be go to church like
it may be that every sin that your
family gathers together for brunch and
they get together and socialize and
there's not necessarily a huge amount of
consciousness there's not like a dick
taught that tells you this is what you
ought to do it's rather simply what you
do and because it has worked for a long
period of time what the blue church has
done is it over coated that they
actually had the very bad characteristic
this is kind of that fifties sciencism
that we can replace food with food and
pill form that we can replace well
replace all things that came from nature
with things invented and engineered by
humans that's the one of the worst vices
of the blue church and did lots of good
stuff when it brought us to the moon but
it also had lots of vices and this is
one of them is to try to go back in
let's go with childbirth I think we're
all well may be net were all I will make
this as a strong assertion I will I will
own this the set of the medicalization
of childbirth that happened during the
20th century which was largely a
consequence of this mindset and
distinctly reinforced but the structures
in the blue church was it travesty and
is a fundamentally anti religious
function that the the traditions of how
you go about actually doing a good job
of giving birth to a child that is
conducive to the holistic
characteristics of what it means to be a
one child I have been completely over
coded by that structure top-down imposed
ideology and entirely ideological and
enforced by shame how many mothers right
now still do not feel empowered to make
their own choices on how they want to
give birth to their child but feel shame
at not falling in line with what the
ideological structures tell them to do
that's a good example of how that shows
up so now we're actually a very
interesting spot a size of a fraction
the population is still ideologically
possessed it's still running old code
it's running code that was derivative of
an old machine some of which was
adaptive when it was created some of
which was malevolent when it was created
much of which is no longer adaptive and
the psychology that runs that code is
not a particularly effective it's in
fact not the psychology for this new
environment so if you're running a blue
church receiver like your blue church
radio
nobody's broadcasting on that signal
anymore if they are it's noise it's
noise yeah so no truth is broadcast on
that signal or very tiny amounts of
truth is broadcast on those segments
it's no longer an adaptive strategy to
tune in to be a blue church radio we
need to do is find a way to turn into
this new meshwork to become a well a
router I suppose a network aware
component that has the ability to do
things like discern good signal from bad
signal powerful insight from just
repetitive information tune in to that
which is most insightful as opposed to
merely that which is repetitive or that
which is destructive and then up
regulate that with high fidelity take
the part of the signal that is the good
part operate you lay at that if the
particle isn't and down regulate that
and so by virtue of playing that role
ultimately end up being part of what
generates really cleaning insightful
signal you've talked about game B in the
past what is game a what is going B and
why do we need to shift between one to
the other so
I guess what I'd like to try to do is is
present a frame a way of thinking about
it where we're able to to recognize that
in spite of the significant diversity of
approaches that have shown up in the
various civilizations that have emerged
since the dawn of Agriculture they are
all in a deep sense the same kind of
game and I mean that in the sense of a
game meaning that the kind of thing that
is played by people according to rules
made up by people and enforced by people
not by the laws of nature although in
the context of the laws of nature for
sure and this this seems to be mostly
about a couple of basic characteristics
it's a an effort on the part of people
to be able to find a way to work
together so as to dress and deal with
the problems of scarcity at the level of
nature not enough food not enough water
and with the problem of rivalry in the
context of other people both in the
tribe and of course hostile external now
it's a that's a pretty compact
description of the problem that
civilization exists as salt so if your
civilization can't feed you then it's
not viable if your civilization can't
find a way to prevent itself from being
torn apart from the inside by people
struggling against themselves or if they
can't protect itself from the outside it
can't survive it so effectively every
single civilization since the dawn of
civilization has been some effort to
solve those three problems in the
context of every other civilization and
hence history that's game a that entire
block every single variation on that
theme is game a
and the civilization that we just
currently live in is the winner of that
game and and by the way this contains
both the critiques and the virtues of
our current political debate yes this
civilization can be characterized as the
center of all forms of Tyrian oppression
yes the civilization can be
characterized as that which has
innovated all virtue and all advance
these are all true they are not
paradoxical it's just the nature of the
way they came is played so then the
proposition is for reasons we've talked
about maybe ad nauseam so far today that
game is coming to an end we cannot
continue to play that style of game that
we cannot continue to operate in a rival
RIS way we cannot continue to operate in
a in a fashion that is dominated by the
logic of scarcity and by the way we need
not we cannot and we need not that we
are now near a point of potential
transition and we're need a point of
necessary transition we have within us
the capacity to transition into actual
abundance we have within us the capacity
to transition into a way of being with
each other that is premise thanh ante
rivalry not rivalry but anti rivalry and
that that this this transition is a very
different kind of game game be and it's
not the kind of game that is mysterious
meaning that we've actually always been
playing it a little bit we can all we
can find locations at any point in time
in any culture in any environment and
your person's life or this the aspects
of this was shown up the transition is
about being able to orient reorient the
basis of civilization and put it in the
right order you know to put civilization
on a footing of abundance and on a
footing of the anti rivals
and on that basis then to be able to
categorically resolve all questions
associated with scarcity elegantly
without any real conflict and so now on
this side I am also receiving both the
optimistic and the pessimistic futurist
narratives the optimistic geological
futurist narrative is that we're on a
one-way ticket to utopia no that's not
true
but we have the possibility of getting
to something that is going to feel a lot
like utopia to the people to us now like
if we were to look at it and project for
100 years we'd be astounded by what can
happen just like you know the crochets
in louie xiv court would look at our
modern environment and just be astounded
by the abundance of what we've been able
to achieve and then you also have the
more apocalyptic narrative that if we do
not if we choose the wrong set of paths
and we refuse to figure out how to give
up that which is not supposed to be part
of this new world and do not decide to
actually build these things that are
necessary and innovative to invent new
things did not yet fully exist then we
don't make the transition then that
which must come to an end game a will
come to an end
and we will not have any place to go and
that of course will be presumably
somewhat unpleasant so that's the story
and some people would think that's quite
naive to say that we can move beyond
rivalry how does how does the ante rival
Russ exist there's a whole lot to what
you just said the first part is that I
find that almost everybody who accuses
something of being naive are actually
not engaging in what we were calling
thinking earlier that's a rhetorical
move that's not in fact a proposition
but let's moving to the second remember
I mentioned that these have been always
present that it is actually just a
feature of reality that the rival wrists
and the anti rival risks exist
it's just that nowadays we're in a
situation with the anti rather less is
becoming more evident and more powerful
in our day to day lives
so the rival risk is most easily
characterized by energy so
things that if I have it like say a
glass of water or a barrel of oil then
you don't have it it's one of those
things it's real physical instantiated
material coalescence of energy in an
entropic environment so that if you use
it then at least some of it is destroyed
forever well that's the rival risk
yep we've got that all over the place
particularly food water now on the other
side of the continuum sorry
not a continuum on the other side is the
anti rival risk and in these days the
language that we would use is something
like information that well by me telling
you this story about the nature of the
enterovirus I lose nothing except for
the energy that I expended to tell it
but that's not the story and you gain it
whether you like it or not it's a
different story but at least you have it
so now we both have it and this is not
novel I've been talking about this
nature of the scalability or the copy
ability of information ever since
computers made it possible to do that
remember music but the other
characteristic of the anti Ravel risk is
that it becomes more valuable the more
people who have it that the rival risks
is valuable largely directly in
relationship to the degree to which it
is rare the antivirus is valuable
largely to the degree to which it is
shared I don't mean that aspirationally
I don't mean that naively I mean that
rigorously logically if I have a
language and I'm the only one who speaks
it it's not very useful if I
teach it to you and I teach it to him
and I teach it to her and we all speak
it it's actually become very useful the
more people speak it the more powerful
it has become that is a very anti rival
hrus thing the entire category of
phenomena they're characterized by was
called the network effect or Metcalfe's
law are associated at the basis with
anti ravenous phenomena okay
well let me just connect the dots
because I happen to have a direct I have
been an entrepreneur I've built
technology companies and we're talking
about how technology companies work
collaboration is the birthplace the
origin of innovation innovation is anti
rivalries if I have invented calculus I
can then give you calculus and it cost
me nothing
and by the way much much easier than you
inventing it yourself and then you might
do something with it which is very
powerful that I wouldn't have been able
to do with it myself so it's actually
become more valuable it's a more
valuable tool the more useful and where
it's shared well that's what we mean by
the innovation economy the essence of
the innovation economy is the discovery
of the degree to which particular
approach to working together
collaboration is the essence that have a
go about innovating and innovation is
anti ravenous and innovation is the
source of all wealth if you actually go
back and look at history some wealth a
very tiny minute wealth is generated by
the sweat of your brow well I mean again
Jesus said it well yes I can fish and I
can get a fish I can give it to you
rivalry I don't have it you have it you
eat for a day or I can teach you how to
fish anti rivalry I have not lost
anything you've gained something and
maybe someday I won't catch a fish in
you will and you can give one to me it's
more valuable honestly it's very simple
the challenge is actually more about the
transition the challenge is about how do
we go about designing a new civilization
structure on the basis of an anti
rivalries psychology and not on the
basis of a rival isn't on the basis of a
scarcity mentality this is the real
trick and even the people who don't have
power but are thinking using the old
model if your toolkit what is the phrase
you cannot you cannot build a new house
with the Masters tools or something like
that that's a nice phrase if your
toolkit is a toolkit that is in its
basis
very foundation a response to scarcity
and the scarcity mentality designed to
be adaptive to and operate within a
rival risk world it's not the right tool
kit for solving problems for and in an
anti rivals one and so but that's not
okay we have all the way down to the
language that we use and so we have to
figure out how to do that sleight of
hand
how to allow the space for this game B
to emerge and it will be emergent
they'll be emergent by design and we
have a way to generate almost like
parenting parenting is a great example i
do not design my child but parents are
necessary if you want to have a child in
the relationship with parents our child
seems to have three specific
requirements or rules the first is
obviously the creation of the fertilized
egg which becomes the zygote the second
is the bloom the creation of a space
that allows the zygote to develop by and
for itself on its own basis in on its
own terms
right not outside in the world I mean if
I were to put the zygote of game be in
the middle of game a drop it on to the
streets of the financial district it
would not survive very long it's not yet
strong enough to survive on its own in
the world but if we can create the
zygote and then embed it in the womb
then there's the last piece of parenting
which is that when we think about
ordinary design like say an architect
designing a house or an engineer
designing a vehicle all of the agency is
in the part of the designer when we
think about parenting the agency of the
parents is always fully in service of
the agency of the child and the agency
of the child is primary so we can
generate the zygote we can create the
womb and then we have to be able to
always be mindful to put our agency in
the service of this world that is in the
process of giving birth to itself
and that's all that we can say in this
analogy what's the womb this is going to
be spaces that are created and enabled
to be available to the people who are
experimenting with game B so literally
physically spaces incubators as it were
or entirely new towns or cities
I actually know that for example a
number of countries are in the process
of endeavoring to figure out how to
build quote-unquote smart cities of the
future so the idea in the Chinese of
course had built innumerable mega cities
over the past several decades well
things like that we're going didn't
happen you know two or more are going to
have to gather and it's going to have to
be a lot more than two and they're going
to need to learn how to gather first in
small groups just in houses and homes
and to create this territory in this
space where they can gather and practice
game B and create they think you said
the field but create a space where these
practices are honored and they're
explored and then those groups are going
to need to come into relationship in
larger spaces and perhaps this is where
we just start thinking about things like
resources I mean one of the primary
aspects of game a is the necessity to
continue to work in things that are not
your highest purpose so the true to the
degree to which that we can build
through innovation to better innovation
the ability to bring more and more
people into a space where they can
simply fully and enter into their most
fully realized selves and thereby become
available to source and support superior
innovation we start getting an attic
autocatalytic system and again let me
present this in a way that is not naive
let's take the lineage of technology
companies in fact I'll I'll own it since
you go to British accent technology
companies in the United States of
America
let's go from Ford to Google let me take
step
General Motors IBM hewlett-packard APRA
saw Apple Microsoft Google this
something like that one of the things we
noticed is we good in that lineage is
they have shifted from a more scarcity
rivalry based culture to a more
abundance anti Ravelry based culture
Henry Ford would have been rather
surprised by the prospect that he should
have fed all of his employees highly
nutritious meals with personal chefs and
provisioned them with places to play and
to drive around on scooters for Google
it's obvious because that's how you
create a space that is maximally
conducive to creative collaboration
which is maximally conducive to
innovation which is maximum conducive to
making a ton of money we just need to
push that further what's the further
envelope you can get and I'm noticing
that's actually happening groups that
I've been collaborating with her
beginning the process of trying to
construct entrepreneurial activities
that show up is having a game a side
that can be very effective and
competitive in game a but are actually
anchored in a game B side and are
oriented towards generating and
producing taking the resources to come
and providing them out into activities
and envelopes that create these zones of
these wombs for continuing development
and exploration of a more generative
community
if that story the story that is told is
true then it would be in our bones and
be in our deepest mythology and our
deepest traditions ideas religion that
this is the place to go that when
trouble is brewing gather together enter
into this space this is where we do
these sorts of things this is how we
solve these kinds of problems
you