[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time we began our
discussion of Aristotle and how he has
contributed significantly to our
understanding of meaning and wisdom and
we talked about how Aristotle was
centrally concerned with something that
he thought Plato didn't give an adequate
enough account of change but importantly
Aristotle's term for change is properly
understood in terms of growth and
development and we talked about how much
your sense of growth and development is
constitutive of finding your life to be
meaningful we talked about how Aristotle
understood that development in terms of
making use of Plato's idea of idose form
the structural functional organization
and then what's happening in change and
in development is that something is
being informed in particular something
like wood is the potential to be a table
or a chair and when it has the correct
structural functional organization then
the chair starts to act like table sorry
the wood starts to act like a table or
the wood starts to act like a chair and
that is their the idea that when you
inform some potential it gets actualized
into a particular thing and so change is
the actual izing of potential via
information' and then in order to
understand that better we left a head to
look at a current account of growth and
development that was directly inspired
by aristotle we looked at elisha
Gerardo's work and we went through the
discussion of what a dynamical system is
and how we can use it understand growth
and development in terms of the idea of
a virtual engine we then returned and
used that language to better understand
Aristotle's idea about wisdom as the
cultivation of character where wisdom is
to create a virtual engine and there's a
deep connection between being a virtual
engine and the cultivation of virtues
right that wisdom is the cultivation of
a virtual engine a character that
regulates yourself development in fact
yourself making so that you can
actualize your potential you can live up
to your potential and what does living
up to that potential means it means and
we talked about it means moving through
that hierarchy that we talked about last
time the hierarchy of actualization from
the mere plant to the animate thing to
the mental thing to the rational thing
so to be wise to live up to your
potential is to cultivate a character
that most helps you realize your
capacity for rational self-reflection
your capacity to appropriate and take
charge of your your ability to engage in
self-actualization self-realization and
to do so in such a way that fulfills the
potential of your humanity that you most
realize reveal actualize the
characteristics that make us uniquely
human and that foolishness is to have
not properly cultivated your characters
so even when you have the correct set of
beliefs you believe that you should not
do something you will still fall prey to
a crazy because you have not cultivated
adequate enough character then I
challenged you in two ways I challenged
you to try and reanimate and deepen
these terms that we use everyday to talk
about how meaningful our lives are terms
of growth and development and actualize
in ourselves and living up to our
potential to deepen those terms by
returning and reflecting upon them using
Aristotle but also a Socratic challenge
via Aristotle what are you doing to
cultivate your character how much time
are you dedicating to it since it is now
reasonable given this argument that it
plays a significant role in how
meaningful your life is how much time
have you devoted how much time do you
regularly devote to it now as promised
last time I want to turn to the other
side of Aristotle's work
and so in a further sense how he
contributed to the axial development of
these ideas of meaning wisdom self
transcendence and of course Aristotle is
understanding self transcendence as this
living up to your potential
self-realization ascending through the
hierarchy until you are a fully realized
fully rational human being now Aristotle
was interested in rationality for
exactly this reason he thought it was
the way of defining human beings now his
understanding is axial your rationality
is what we've been talking about since
the beginning of this series right the
actual revolution idea of second order
thinking you can step back and reflect
on the ways in which your self-deceptive
and you you have a capacity for self
correction and self transcendence that's
the hallmark of rationality please
remember that right because we have
tended and we'll see much later why
we've tended to reduce rationality to
the idea of being logical but that's not
that's not the core idea of Rash noted
the core idea of rationality is your
capacity for reflectively realizing your
capacities for self-deception and
illusion and for self correction and for
Aristotle that self correction is a
process of also realizing your potential
through the cultivation of character but
what is at the heart of rationality
because if we go back to the Platonic
model Aristotle has told us a bit about
one side right character this is
remember Plato talks about how you are
aligning the psyche but Plato also
talked about right being in contact with
reality
how did Aristotle develop this side of
the Platonic equation this is his way of
trying to give a deeper analysis of
structuring the psyche to reduce
self-deception what did he do to try and
develop Plato's idea of being in contact
with reality because if you remember we
also have this meta drive we need to be
in contact with reality I put it to you
that that is in fact the core feature or
at least the core motivation of
rationality the core motivation of
rationality is the desire to come into
as deep a contact with reality as
possible by those means that are as
reliable as possible so for Aristotle
this brought him into a discussion about
what it is to truly know something to
truly know something and again he's
going to be deeply influenced by Plato
well of course making his own unique
changes and challenges to Plato so we
have got a view in which we think we
largely conceive of knowing as being
able to give a very accurate description
of something I know what a chair is if I
can really describe it very well to you
now the there there is a challenge to
that if I were to ask you the following
who knows better what a chair is
somebody who could describe a chair very
well to you or somebody who could
actually make a chair and many people
would say well you know the person who
can describe it doesn't really
understand and and they'll probably
struggle for words he'll and they'll use
words taken from Aristotle without
realizing they don't get the essence of
a chair right because if you can make a
chair then you've grasped something more
and this is again related to this notion
if you can cause a chair to be if you
can cause it to be then you deeply
understand what a chair is so Aristotle
then asked well what is it that the
chair maker has
that the accurate descriptor does not
have and again it goes back to what we
saw before when I gave you my
description of the bird you know it has
wings and beaks and all this stuff and I
was lacking the idol I was lacking the
form the structural functional
organization so Aristotle says what the
chair maker has that the good
descriptive the good describe or doesn't
have is the chair maker actually has in
their mind the I das think of it like an
architect right that has a blueprint the
architect has in their mind the
structural functional organization that
is actually going to be shared in the
building the architect has the I does
the chair maker has the I das in their
mind and they can actualize they can use
that I das to actualize the potential in
the wood to make the chair so to know
something is to possess the same I Doss
as it now the architect right when he
has the IDIS for the the building he
doesn't have a he doesn't have a
material building in his mind you
couldn't go in house a family of five
inside his mind right when we when we
say that they has the same pattern we
don't mean it's actualizing the same
matter as wood and metal in a building
but the same form is there so for
Aristotle when I know something and this
is the original meaning of this world
right there's conformity I share the
same form with it so when I know some
object or know some thing my mind takes
on the same structural functional
organization as the thing such that if I
could take that I toss from my mind
and actualize it in some potential I
could make an instance of the thing I
could cause it to be so if you'll
remember shape is not the same thing as
form but we can use shape as Aristotle
does as an analogy for form so when I
know the cup I could know it by standing
away from it and describing it right
trying to describe its shape and I'm
using shape as an analogy for form or I
can actually conform to the cup I'm
actually taking the shape same shape and
notice how this enables me to causally
interact with a cup in a much more
intimate and complex and sophisticated
fashion so when you know something for
Aristotle your mind is in conformity
with it now that's really important
because that means when Aristotle's
theory of knowing there's no distinction
there as we typically have between
knowing and being what do I mean by that
again using the analogy here's the
modern view I'm over here describing it
it's over there independent I'm over
here describing it
here's Aristotle's view I'm actually
changing my structure this isn't just
I'm not just knowing and having beliefs
I'm being changed this is a change in my
being not just a change in my knowing
the conformity Theory doesn't just
change your beliefs it changes the very
structure and functioning of your being
so the conformity theory is a very
different way of thinking about how we
know things so Charles Taylor who I've
mentioned before Herbert Dreyfus and
others they talk about the conformity
theory as a contact epistemology so to
know something is to be in contact with
it is to actually participate in the
same form as the thing we're going to
come back to this sense of participatory
no
participatory knowing is when I shape
myself in order to know the thing and I
know it by conforming to it this is
different from descriptive knowing where
I stand apart and I generate
propositions about the thing so the
conformity theory has this very powerful
idea of an intimate connection between
the mind and reality and it's based on a
very powerful idea and as I mentioned
Aristotle is going through a significant
revival in our understanding of living
things understanding of mental things we
are increasingly coming to see that this
kind of contact
knowing this participatory knowing is
much more central to how cognition works
than we previously thought we're going
to come back to that a lot in this
series I just want you to take note of
it now notice how this what we need to
notice right now is how this theory of
knowing which is also a theory of being
satisfies that desire of being in
contact with reality as opposed to being
like separate from it and merely
pointing at it with my words or my
propositions alright so if I'm in
conformity with the world that tells you
something very interesting the
structural functional organization my
patterns of intelligibility member for
Plato intelligibility and Aristotle
completely inherits this like I say
again read Erich pearls book on this
right how I make sense of things the
pattern of intelligibility is the same
pattern by which the thing is organized
so when I'm making sense of things
there's a structural functional
organization in my mind that is shared
with the structural functional
organization of what I'm making sense of
things but does that mean that you know
everything I think is just true no
Aristotle is like
a genius right he he he's probably you
know a clear instance of what's been
called a universal genius we shouldn't
dismiss it what Aristotle says so easily
I mean Aristotle literally writes the
book on everything you you you you come
to say you're at a party with Aristotle
you say all I'm interested in physics
and then he'll here I wrote the book on
this this is called physics this is the
book that started physics oh well I'm
also interested in philosophy I'm
interested in metaphysics here's the
boat book I wrote on metaphysics well
I'm interested in how animals move
here's my book I wrote on how animals
move I'm interested in psychology here's
my book dreams here's my book how to
write books here's my book Aristotle is
right just an astonishing intellect so
what does he mean then well what he
means is right that after we've done all
that axial age second order thinking oh
we've done all this Socratic and
platonic argument and discussion well
we've done this rational reflection once
we then get to that I toss that
structural functional organization we
can be confident that what structural
functional organization we're finding
and how we make sense of things is the
same or to put it in a slogan when we've
made sense of things the pattern in our
mind is the same as the pattern in the
world so what are those processes
Aristotle like everything he does he
tries to explicate a little bit more so
think about this think about how you try
and determine if something was real if
it really is the case so let's say
you're interested in Susan and you're
talking to your friend Tom and Tom and
Susan and yourself you're at a party the
previous night and Tom tells you Oh
Susan I think Susan really likes you now
this is important to you because you
really like Susan you'd really like it
if Susan liked you
this would be a good thing
and but you don't want to leap into this
because your heart has been broken
before and you've acted foolishly and
impulsively so you want to make sure so
you say wait wait come on Tom
I saw you last night you were really
hammered like you were drunk then I
don't believe you and this is Tom says
no no no no I heard this way before I
was drunk I heard this at the beginning
I heard Susan say this at the beginning
when you say come on Tom there was so
many people was so noisy how can you be
sure and Tom says no no this was in the
kitchen Susan was in the kitchen when I
heard her say it wasn't that noisy there
and then you say I don't know and then
Tom says yeah but Andrew and you know
Jane also heard Susan say that and you
go oh wow I think Susan likes me so you
do these three tests you make sure that
you're the relevant organ of cognition
right your your attention right your
memory your brain was functioning
normally yes it is it's functioning
normally okay so I was sober you make
sure that the environment isn't creating
distorting conditions too much noise
right no no it's an optimal environment
so let's do this or again operating
optimally environment optimal or really
good and then I look for did other
people experience it inter subjective
agreement so this is what you do right
you write you very carefully try to get
your mind into an optimal state you make
sure the medium is the best right and
you do a lot of intersubjective
discussion to make sure that you're in
agreement with other people so you do
really deep philosophy you argue and
discuss you to you in act like the
Socratic thing you really train your
mind you get the appropriate conditions
you do all this you get you come to some
agreement and then once you get there
you can have significant confidence that
you're in conformity with reality that
the
pattern that's in your mind is the
pattern that's in the world now I point
this out to you not because I want to
say that Aristotle's ultimately right
because we're gonna see how that way of
doing things was challenged but I want
to point out to you how you still do it
now there's something deeply plausible
and practical in what Aristotle saying
this is how you on a day-to-day basis
try to make sure that you're in touch
with things so how are things what is
the structural functional pattern of the
world when I'm making sense of things
so Aristotle is also as I said
considered you know a foundational
figure in science in fact for the for
literally millennia right a millennia he
he is basically identical to science
knowing Aristotle's to know science he's
building upon all the pre-socratic
philosophers before him but basically he
what he says is okay how is the world
organized what is the structure of
reality well how does it look to us what
can we all agree on okay so we're all
stone-cold sober clear day we can all
talk we can agree and this is when that
no try to get back to Aristotle's time
this is how things seem to all of us
we're at the center okay and that's been
this is something we're going to come
back to because that's how your
perceptual cognitive system seems to
operate you're at the center things are
moving around us
so he has a geocentric worldview the
earth is at the center well why do
things move like why are things moving
so he has the idea again that things
move for the same reason you do remember
if they'll ease talked about that the
magnet is moving you're moving look look
when I lift on this and it's pushing
against me that feels no different to me
then when some a person is pushing on me
it feels like the table is moving itself
against me again don't concentrate on
whether or not this is true concentrate
on how much sense it makes so when I
move the pan away from the earth it
looks like it moves itself to get back
there which looks exactly like I want to
be over there and I move myself there
because I'm separated from where I want
to be so Aristotle's idea is that
everything right is made up of elements
basic elements like earth water air and
fire things that have a lot of earth in
them like this marker want to be where
earth naturally is earth is at the
center so if you as you move things away
from the earth things fall back towards
it water is going to be on the surface
fire moves up and air is above so notice
when I when I burn some wood how much
sense this makes of it because when I
burn the wood the fire comes up the
water that's evaporated spreads out is
condensation right and then the ash the
earthen part falls down so for Aristotle
the earth is at the center and this is
the thing everything is moving by a
process of natural motion everything has
an internal drive just like you
everything is trying to get where
it belongs everything has a natural
place so and this is very important
everything is moving on purpose
everything is trying to get where it
belongs
so notice how meaningful this view of
things is everything is moving just like
you you're doing things to get where you
belong and where you are where you
belong
then that's right the fulfillment of
your goals that's what makes your life
meaningful so all of these things the
whole everything in this cosmos we
remember we talked about that we talked
about Pythagoras a beautiful order
everything in this cosmos is moving
purposefully meaningfully now you I mean
it's important to you that you resist
the temptation here to be smug and say
wow what is silly idea I mean thinking
the Earth's at the center isn't he a
Luddite right
no because the idea that the earth is
not at the center that the idea that the
earth is rotating was no one in the
ancient world it's known by Aristarchus
for example the problem with this view
is that there are there were great
counter arguments about it look if the
earth is rotating all right and you
write you think the earth is rotating
that means if I'm on the earth and it's
rotating and I drop an object right as
the object is dropping I'm moving
forward with rotation I end up here and
the object drop should then end up
behind me because as I let go of it I'm
moving on the earth that's rotating and
it should fall behind me so let's do it
let's run the experiment oh it doesn't
fall behind me see what you need to
realize is that until you also have an
idea of something like universal
gravitation and other ideas like
inertial motion the idea that the earth
is rotating actually doesn't make good
sense of the phenomena if it's rotating
why am I not feeling a breeze on my face
constantly when I face
one way rather than the other so there
was all kinds of arguments so Aristotle
has a sense that we can still appreciate
he has a sense of well this is how we
get in contact with reality and this is
how this is the pattern that is making
sense to me
and what I mean by that is even though
you and I are post Descartes post Newton
right and we know and we're post right
Copernicus we still move around the
earth as if it's at the center and that
right the earth isn't moving and that
objects fall directly down etc etc
so given that given the tremendous
plausibility of Aristotle's proposal you
can now put these two sides together
you've got the geocentric right world
and by world I don't just mean the earth
I mean the cosmos right with the earth
at the center and everything moved by
natural motion and then what we have
over here is we have the conformity
Theory from knowing and I'm going to
hyphenate these words because these are
not separate for this theory the way
they are for us knowing being it's a way
of being and a way of knowing and what I
want you to see is how much they
mutually support each other this is very
plausible that's why I told you that
whole story about the person who knows
how to make the chair and once you admit
that this is plausible and you use
Aristotle's test it supports this view
of things because if we're in if the
conformity theory is right and I do all
of this rational reflection this is the
intelligible pattern that I see now I
can look at this and say this is the
intelligible pattern and it's plausible
that makes sense of so many things and
that view that view of the world then
lends evidence that I am in fact in
conformity with reality it provides
evidence for the conformity theory and
notice these two things are now mutually
supporting each other that's how you get
a worldview right you have an account of
the world and you have an account of how
you know the world that mutually support
each other in very strong bonds of
plausibility now that that sets
something out for us
notice that there is now a deep
connection that a deep bonding as I say
between your understanding of your
understanding and your understanding of
the world so let's try and put this
together this is a view of the world
that totally makes sense of your actions
this is a world organized according to
like purpose things are moving on
purpose things are trying to get where
they belong the structure of the world
is very very similar to the structure of
your right did the meaningful structure
of your experience so this view
basically if you'll allow me a term that
I've crafted with Christopher master
Pietro and Phillip miss Vicky in our
book this Mike basically makes the
external world an arena an arena is a
place that's organized such that you
know how you can act in it it makes
sense to you you know where things
belong what actions are appropriate how
to measure and calibrate your
performance and I don't mean just your
physical performance also your
intellectual performance if you are a
football right player and you go into a
football arena things are organized in
such a way that you know intimately how
to be involved and how to interact you
can conform listen to my language you
can conform to that situation very
powerfully right this right is how you
become an agent to be an agent is right
to be capable of pursuing your goals
it's to be able to organize your
cognition and your behavior so that your
actions fit the situation they fit the
environment so what you have when you
have a worldview is you've got this
agent and arena coupling Aristotle is
explaining to you how you become an
agent how you know and structure
yourself to act
accordingly and then he's telling you
how the world is right organized cosmos
so that you can meaningfully interact
within it and these two right there's a
process here of Co identification the
identity of this is determined by and
determines the identity of this and the
identity of this is determined by and
determines this so the professional
football player is a particular kind of
agent they're a football player and they
go into an arena the arena allows them
to be a football player it affords them
then being a football player makes sense
of why this part of the world is
structured the way it is they Co
identify the identity as an arena and
the identity is the agent Co identified
now this is important we need to stop
here and be a little bit bit more take a
little bit more care because I want to
introduce an idea to you this Co
identification because this is something
you're doing all the time right you're
always assuming an identity I'm doing it
now I'm assuming the identity of someone
giving a talk and I'm assigning an
identity to everything around me
everything is right has the meaning of
how its facilitating and affording my
talk and even you as the audience have
been assigned a particular identity
I'm always assigning an arena and
assuming agency and they are Co defining
together that that is an existential
mode to use a term this process by which
you are Co identifying agency and arena
so that they fit together and make sense
of each other and you get a coherent and
functioning worldview that's your
existential mode and of course it
matters really greatly to you we're
going to come back to this later this is
an idea from clifford geertz
it was an idea that he used to talk
about religion in general and we'll see
about that later but what I want to
point out because a similar idea was
also proposed by other people like
Boober and by Fromm and although they
also have said there were important
connections to religion they didn't they
didn't identify just with religion these
existential modes they are meta meaning
relations what does that mean if you do
not have the agent arena relationship
then none of your particular actions
have meaning if I put the tennis player
into the football arena it's absurd it
doesn't make any sense things aren't
right the tennis player can do well all
they want and it doesn't make any sense
the environment is what what's going on
that's absurd notice that word we're
gonna come back to it unless the
coupling works your individual odd
actions and projects of meaning don't
work
it's a meta meaning system because this
mode makes possible an entire system of
meanings it means right that the
throwing the ball has a meaning for the
football player right the catching the
ball the running here all of these
different things take on their meaning
because an agent arena relationship has
been set up you're doing it right now
you have right you have assumed a
particular identity you've assigned an
identity to me and within that X
attentional mode everything you're doing
and I'm doing take on whatever meaning
they have this is very very important
this idea of your existential mode being
a meta meeting relationship and that
what it does is it's an instance a
particular way of enacting this
worldview relationship Gertz
garrets calls this this thing we're
seeing in Aristotle
the way you get this mutual support
mutual intelligibility not as a static
relation but it's an unfolding process
he calls this worldview attunement so
one of the things that's really
important to you
right is that your existential mode the
way in which you are creating Co
identifications of agent agent and arena
actually fit into a process of worldview
attunement if you don't have a worldview
with worldview attunement then
ultimately you can't get this going you
will be like the tennis player trying to
play tennis in the football arena you
will start to experience your existence
as absurd it won't make any sense to you
and that matters right because one of
the ways in which the meaning crisis
expresses itself is when people saying
that they feel existence is absurd
people often express the opposite of
absurdity when they articulate that they
have a meta meaning existential mode
that affords a functioning worldview
attunement which gives them ways in
which they are co-creating with the
world the agent arena relationship so
notice what this is done what
Aristotle's done here that's so powerful
he's given us a way a language of
articulating a connection between what
we often don't see a deep connection
between our projects of trying to
intellectually understand the world and
our existential projects of trying to
feel like we fit in and belong in a
meaningful fashion that's what's so
beautiful about Aristotle he's given an
integrated account of both of these and
for many of us today we don't find that
clear consonant connection we have a
scientific worldview a view of how
things are how we understand things
given our science but one of the most
common complaints of that worldview is
it gives us no existential guidance it
doesn't tell us how to make our lives
meaningful
I wanted to propose to you a term for
talking about this set of things where
you have a worldview that is
demonstrating on an ongoing reliable
fashion worldview attunement and so that
it is constantly affording existential
modes in which agent arena relationships
are unfolding and blossoming naturally
so that the person is not experiencing
absurdity and so the person is
constantly experiencing a deep
connectedness
between their intellectual projects of
making sense of the world and their
existential projects of finding meaning
and belonging and fitness within it I'm
going to call that a neurological order
Noma logical order comes from No Mas
right law this is what makes the
universe law like not in the not just in
our current sense of scientific law but
in the sense that it's a cosmos for us
it's a cosmos in which there's deep
convergence and consonant between our
best attempts to scientifically explain
the world and our deepest endeavors to
existentially dwell within it when we
have that when we have those two
together we have a normal logical order
as the Noma logical order breaks down of
course then we start to confront
absurdity and we start to lose a sense
of how we fit in and how we belong so
part of what we can take from part of
how we can understand the actual age
heritage part of the way we can
understand what it's telling us about
meaning it's this idea of a Noma logical
order to have a meaningful life is to
have a life that is situated within a
Noma logical order and attuned worldview
that is reliably generating existential
modes that are consonant with our best
scientific understanding so I want to
pause now in the discussion of the
actual age in Greece and in ancient
Israel we will return to ancient Israel
after we complete our survey of the
axial age but I'd now like to move to
another place that is an important locus
of the axial revolution that is having a
significant impact on us today this is
something that I mentioned earlier on in
this series we're in the midst of what's
been called the mindfulness revolution
one of the ways in which people are
responding to the meaning crisis is by
in an intense interest both
existentially and personally and
scientifically in the phenomena of
mindfulness that somehow mindfulness in
the cultivate
so mindfulness is a way of retrieving
the project of cultivating wisdom and
self transcendence and somehow deepening
the meaning that we are finding in our
lives and of course when I talk about
mindfulness and mentioned things like
meditation and contemplation our
thoughts should turn of course to India
and the axial revolution that was taking
there and the particular form that
revolution took that is impacting the
West and the meaning crisis as I
mentioned at the beginning of this
series was in the generation of Buddhism
and the set of practices around it now
this is a very complex topic when I'm
not gonna we're not gonna do it all at
once right now it's gonna unfold as we
move through this series but I want to
talk about the axial revolution in India
I want to talk about mindfulness and I
want to talk about what what it is as a
psycho technology house associated with
wisdom and self transcendence and I want
to begin the discussion of the nature of
enlightenment and why enlightenment is
largely a project of trying to deal with
threats of meaning in one's life so just
the way I mean it's only analogous in
this way so don't draw too much but in
the way Socrates was the embodiment of
the axial revolution in ancient Greece I
think you can see Siddhartha Gautama as
the embodiment of the axial revolution
in India as I mentioned of course the
axial revolution is being driven there
by similar kinds of processes there's
there's coin edge and there's alphabetic
literacy and other things like this
developing but there's specific psycho
technologies that seem to have come to
the fore and the reasons for that are
very complex I would recommend taking
look at Karen Armstrong's book the great
transformation of because she tries to
tease out why did psycho technologies a
mindfulness become so prominent in
ancient India and and I'm not going to
go into that history but she gives a
fairly coherent explanation about sort
of historical cultural factors that
generated it what I wanted to
is start talking about siddhartha as a
way of again giving us a doorway into
the axial revolution in India so
Siddhartha right it's in it's all of
these figures right Socrates and
Siddharth later when we talk about Jesus
but I'm I mean trying to talk about well
who
what's the historical this is there's a
quixotic endeavor trying to somehow peel
away and separate them from their legacy
is largely a project that you can only
pursue to a certain degree so I cannot
and I I don't think anybody can say with
certainty this is what the historical
said hearted was doing and I'm not going
to endeavor to try and separate the myth
and I told you how I use the word myth
from the his the history I'm gonna let
them still remain seamlessly together
because that's precisely how they are
making an impact on the West so the
story goes like this
state hearta what when Siddhartha was
born his father had all of the sages and
wise men come to his birth and it was
prophesized foretold in sort of an
oracle fashion that the boy had one of
two possible futures one is he would be
a great king or the other was he would
enter religious life and be a really
important religious figure the king
being what all Kings are chose the
former he wanted his son of course to be
a great king and he decided in order to
do this he would try and remove all of
the things that might trigger sit harder
from pursuing a religious life a life
devoted to the ideals of the actual
revolution so what do you do if you do
not want someone to go through the
actual revolution while you try and give
them all the benefits of the pre axial
world you try and give them all the
benefits of power and prosperity so the
story goes that the King rigged things
so that said harden never saw anything
distressing he was always surrounded by
beautiful women
correct amount of food everything that
he wanted and we can sort of just take
that as it is or we can step back and do
something that you should always do with
things that have a methodological
component remember myths are not
irrelevant stories about the past
they're attempts to get you to engage
right now with perennial ongoing
patterns so I want to I want to talk
about what the palace represents now a
good way of getting at this right is
Marcus Aurelius his famous quote that
and this is how it goes it is possible
to be happy even in a palace that tells
you how much the axial revolution right
is right
antithetical to Palace life now a way of
getting that is to get a notion which
we're going to come back to later when
we talk about stomachs like Marcus
Aurelius drawn from Fromm and this goes
to this idea that I just explained to
you existential mode that the palace
represents a particular existential mode
it's a mythological way of trying to get
you to right experience not just to
think about but activate in your memory
a particular existential mode all right
so we're talking about the palace
because we're talking about Siddhartha
living in the palace what does this
represent Fromm talks about two
different existential modes that we all
face again perennial patterns they're
organized around two different kinds of
needs they're having needs and being
needs so of course this mode is called
the having mode it's an existential mode
it's a way in which you make sense of
the world and make sense of yourself in
this process of Co identification this
is the being mode okay so having needs
are needs that are met by having
something these are needs that are met
by categorizing things efficiently
controlling them effectively
so my understanding of thing is
categorical I put it in the correct
category here's a cop like an idea it's
like all the other cops it functions
like another cop I can replace it with a
cop if this coin gets damaged it really
improves my ability to control things I
have this categorical way of
representing it and it's oriented
towards me getting very effective
efficient control over things because I
need to have water I need to actually
consume it if I don't I die so having
being able to category categorize my
world manipulate it and control it so I
get water is very important that means I
relate to things at in what Buber who I
also mentioned called an i8 fashion and
it is an identity something has when it
belongs to a category and so what I'm
mostly relying on here is my
intelligence which is my ability to
control and manipulate things right to
achieve solving my problems now there's
nothing wrong with the having mode you
need to have water you need to have food
you need to have oxygen the being mode
is different the being needs are not met
by having something they're met by
becoming something so for example you
need to become mature or Aristotle might
say you need to become virtuous it's not
meant by having something it's met by
becoming developing these are
developmental needs according to Fromm
because of that these are needs that
have to do with write a particular kind
of meaning that you're creating for your
existence and so you're not relating to
things
Coralie but as Collingwood for example
say relating to them expressively let me
show you what I mean with a concrete
example and we're going to come back to
these kinds of examples when we talk
again about the connections between love
and Anna gaga
okay when you're in love with somebody
right you are engaged right in a being
need you're trying to if it's if it's
love as opposed to just desire or sex
you're trying to become something and
you're trying to afford them becoming
something you're trying to meet your
needs of meaning and right maturity
growth and development that's why we
pursue love right as a pope you know and
I'm not sick I'm not approved sometimes
you just want to have sex with people
that's not what I'm talking about I'm
talking about when you have said no what
I want here is love okay now notice that
so I'm in love with this amazing woman
Sarah okay and I'm in this relationship
with her this relationship of mutual
development mutual realization fact that
that's a that's a great way of thinking
about love love is this process like an
agog a of reciprocal realization I don't
think of Canada of Sarek categorically
remember how I thought of the cup this
is a good cup because it reminds me of
all the other cups that I've ever seen
and I know how to replace this if this
one's damaged and I can control and
manipulate it if I was to say to Sarah
you know why I'm with you because you
remind me of every other woman I've been
with been with and I could easily
replace you if I lose you and I know how
to control and manipulate you I have not
made this relationship better I pretty
much just destroyed it okay because I
don't interact with Sarah from the
having mode I don't understand her
expressively I'm not trying to control
and manipulate I'm trying to engage in a
process of reciprocal realization we're
going to talk a lot about this when we
talk about gnosis so my relationship
I don't assume right controller
manipulator of an it thing I have an eye
though relationship with Sarah
right and here I'm not trying to solve
problems and using my reason because I'm
not about trying to get rid of my
problems I'm trying to make meaning to
live in the palace is to try and live
everything from the having mode see
froms it's not that this is good and
this is bad froms point is we get mixed
up we try to satisfy our being needs
within the having mode we suffer from
modal confusion think about how much our
culture is organized around this because
it serves a lot of market interests if I
can confuse you if I can get you to try
and pursue your being needs within the
having mode you need to be mature here's
a car you can have you need to be in
love there's lots of sex you can have
notice how we talk about making love but
having sex
modal confusion deep existential
confusion and what happens when you're
morally confused right is but your need
for maturity isn't being met by having
the car you need for love is not being
met by having sex so you pursue it more
by more cars purchase more sex the more
right the more the corporate world the
market world can get you to try to
pursue your being needs from the having
mode the more they can induce modal
confusion in you the more they can sell
to you being in the palace is a myth in
the sense that I'm trying to teach you
for modal confusion it's a myth of
trying to lead your entire life within
the having mode but here's the thing
because the story continues siddharta
leaves the palace
and he leaves the palace in a way that
teaches us something about overcoming
modal confusion and in our next time
together we're gonna look at how
Siddhartha left the palace and we're
gonna look about we're gonna look at
what does mindfulness have to do with
that and what does all of this have to
do with wisdom and enlightenment thank
you very much for your time
[Music]
you
[Music]