[Music]
[Applause]
what're nootropics generally means a
chemical that increases some aspect of
cognitive function maybe its focus or
memory or creativity or something but
increases some aspect of cognitive
function beyond your normal healthy
baseline without meaningful side-effects
[Music]
human OS learn master achieve cognitive
enhancement that is the subject of
today's show the desire to boost our
mental abilities is nothing new yet the
field of nootropics and cognitive
enhancers is really growing rapidly I
heard a statistic on my friend Josh
trends podcast wellness Force radio that
this subject is now one of the top 10
fastest growing health trends in the
world and it's not a surprise our world
is filled with cognitive work we are no
longer tilling fields or hunting and
gathering
we're in meeting rooms we're giving
presentations we're typing code etc etc
we are required to spend hours upon
hours focusing and performing well
mentally while the same time being
bombarded with interruptions if you're
dubious at all that society wants the
semi equivalent of brain steroids go
back and listen to my show with
Professor Stephen Hinshaw who is the
vice chair of psychiatry at UCSF on the
remarkable rise of off-label usage of
stimulant smart drugs like ritalin and
adderal now we have over-the-counter
substances that are claiming to not only
be able to enhance cognition but also be
able to keep the brain healthy as we age
oftentimes these cognitive enhancers are
provided in what's called a stack which
theoretically means several
complementary compounds that are
combined for synergistic effect today my
guest is Daniel Martin Berger who is the
head of product at neural hacker
collective an organization that is
dedicated to optimizing cognition and
human betterment in the show we
discussed the product qualia although
Daniel and I are talking about ways we
can work together since we have
overlapping object
and perspectives on how to make the
world a better place I have no financial
relationship with the company at the
time of the recording but I do have a
favorable opinion about the product I
just want to let you know that I
received no financial remuneration from
you purchasing the product because of
our discussion and with that I bring you
my discussion with Daniel Daniels Martin
Berger welcome to human OS radio Leiden
be here thanks for having me
to begin I'm interested to know more
about you what were the conditions under
which you developed your mind as a young
person and how do you continue to do
that
even today fun question I think one of
the key defining things for me was I was
home-schooled throughout most of my
childhood and the reason for it was my
parents were educational philosophers
theorists and they had the idea that if
kids were given pretty much no
curriculum but exposed to as many things
as possible and then their interests
were facilitated that they would kind of
blossom in the unique way that they were
most innately suited to and so it was an
educational theory experiment and so I
had no curriculum at all never did hand
writing spelling state capitals and it
happens to be those three are good
examples of things that I never learned
well spell-checking later taught me how
to spell and make the fact that my
handwriting is illegible tolerable okay
and don't have state capitals but I was
fascinated by all of the sciences I'm
fascinated by all the philosophic
disciplines and so I got to start
working in understanding modern physics
as a little bitty kid and eastern and
western schools of philosophy and etc
and one of the other cool things was not
having subject divisions I didn't know
there were subject divisions so there
was no arbitrary break between physics
and chemistry or chemistry and biology
or any of the disciplines so we'd be as
a little kid it asked a question like
why is the sky blue and part of that
answer has to do with the physics of
diffraction and the molecule size the
upper atmosphere that means you have to
understand Sun and stars and solar
formation and atmospheric chemistry and
how diffraction works and the physics of
light waves and the actual molecules in
the other atmosphere but it also means
you have to understand how a retina work
and what's objective blue is and what is
the difference between subjective blue
and object of blue and then the hard
problem of neuroscience and like all of
that comes into her the answer that well
mm-hmm almost everything was a movement
between various Sciences and then
getting into the deep philosophy the
ground of the sciences or the hard
problems were and that led to a
interdisciplinary and system orientation
to understanding the nature of reality
that we live in and of course for me it
was always implicitly because
understanding early on evolutionary
theory universe was going somewhere and
it was organizing itself towards more
orderly complexity and with that more
complexity new emergent properties with
more evolved physiologies there were new
capacities of consciousness and so it's
clear that something like we have a role
to serve in participating with that
evolutionary impulse of universe as the
one creature here that we know has the
abstraction capacity with our certain
structures of prefrontal cortex to
understand evolution itself right to not
just be a part of the grand design but
be able to think about the whole thing
the direction of evolution of the
principles of it do we really have the
meaningful capacity to consciously
participate with it and looked like the
evolutionary impulse is evolving
everything all of universe so my
interest early was how do I understand
universe how do I understand where it's
going and how to help participate with
evolution of everything so that also
looked like activism in terms of how to
actually support the evolution of
quality of life for all sentient things
yeah and one thing I'll add because it's
so important for people to know is that
for the most part of the kids ask
questions that they're really interested
in like why is the sky blue and we don't
really understand the answer we don't
facilitate the interests well and then
we try to force them to be interested in
or at least do that they're really
not interested in at all and the process
of forcing them to do uninteresting
things while not the facilitating
interest is what breaks people's
interest in life and then you have to
extrinsic ly motivate them with money or
reward or whatever and otherwise they
want to chill and watch TV or play video
games but if intrinsic fascination with
life gets fed and
silat ated than they are innately and
ongoingly
highly agentic by nature your background
is particularly interesting to me we are
seriously considering homeschooling our
four-year-old boy hearing you explain
your background is motivating to me and
that this is indeed a good course to
pursue I was a solid student growing up
but I became a much better student later
when I found myself in learning
environments where I had more freedom to
do things like for example spend long
periods of time on a subject versus
changing my focus every 50 minutes like
you do at most schools so for me
changing class that frequently was
really disruptive I'm more of a type of
a learner where I like to go deep I
built momentum and then I want to stick
with a subject for a while and then also
whatever typically has my attention has
all of it so I would do very well in
some classes and just okay and others
also the more I advanced my own
education I had the freedom to learn
more about how I learned and if I knew
some of these things earlier in life my
ability to advance my own knowledge with
the effort I was putting in I think
would have been greatly accelerated so
for my boy Desmond I think about how to
create this custom learning experience
that adaptively contours to his
interests a way to always harness that
natural curiosity that we have as
children and to empower that love of
learning by all means necessary so it's
really nice to hear about your
experience and that you look back on it
with appreciation I think about this
technologic unemployment is going to in
something like 30 percent of all jobs in
the next 15 years mm-hmm it's going to
start with a lot of labour jobs but it's
going to move with a eye to a lot of non
labor jobs when we think about the
history of education if a kid was gonna
grow up and take over the family
business
or the family work whatever that was so
they had to kind of learn how to do
those things from a skill location point
of view or then it became more
infrastructure alized and they were
going to just get some job within
infrastructure within my pre-cana me
they had to be prepared for the
workforce the workforce is gonna get
progressively more and more automated by
the time that people who are kids now
will be moving into what we would have
called the workforce previously mm-hmm
and what will be unique is things that
are uniquely human and so if there are
things that robot
can learn to do well in AI can learn to
do well and obviously there's a deep
question around strong AI but let's just
take strong AI off announce the things
that are uniquely human are going to be
the only things that really adaptive for
few minutes to do they also happen to be
the things that are most fascinating and
fun and intrinsically rewarding for
humans to do so this has always been a
relevant conversation yeah but it is
living in a way that it never has been
right so these are some big global
issues that we are facing how it's all
going to play out is you have to be told
but what I'm hearing is that the need to
be able to maximize some of our innate
human capabilities is of paramount
importance for the next generation and
even for people that are going to go
through this transition when you think
about a cognitive enhancer which is
ostensibly at the topic of today you
think about something that might make
you focus better remember more be able
to task switch better but if you remove
a layer from there and you think this is
far more important for overall humanity
it's for us to be able to figure out
ways to optimize our minds ability to
interact with this world and to be our
very best on a consistent basis so what
was the first experience that you had
that motivated you to explore the space
I've been interested in human potential
development and what the space of
possibility was and enhancement
capabilities my whole life whether we're
talking about meditation and
psychotherapy personal development or
physiology brain chemistry and so as far
as chemistry goes an interest in natural
medicine and healthcare biohacking
neural hacking EEG neurofeedback these
are just always kind of hobbies and
insofar as the topics that I was really
committed to for the world required
high-level cognitive capacity
continuously supporting that was an
important topic I got more acutely
involved when I actually was diagnosed
with some kind of mysterious autoimmune
diseases that were very rapid onset and
it didn't have adequate cures in the
allopathic or the holistic alternative
worlds and it had a shitty prognosis and
other physical pain disability kinds of
symptomology they also had decreased
cognitive and would symptomology which
was the center of abilities that didn't
work
you lose and so I knew that if I was
going to be able to fix these issues
that didn't have adequate solutions I
was gonna have to figure it out and I
knew that was going to take cognate
bandwidth so my first focus
strategically was used the bandwidth
that I have is on increasing cognitive
bandwidth then use that to figure out
the underlying pathophysiology etc
what's going on and corrected and then
get back to work and so that led to a
very deep dive in the whole topic of
cognitive chemistry and this was Rob's
brain nutrients at robux understanding
neurotransmission optimization etc so as
I was diving deep into that space and
looking at what's been done well and
we're there pretty significant polls one
of the big holes that I'm always wanting
to look at is the topic of synthesis
where do we have a lot of knowledge of
acetylcholine goal or dopamine role or
glutamate role or neurotrophins role but
not the complex relationship between
those or even between different aspects
of the regulatory system on any of them
and so looking at how do we support many
complex systems that are self-regulating
to have increased regulatory capacity
became the deep question for me so
synthesis there that led to me doing
work on myself where I was able to
achieve increased cognitive bandwidth to
beyond what my previous healthy baseline
had been even while I had
pathophysiology going on and then was
able to figure out underlying cause what
was going on for me corrective reverse
autoimmune antibodies that whole fun
thing that led to doing that with quite
a few other people that had various
forms of disease that didn't have
adequate solution and clinical settings
and to formalizing a model of how health
aging illness and reversal of illness
could work there was a complex systems
informed model for medicine and
well-being and so that really was a lot
of things that that would pertain to but
the psycho neuropharmacology the
cognitive psychological stuff was really
essential because almost everyone who is
dealing with complex illness has some
brain fog cognitive effects and has some
emotion affected by hearing that they've
got incurable prognosis and they have to
have their psyche and their cognition in
the right place to do everything that it
takes to get better right so focusing on
that first became a central thing so I
would say that's where I went from
being a area of general interest to a
area of central deep-dive mm-hmm yeah so
what I'm hearing is there was a need
that arose for you personally that
fostered a deep dive to understand the
overall system with which any possible
solution would be working over your
health aging etc from there then you
wanted to understand not only how we
might be able to utilize some sort of
exogenous chemical to amplify a process
but rather how can we help make the
entire mind that is doing the thinking
stronger and better over time it seemed
like that was the goal yes and then
you've been working to solve that yeah
the last thing that you said I think is
absolutely central to what our goal as
an organization is is that when we think
of psychopharmacology as a field or
really just pharmacology as a field
there are exceptions and they don't mean
to over generalize but generally there
is less focus on fundamental or
causation and especially if it is
multifactorial right like we focus on
cause and we're usually quite good in
western medicine if it's an acute cause
right injury or acute infection or acute
poisoning is quite obvious right and so
then you reverse that acute cause but if
the cause is time-delayed
so it's hard to find out what it was or
it's multifactorial there are multiple
things that are involved independently
or multiple sequence steps there's a
causal cascade it's hard to actually
understand what it is and so we'll
cluster symptoms into disease names but
if we look at what was the path of the
deviation from homeostasis that led to
this person's MS or cancer or rheumatism
a hundred different MSS have a hundred
different paths of ideologies right and
there are commonalities and then but
this is why personalized medicine is so
critical so generally given the
understanding cause has been difficult
the focus has largely not been on what's
actually in balance and how do we
correct it because it's not a small
number of things right it's usually a
large number of things right the focus
has largely been is there some kind of
exhaustion ischemic or treatment that we
can give that will limit the symptom
ology or some aspect of pathogenesis and
we've that's better than not doing
anything but we can take the next step
in our science etc is good enough to
take the next step into our
focuses rather than give some exogenous
external override to an internal
regulatory system that is radically
complex and intelligent and brilliant
let's work to understand what's actually
wrong with the regulatory systems or
deficient in them and up regulate the
regulatory capacity of the system so
it's fundamentally more adaptive more
resilient etc I've done research in the
condition of narcolepsy for over 10
years now gosh maybe 15 and I have an
example that's relevant to what we're
talking about narcoleptics are missing a
protein in their brain called hypocretin
one result of that pathology is
excessive daytime sleepiness which is
what usually is synonymous with the word
narcolepsy for most people but another
symptom is called cataplexy which is the
loss of muscle tone or partial paralysis
when somebody experiences emotion
usually so Daniel you tell me a joke and
I experienced weakness in my limbs and
in fact it might be where the term weak
from laughter comes from narcoleptics
also experience depression with greater
frequency than the rest of the
population so early on in the treatment
of this condition narcoleptics were
given a class of drugs called tricyclic
antidepressants turns out that this
medication also improves patient's
cataplexy which was totally
serendipitous but the medication is not
directly confronting the cause of
narcolepsy but rather it is ameliorating
one of the symptoms but only temporarily
so here's the problem tricyclics do
reduce cataplectic attacks in these
patients but the medication loses its
potency over time over the course of
several months patient will build up
tolerance to the drug and they will take
what's called the drug holiday to allow
the receptors to resend ties to the
medication and in this scenario however
when a patient goes off of the drug they
are essentially paralyzed for days at a
time
and where they're having up to 60
cataplectic attacks per day so they
basically have to stay in bed until the
brain resented eise's and readjusts in
some conditions that's the best we can
do but it does highlight how when we try
to exhaustively override as you say a
system in the brain usually we only
provide a short-term gain but there's
always a long-term price to pay so let's
take narcolepsy for instance what is the
cause of narcolepsy well it probably has
quite a few distinct causes many of
which can be happening
or not in any particular situation right
so can someone have sleep issues that
are causing narcoleptic lights symptoms
sure can they have sleep issues from
structural pain somewhere in their body
or from waking up in the night to
urinate too much nocturia
or from apnea or from head injury that
caused firing pattern injuries or from
got brain access disorders or from
toxicity or methylation disorders or
there's so many underlying mechanisms
that can lead into a particular set of
symptom ology that in order to really be
able to address it comprehensively our
approaches identify everything that has
statistical correlation that could be
causal even if it's not one for one
correlation because we're not looking at
one disease one cause we're looking at
multifactorial possibilities and then be
able to do differential diagnosis across
the entire causal phase space all the
things that could be involved to see
which ones actually are and then look at
treatment that is specific to pathways
rather than to symptom ology or disease
clusterings you're describing a very
sophisticated approach to address a
problem and the body is sufficiently
complex that if we really want to do
better with our health in the modern
world we need to be able to implement
this degree of sophistication in
diagnosis and treatment so I'd like to
Segway to using this sort of approach to
support optimized cognitive enhancement
let's start if you will by describing
first what is a nootropic substance for
our audience and then tell us about your
product qualia sure so quality is the
first product that released market we
have many other products in the
nutraceutical category that are in
various phases of R&D or testing and
will be released soon for various
different goals mostly in the upgrading
mind brain interface space so looking at
things like pain and sleep and anxiety
and etc quality is largely what people
would think of as a cognitive enhancer
but the focus that we have is not
adequately summarizing the work
cognitive so answering your first
question what are men tropics no tropic
is a kind of loosely defined term
there's ambiguity of definition but a
general means a chemical that increases
some aspect of cognitive function maybe
it's a focus or memory or creativity or
something but increases some aspect of
cognitive function beyond your normal
healthy baseline without meaningful side
effects so we're used to things that can
increase cognitive function back to
baseline if you had some kind of deficit
cognitive decline or whatever and we're
used to the idea of something that can
be enhanced beyond baseline but with
meaningfully negative side effects like
an pet amines that can increase focus so
the idea of no trophic was can we
understand some of the mechanisms that
cognition operates through neural
chemically and be able to support those
in ways that don't create meaningful
side effects or externalities the term
was coined with the development of a
chemical called piracetam that really
stirred out a whole new category of drug
research rasa thames and then empathy
and mostly they were a receptor site
modulate this for certain
neurotransmitters smart drugs is a
related but slightly different word
which generally means pharmaceuticals
that have some cognitive enhancing
potential these are usually either drugs
for narcolepsy or for a TD or for
certain kinds of depression or certain
kinds of neurodegeneration sins and so
we look at things like adderall
modafinil wellbutrin Deborah Nell and
these are things that can increase some
aspect of cognitive baseline but
oftentimes do have some meaningful
consequences so the risk reward is a
tricky thing to consider mm-hmm no topic
is also encountered distinction to the
term brain nutrient which is just
fundamental nutrients that we need
dietarily that many people don't get
enough upper optimum even though they're
not in a tube deficiency there and kind
of what we call subclinical deficiency
mmm-hmm and so this is the right fatty
acids the right amino acids minerals
vitamins that support normal brain
function those aren't gonna bring you
beyond
baseline because the body's going to
convert as many as it actually needs and
then not more but they will keep you at
optimum baseline or bring you back to it
if there's deficit so the oli actually
involves key brain nutrients that are
actually needed for the way some of the
nut tropic ingredients function there
ders or transplant actors and that are
chronically at suboptimal levels and
then include some things would be more
in the no trophic category some of which
are synthetic some of which are plant
derived I have been exploring the space
for about a year and a half and I have
to say that my own personal experience
with qualia has been very noticeable and
very impressive we've not discussed this
before so for the listener Daniel is
hearing my feedback for the first time
on air my experience with qualia has
been different I would say then with
other new topics I've tried first that
let me discuss energy when I take it I
feel a calm energy that lasts I don't
experience a drop off like you get with
caffeine
I don't feel overstimulated either so
that's really an ideal situation next my
focus is stronger with it I feel like I
can take it dip in the afternoon though
my energy doesn't necessarily flag so I
still I think it's just a sign that my
brain wants to take a break and go for a
walk so I try to attend to that but it's
still a different feeling than simply
feeling exhausted by work my ability to
tasks which is improved which is
actually a huge impact on my
productivity because in today's world
there's just a lot of task switching
that we all need to do with email and
notifications etc also I'm a
happy-go-lucky guy but I even wake up an
annoyingly good mood but I actually
experience in mood elevation with qualia
how did I notice well I caught myself
saying hi to random strangers more on
the street and generally just feeling
more outgoing and at first I was a
little worried about this because things
that can elevate mood also are subject
to a reduced mood later but I didn't
experience a dip and either the day of
taking it or during the weekends when I
don't take qualia and on that note you
instruct people to take the weekend off
from taking it which I do but again I
didn't feel the dip and energy focused
mood which indicates to me that we've
created really supports the health of
the entire system versus trying to
squeeze all the cognitive enhancement
out of one pathway leaving you feeling
depleted later and lastly I also noticed
that I have really good sleep when I'm
on qualia but even on the days where I
don't get what I consider to be a
adequate amount of time in bed so for me
that's about seven and a half hours I am
Leslie being more capable the next day
when I take qualia then I am when I
don't so there you go there's a live
testimonial for you
a couple things on that first two
disclaimers on our side one is not a
drug right and treat anything and it's
not prescribed for any diagnosed things
etc this is a supplement without FDA
classification or any drug stuff second
thing is that we are absolutely not
recommending it as a way to deal with
lack of sleep as far as general
lifestyle optimization goes exercise
matters Food Matters mindset matters
being outdoors matters there's a lot of
things that matter we probably put sleep
in its own category and everything else
in the second category in terms of just
how important it is for overall
physiology or there and one of the
things that we push heavily is to really
support people getting enough and good
quality sleep and that Galia works
radically better in well-rested people
than in people that are dealing with
some sleep deficit so just that public
service announcement yep and I agree
with that fully as a sleep researcher
there is nothing that's been identified
that replaces the need for sleep what I
would say is that I think I perform
better but that does not encourage me in
any way to then cheat sleep there is a
exponential benefit to getting better
sleep and then having quality in my
system then getting not enough sleep on
a regular basis if someone is getting
insufficient amounts of sleep acutely
rarely then we're gonna deal with that
much better than chronic sleep deficit
yeah
even if we're only talking about an hour
less than the person actually needs but
over a period of time I can really start
to have profound effects so yeah moving
on to the effects you experience I'm
delayed because you said things that
related to most of the goals we had in
the development of this particular
product so one thing that we said was
essential to our focus was how do we
regulate regulatory capacity rather than
up regulate particular state right
mm-hmm in a way then creates external
dependence and so we saw how many people
were using adderall not even on
prescription for appropriate purposes
but off-label as a way to get through
midterms or finals or their tech startup
or whatever and it's a dopamine agonist
but it is one it's going to be
flatlining your dopamine while you're on
it as opposed to how
your dopamine responsive your dopamine
regulary system responsive to what's
happening because we don't want the same
dopamine levels all the time right or
any neurotransmitter we want them to be
responsive so our state can shift to be
appropriate to the environment mm-hmm -
it's affecting dopamine without paying
attention to its relationship in healthy
cognitive function to acetylcholine than
to so many other transmitters and then
aspects of transmission and post
synaptic d1 d2 receptor sensitivity and
etc so you end up getting imbalances and
really key ratios and dynamics mm-hmm so
that we'll end up looking like with
increasing focus but not increasing key
aspects of memory or even decreasing
some of them or things decreasing things
like empathy or presence right and then
because you are getting in exitus
override to a key in chain chemical it
can create dependence and down
regulations yeah so our goal was the
exact opposite it was we know people
weren't going to use something if they
didn't feel it right away
it would just fit in category with all
their other vitamins and supplements so
it hasn't produce the kinds of immediate
effects that they were looking for but
we wanted it in a way that would not
produce long term down-regulation and
that would ideally produce meaningful
long-term upregulation well even in the
short-term having a much wider scope of
positive impact so can we increase focus
and concentration and short-term memory
and working memory long-term memory
creativity analysis synthesis all at the
same time and a lot of things that are
actually almost opposite functions like
the ability to stay very focused
independent of environmental noise but
then the ability to tasks which when one
needs a tasks which are opposite kinds
of functions but we really want them
both mm-hmm the ability to have very
high Drive but also to be able to let go
of it and be empathetically
interpersonally responsive when
necessary mm-hmm analytic and synthetic
and so our focus was can we do
comprehensive brain chemistry in
real-time that makes people that
up-regulates comprehensive capacities
that is also up regulating over the long
term and so those those are the things
that we saw and we have been quite happy
with what's happened so far though one
of their
component to my feedback is that as you
recommend you take qualia during the
week and then you don't take it on the
weekends I still feel very energetic I
feel my brain is actually even smarter
having taken it but not having to my
system on a weekend so that would
support what your end goal was here one
thing I'll say about that is the the
most addictive chemical that's in this
stack is caffeine and that's a chemical
whose addiction curve most people are
pretty familiar with and it's pretty
benign everyone metabolize is caffeine
differently and some people can drink it
daily for quite some time and then not
drink it and be fine other people will
get headaches and it does have a lot to
do with caffeine metabolism which is
genetic and other factors so what I'd
say is this has a relatively small
amount of caffeine we have 90 milligrams
but in the unique form where it's bound
to an antioxidant the antioxidant from
blueberry skins pterostilbene which has
it basically be slow release so it feels
like 30 milligrams when it kicks on
which is very very subtle but then it
lasts for quite some time so instead of
getting a spike in a drop off you get a
very subtle long-term effect yeah why
it's important to take in the morning
again because it will last longer for
people who are used to drinking a big
Starbucks where they've got 152
milligrams of caffeine the kicks in
right away they will still want to do
that they just might down regulate the
amount a little bit cuz this isn't gonna
match with that amount of caffeine but
on people's off days we tell people to
do five days on two days off qualia so
that they don't desensitize to any of
the chemicals that are here on their off
days if you can't get off caffeine
without headaches and you can still do
your coffee or monta or whatever it is
on your off days caffeine doesn't mean
cycle that's frequently those other
chemicals and so what we'd say is our
recommendation is that people should
cycle off caffeine if they use it on a
daily basis for about one week per
quarter hmm so their adenosine cycle
gets to reset the other dynamics that
are involved get reset and we do find
that people will start getting decreased
meaning for response from caffeine over
longer periods of time obviously there's
problems if people are using it again as
a replacement for sleep or to push
through too much fatigue when they
actually need rest
yeah if people are well-rested and
they're taking appropriate amounts of
caffeine and it can actually be an
efficiency increase our metabolically
for their system so we say two days off
of quality each week and one week off of
all stimulants per quarter I was never
much of a coffee drinker growing now
several years ago I started to drink it
and it became a part of my daily routine
rather fast
I enjoy my coffee with cream and I
recognized that I was adding hundreds of
calories to my to my day from my coffee
routine we know from an energy balance
perspective that the body doesn't
compensate for calories that are
consumed in liquid form as much as it
does when they're consumed in solid form
so now I get my morning boost without
those additional calories and honestly I
thought I was gonna have a hard time
giving up my coffee but that's not been
the case so this is another reason why I
enjoy qualia when I think bulletproof
coffee has become as popular as it has
this is a topic people are aware of
because they're putting a lot of
calories in the form of MCT or xct oil
in there you know and butter but if
someone is doing that and then eating
the same breakfast that kind of missing
the point right exactly most people are
doing that to then not eat breakfast for
quite some time or they need to down
regulate the caloric intake of the
breakfast
right yeah exactly I was doing the
latter what other tools do you use to
either monitor your cognitive
performance or to enhance it assessment
wise there are some apps that are fun
there's a quantified mind of them is a
publicly available app that anybody can
use inexpensive and then there are some
apps that you can pay just a little bit
for that have a lot of increased
capacities like Cambridge brain science
app there's actually two different
Cambridge associate cognitive
assessments Berkeley's greater good
science center has a positive psychology
assessment UPenn has some pretty great
non-symbolic experience assessments so
there's a number of good online
assessments we have a friend dr. Zachary
Stein who was in the education
department philosophy education at
Harvard and worked with Howard Gardner
on what was next beyond multiple lines
of intelligence and I would say is one
of the top theorists in developmental
psychology he and a group of friends
made a assessment system
electic a-- and to go to left or you can
see it which is probably in all that I'm
aware of the most advanced human
cognitive psychological assessment
system anywhere and it assesses for
things like how complex someone's
thinking is how abstract their thinking
is levels of moral reasoning a lot of
things beyond basic psychological and
cognitive assessment using really quite
deep and good and want models so those
are ones that we like in sport we're
actually working on synthesizing
elements from many of those into apps
that can provide better resources for
people in the futures one of our goals
so those are some things as far as
biometrics go I use a lot of blood
chemistry testing for mmm-hmm biometric
assessment and I'm a big fan of qejy
assessment I'm a big fan bio data and
psycho data and then the key becomes the
interpretive process to be able to put
it together and really understand what
it means to have to it the hard part
hard that's the part we're really
focused on is because the data
collection is getting better on Moore's
Law curve we're focused on how do you
actually play all the various parts
together where you're not just looking
at each thing in relationship to a
reference range but each thing in
relationship to all the other things to
get a center just a picture yeah and
then as far as other things for
cognitive performance enhancements so
things I do personally there's a lot of
cognitive chemistry that I play with and
so Walia is a base stack I still even
after years with it and I've been
formulated it and previous stacks that
led up to it I still use that private is
weak but for different goals if I'm
wanting to be in much more new idea
creative space or much more execution
oriented space there's some number of
hundreds of other chemicals that I'll
play with and so some of those chemicals
will come to market some will be things
that we educate people about but we
could do a whole talk on nootropic
chemistry sometimes yeah but also again
that's based on me knowing my actual bio
data and then optimizing towards that
with qualia since we weren't able to do
it in a personalized fashion to begin
with even though that's a goal for us in
the future is to be able to do
personalized chemistry at the scale the
infrastructure for that takes quite a
bit of development we focused on what
meets
center of bellcore chemistry best beyond
chemistry for me the other things that I
will do meditation every day is actually
one of the foundational ones so enough
sleep meditation everyday exercise that
is focused specifically and
obviously we get neurogenesis from
high-intensity exercise we get neurofen
upregulation the circulatory effect is
important etcetera but new skill
acquisition is huge for neurogenesis
more than anything else and new skill
acquisition in the form of learning new
languages learning new musical
instruments but it seems right now that
learning new motor functions sensory
coordination motor functions has the
deepest evolutionary biology on creating
new neural pathways and so the key is
whenever you try and do some new
activity like say you're gonna slackline
or you're gonna whatever that requires a
balance or coordination you just don't
have and it seems almost impossible your
your nervous system is trying to use the
much larger bandwidth of other than
conscious processing to handle it and
just conscious processing but that means
driving new neural circuits and then you
start to get a hang of it as soon as you
start to get a hang of it that effect
starts decreasing but if process you
actually increased the neural hardware
for automating learning and so then you
switch and do some other one and so
continuously focusing on things that are
really hard until they start to become
easy and then switching again that
hardware where you take new learning and
automate it then translates to new
cognitive and interpersonal and
psychologic things that you actually
hear rate of learning goes up yeah
there's many more but those are a few
examples there's an approach to physical
activity that i promote called in tune
training it stands for
integrative and opportunistic training
the goals of it are this to support a
sufficiency of physical activity in
one's life to reduce longer periods of
sedentary time so even if you're
somebody who's getting a good total
amount of physical activity think of the
weekend warrior concept where somebody
is getting all their physical activity
during the weekend but they're largely
sedentary during the week in tune helps
you fit smaller bursts of physical
activity into your days which makes it
easier to make it more regular one of
the objectives of the program is to
optimize mental performance and it does
it in several ways first there are brain
benefits to regular physical activity
second there are acute benefits to
getting physical activity within your
day especially when you're active
activity isn't too intense and third
since it instructs you to do some but
not a lot of physical activity day by
day you're left with a good energetic
reserve and what I
is that when I do workout in this manner
I wake up with a lot of energy every
single day so that is validating to the
concept and then lastly I also dance
during the day so I try to mix in more
complex movement patterns aside from
just squats and push-ups and this sort
of whole body coordination supports
cognitive strength and in support of
that idea as well I also have a
slackline outside which I use for
similar purposes I think there are
specific insights that can teach people
what is optimum more like what we just
talked about with the benefit of dancer
slack minor balance whatever but
everyone knows quite a bit that they
don't fully apply already hard to things
like sleep and exercise and lifestyle
that's one of the things I'm most
excited about the dear human operating
system as you continue is all the kind
of behavioral support dynamics you're
building in so that people can actually
start getting traction so yeah max I'm
delighted to see that in you awful well
last question for you what would you
tell somebody who has never taken
nootropics before but is curious to
drive them do some research mm-hmm
educate yourself that is gonna be a
general mo for me in any health
well-being performance related topic
mm-hm
one of the core kind of concepts means
that we hold really heavily here no
hacker is topic of empowered
responsibility and that the idea that
people take relatively little
responsibility for their longevity
health well-being and then trust other
people who don't know them that well to
tell them what to do and then have side
effects and get mattad yeah the doctors
for it is just lame it doesn't work
right no and so since you're the one
that lives in your body and your minds
you just gotta take full
responsibility for what you can do if
you don't understand how it works great
a hundred percent well said that's the
key thing that we would say is study
learn and then do experiments as they
seem appropriate to you that you feel
ready for and of course as part of your
study consult the appropriate people
that you want consult and you can go to
our website and research how we
formulated this or the formulation page
it has all the ingredients and all the
research on each ingredient pathway etc
and then you can try it and its intended
as a potent nootropic stack that is
relevant even for people to have a part
of the
experience with biohacking email hacking
but also is one that is very good in
entry fashion for many many people and
in general if you're new to it I would
say start with the lowest dose as
possible and if you don't notice there
the effect feels good but subtle move up
and kind of titrate your way up paying
attention to your experience
great advice one thing I'll say about
the experience some people have with
nootropics is you might not feel it
unless you're doing something that's
really challenging your mind if you take
it and you're just walking around the
day doing remedial tasks you might not
experience the benefit but if you are
doing something we have to concentrate
right code something that is challenging
your mental resources that's where you
might notice the effect one of plastic
places where people report like we
didn't anticipate this up front but it
made perfect sense afterwards was people
have reported in huge number ending
procrastination mm-hmm specifically that
things whether it was their taxes or
their desk or whatever they was normally
put off a law that they could have
sustained attention not just that things
that they liked but they could have
sustained attention that terrible things
that they had previously not liked so
there was focus with better neutrality
and so when you say you'll notice when
you actually engage it that's one of the
areas that has been really fun people
noticing when they're engaging in oh
should I actually move the things that
continuously get on my to-do list and
then get moved because I never do them
and actually did Daniel this is
important work I've benefited from using
qualia I have loved hearing your
approach on how to create the very best
version of a cognitive enhancer I've
been recommending it to friends when the
discussion comes up on the subject and
interestingly several of those people
who have tried it have spontaneously
written back to me to tell me what a
positive experience they've had with it
becoming better at getting stuff done
that we care about is hugely valuable
this can mean better overall work
quality and it can even release you to
have more free time if you can be more
efficient getting your tasks done I
believe your system thinking has really
helped to develop this product and it's
really paid off and I'd like to thank
you for taking the time for to have a
conversation with me I'm sure our
listeners will appreciate the discussion
and I'll be sure to put information on
where people can find
in the shownotes awesome and we continue
to roll out new technologies new
products our website is a good place to
check in with it and if you feel like it
given your email will tip let people
know when new things come out and we are
excited to explore more partnership with
you in human OS and being able to share
that as a education and training
resource for people that's aligned with
our goals so thank you
thanks for listening and come visit us
soon acumen OS dot name
[Music]
you
[Music]