all right I don't know if this is going
to be it's gone
one I don't know anything it's a good
plan but I wanted to talk about that's
cool I'm sharing some crowd like uber
and airbnb car train but that there are
problematic things that happen within
the system and I think a lot of them are
from it still being a profit driven
corporation running it so uber doesn't
pay its employees well and therefore a
lot of drivers are working for blow
venom um wage so it's hurting the taxi
industry the consumers still paying more
than they should and it's not really
helping the worker whereas if you have a
people owned ride share system where
whatever a little bit of profit that you
are beyond what the driver gets paid and
what car maintenance is that little bit
of money that is needed on top of that
to run the website is created but no
more and so the vast majority of what is
there's going to be going to the driver
and therefore it's going to be cheaper
for the rider and you can do all the
things that all the ride share people do
that work having women drive for women
not having served pricing I don't use
them at all because they're not allowed
in my city so after you don't know how a
lot of them work except through the
grapevine and for my sister using them
but recreating those systems so an
Airbnb Maynard how but air bebe drives
up the market the rental rate there's
issues whatever be mu for sure and it
turns out I mean it's not that much
cheaper than standard hotel these days
and then it's hard to get hold of the
person aren't there's lots of issues
with it but figure out what the issues
are and solving it and making them more
ethical and more some more of the money
goes to the person who is selling the
thing so the person selling the room or
the person who's the driver in the case
of uber having more cooperatively based
crowd sharing system
I was very clear that was Apple number
28