all right can you give me a thumbs up if
you can hear me cool the girl's thumbs
alright so welcome to the intellectual
Explorers Club this is another edition
of the sense-making
wormhole series I've been running and
the idea behind these series is to
basically bring the in-person
toronto-based and flexural explorers
experience online and in doing so I'm
inviting past podcast guests to do
basically whatever they want previously
we had Nancy Strickler Jordan Hall and
today we have John for Vicki the man I
think at least amongst these sense
making circles needs no introduction
so how this is going to work today
for the first 60 minutes we're gonna
have a Q&A with John so I'll start off
asking a question and then whoever feels
called to ask them a question maybe you
can raise your hand
Narayan could you explain how to raise
your hand and zoom what keys to push
yeah um if you're on a Windows computer
you can press alt Y if you're on a Mac
you can press option Y and that'll
actually just notify Peter the host that
you would like to speak I don't think
that there's anything that you can tell
that your hand is raised but if you
decide to unraised your hand you can
just press alt Y again and it'll
unraised it right and so I can see if
someone raises their hand and if you're
you're raising your hand and nothing's
happening just you know just jump in
door or you know we'll figure it out and
then after the 60 minute we're gonna
split into two groups and we're gonna
have sort of like a facilitated group
kind of collective intelligence type
conversation which should be fun
I will facilitate one and Orion will
facilitate the other so that being said
let's jump in John I guess you have any
kind of opening thoughts or comments
before we get into this thank you
nothing it's off the bat I just think
express my gratitude for being here or
I'm looking forward to this awesome and
thank you John for being here and not
just for being here but just for like
kind of putting so much value out there
like so much artifacts not only with
your own content with all these kind of
dialogues you've been engaging in and
it's like I can sense that you're really
in this thing and what I appreciate
about how you're conducting yourself in
this environment it's like you're really
putting yourself at the edge of your
thinking not only one like a live chat
but also on the letter exchange that we
haven't with Dave Chapman so I just want
to say I really appreciate that you're
doing that oh well thank you for that
and thank you for recognizing that yeah
yeah the what I was agreeing with was
that the dialoguing with others parts
has grown like really considerably and I
and I have and in sort of in a
correlated fashion I have grown an
appreciation for it I'm gonna come to
see it as as crucial to what I'm trying
to do to the you know the the
argumentative lecture series format I
see the the more spontaneous dialoguing
as also doing a lot of the important
work at getting ideas developed and
connecting people in the right way so
I'm very I'm very happy about that this
is sort of taken off and I hope I hope
to get better at it because it's I'm I
want to and you're helping me with that
I'm trying to learn a lot of skills
about this you know back into the
philosophical heritage but also part of
some of the cutting-edge innovators
right now and try and get something
integrated between them right so the the
theme thay is wisdom and then the
question that you chose is what is
wisdom today I kind of like had a
I want to ask a really annoying question
like what is the wisest definition of
wisdom or something like that
but maybe like what is your requirement
like working definition of wisdom maybe
we can start there
well there's that's a hard question to
answer because I'm right now I'm
actually working on it was sort of you
might call an official definition with
Igor start with Igor Grossman and
Michele Ferrari and some other people we
did Toronto wisdom task force a while
back and the survey of all the major
researchers in the field and trying to
and a long period of discussion it's on
my channel if you want to sit down for
like eight hours with not very good
audio and watch it but um and we're and
there is an emerging consensus about
that now that's not finished and because
of that I I'm not it's not quite right
so I have sort of two definitions in
mind there's that one that I'm that
we're all working towards collectively
and there's one that I've worked for
I've sort of come up with in the past
and so I'm gonna transverse split the
difference the one in the past was the
notion of wisdom as rationally
self-transcending rationality where
rationality is much broader than it used
to mean you know it's tend to it is tend
to met the intentional manipulation of
belief by adhering to logical norms and
evidential norms and something like that
and that's what it is to be rational and
I argue and I'm making this argument
right now in the videos here is that
that is too impoverished do you
truncated a notion of rationality it
can't account for the connections
between rationality and wisdom that were
so central in the ancient world it can't
it can't account for the tremendous
amount of transformative experience or
aspiration to use la Paul's ideas or I
miss Keller its ideas that are needed to
become rational and - and - and to be
adopt a comprehensive comprehensively
rational way of life and so when I say
rational I mean therefore this I mean
any systematic
Sycho technology that reliably and
comprehensively addresses self-deception
for a kind of knowing and so you know
octavo open-mindedness is a very good
practice for becoming inferential ii
better at noticing self-deception within
one's inferential practices but
mindfulness meditation for example is
very good at becoming how self-deception
works within how attention is sculpting
your salience landscape internalizing
the sage is a very important practice
for aspirational rationality and for
becoming aware of alternative
perspectives and trying to grow outside
of the biases found within your own ego
centric perspective so what I'm trying
to say is that I think all of these
various forms of rationality that zero
in on particular kinds of knowing and
and the and the self-deception that is
found where where they're in tend to be
very strong for that particular kind of
knowing and tend to be weak or even
interfering with other kinds of knowing
so for example if you don't constrain
the part of your knowing that has to do
with sort of the insight when you're
making inferences and going through an
argument you will tend to leap to
conclusions often and that's how a bias
gets in
you'll make a leap to conclusions so the
insight machinery is inappropriately
operated and you do this sort of leaping
that's really central to insight but you
leap to the wrong conclusion in an
argument but if I'm trying to generate
an insight think about what you need to
do in mindfulness and think about where
you might need an insight like in
therapy I often have to shut off that
inferential processing so that it
doesn't keep interfering with the
attentional processing that is needed it
needs to come into a kind of dynamics or
self-organization and so I can get the
insight that I need so I'm trying to
give you an idea here that there's these
different
sacred technologies and what they tend
to do is they tend to cause one form of
knowing to flourish by helping it to
overcome the patterns of self-deception
within it but they give it gets too
imperialistic if you'll allow math that
term it will interfere raita can tend to
interfere with other forms of knowing
and so these things tend to be in a
checks-and-balances relationship
mindfulness tends to enhance intentional
process and shuts off inferential
processing active open-mindedness tends
to write enhance inferential processing
diminish insight processing and and then
your you know and then you're going to
also need psycho tech that balances
between them so if you think that what
rationality is about what I want to do
is I want to get right I want to get a
process by which each one of these
rationalities is constraining and right
being constrained there's a patch but
there's a moat there's a pattern of
mutual self-organization between them so
that rationality as a whole is
transcending but it's fence ending in a
rational way so it's rationally
self-transcending rationality now I
think that connects wisdom to some of
the central ideas you find in the
Western notions in Western philosophy so
that notion of wisdom being connected to
rationality in philosophical practice
that you see in sort of Plato and
Socrates I think the definition I gave
and also within stoicism I think it
comports well with all of that however
and I will do this in this series I will
engage in self-criticism I think that
that that view that Leo and I published
in 2012 I think it's inadequate in many
ways because I think what's being left
out is precisely the process is central
to wisdom the cultivation of wisdom of
going through radical transformative
experience we need we need to
appropriate secular technology for that
I tried to explore some of that with
things like the view from above and
ideas about gnosis and that has to be
somehow incorporated
and and there into the account of wisdom
how we aspire how we choose to become a
person other than we currently are and
to have a values that we currently do
not have a Zegna scholar it says how how
do we bring which she calls proleptic
rationality into our accounts of wisdom
because if the aspiration for
rationality if the aspiration for wisdom
is itself not something that is
rationally justifiable then our notion
of rationality and wisdom has to be
radically transformed to reincorporate
aspiration into it so I think that's
missing and then I see all of these
psycho tech practices that I've talked
about as enhancing relevance realization
but what's also needed for the theory of
wisdom is to incorporate a more explicit
model of the nature of understanding
because the difference the difference we
didn't understand sort of a lot of
psychological and philosophical
consensus on this the difference between
knowledge and understanding is
understanding is the ability to grasp
the significance or the relevance of
your knowledge and so that's why wise
people are not only insightful they have
a deep kind of ability to understand and
comprehend and so how the rational
enhancement of relevance realization
enhances understanding also needs to be
much more explicitly developed so I'm
not trying to be coy here but I'm trying
to show you that this is very much a
definition and development as you try
and bring in I think well maybe fill in
gaps and also try and link up with what
I think is the emerging consensus view
of wisdom so I mean that that carries
with it two burdens one is and I've been
very I hope consistent I hope maybe
sometimes a little too aggressive about
this but I'm very critical of sort of
current conceptions of rationality as
being too thin very too thin and too
propositional belief inferential
argumentative and not capturing the
richness of rationality its connections
to insight its connections to aspiration
its connections
to transformation its connections to
deep understanding and so if we want to
integrate rationality and wisdom and I
think we should together but we're gonna
have to really enrich our notions of
rationality to encompass these things
I've been mentioning so that we can get
a more comprehensive account of wisdom
right right and so I can like probably
take you down like a thousand different
threats based off uh you just said but
I'll open it up to the the group anyone
has any questions for John just maybe
just raise your hand I can see everyone
I think I'll call on you or just go on
mute and just ask away Jordan hey John
so something I've been noticing I've
been mentioning in a lot of these groups
that we've been having but I've been
noticing it has been emerging in a lot
of conversations around the sorts of
things that we're talking about right
now something I've noticed as this
caught is this conversation about trying
to be very non egoic about things and I
think it's a good thing to do and it
seems to me to be the case that we have
like too much narcissism in our society
and in particular I find narcissism to
be like a kind of spiritual threat that
I have to deal with and and yet I feel
like the extreme non egoism is too
reactionary and I noticed sometimes when
people try to enact like pure non-ego
ISM it's it comes off very uh it's it
seems very like non-human and
off-putting to me so my issue that I'd
kind of like to ask you about is if you
have any comments or anything to add on
your own is that I think that people is
a tendency to engage non-ego eclis in a
way that like overly down regulates your
own impulses to differ from the group
consensus and still and so on and that
there's god I feel like there's got to
be some good way to integrate like like
a healthy
ego into into the way that we engage
with each other in like a partially non
egoic collective fashion and I'm
wondering if you have any thoughts on
that or comments yeah yeah I do
Thank You Jordan I think that's an
excellent question I think it does
pertain to the issue of wisdom because
as you say mini wisdom traditions are
purported to claim that you know that
they the summit of wisdom is to achieve
a state of non egoic or non duality
those shouldn't be identified together
by the way they're often identified
together I think that's I think that's a
problematic thing to do maybe we could
talk about that later but let's go to
your the main question which is this
notion of you know I I think you see you
seem to be agreeing because narcissism
is an extreme form of this that there
are ways in which ego centrism
an unchallenged ego centrism can by us
or cognition and bias or behavior it's
very self deceptive ways there the
question that they think that emerges is
that there seems to then be an implicit
move and implicit identity that the sole
function of the ego is to bias or right
and that that is always negative and
then the issue I have with that is well
that's not I think it's fair the right
word I've maybe done because I don't
think a cognition without framing or
filtering makes any sense and if you're
saying that what I'm gonna do is I'm
gonna get to a state that's you know
free of perspective and has no framing
and I and I have brought this up with
people explicitly so this is not just
you know this is not just off the cuff
I've gotten in our discussions or
arguments in the philosophical sense of
the word about this it's like um tell me
how what you're proposing is any
different from combinatorial explosion
and just being overwhelmed by you know
the indefinitely large amount of
information available in all directions
in all permeable combination bla bla bla
bla the stuff I argue for right so if
what you mean
my nan egoism is that you have gotten
and this is something that I've been
working with Elizabeth long about if you
mean by that functions of framing and
filtering and relevance realization are
somehow silenced that sounds to me like
cognitive suicide because that sounds to
me like you're undermining all the
processes that have to run I can't see I
need I need a concrete proposal about
how you get something like
categorization going how you get
communication going how you get basic
you know solving of goal or solving the
problems that how you get all of that
going without anything like relevance
realization so if that's what people are
talking about they're tough and and
sometimes when I've talked to people
explicitly that's what they're claiming
and then I try to I try to I ask them to
demonstrate right now in this moment
there be hit a behavior that indicates
that and they'll do what you say they'll
start a talk and there and then I'll say
all you're doing is doing a particular
kind of relevance realization you're
just orienting to this and this is being
made salient and this is being
foregrounded and this is being back
rounded you're not turning off this
machinery you're just restructuring it
in a certain way and you know I've
already acknowledged that we can become
less egocentric and how we're
structuring things but if we mean by
that if we mean about going non egoic
that removing all framing all relevance
realization that that makes no sense to
me now it's what some people say sorry
this is a long answer but this is a
profound question right some people say
no no I don't mean that I acknowledge
that there has to be sort of a kind of
you know relevance realization or
salience landscaping or prospective
tribal knowing or participatory knowing
I get all that but what I mean by that
right so they'll say I don't mean you
lose yourself although some people claim
that too there's a no self experience
right or they can live as a no self
perhaps as a better way of representing
their to you they'll say no what what I
rep what I mean by that is you know like
what happens in flow so that's that's a
little bit more interesting because what
happens in flow of course is you don't
lose your agency you don't lose your
relevance realization ability but you
tend to lose that narrative
autobiographical ego
and since that's the one that we're most
familiar with and the one we most
valorize in the West for lack of a
better designator I can understand what
people mean by that and I tend to view
claims like you know one of the things
that Buddhism was arguing is that it's
possible to let go of the narrative
autobiographical ego and actually
enhance agency we're enhancing agency
means enhancing that capacity for
connectedness relevance realization
insight problem-solving and so that what
we're doing what we're actually getting
what we're actually trying to show is
the identity of our ego agency with our
ego narrative is not a true identity
even though our autobiographical
narrative claims that on a regular basis
so I see that that it is like that you
can get
I mean I've experienced that you can
experience the pure consciousness in
fact you can experience profound flow in
which that that right that
autobiographical narrative ego goes away
but even in the pure consciousness event
even if right you all you are is
conscious you're just conscious and not
even conscious of consciousness like
form and says there's still the hereness
there's still the now in this there's
still the six the salience in a sense of
a presence thing that doesn't disappear
because I don't think you can shut off
right the relevance realization
machinery and keep consciousness and
cognition running so like so how I would
answer that is if we mean by ego right
something that perhaps we shouldn't mean
by the word self but that's problematic
too if we mean you know that the
machinery that drowns the emergence of
our our intelligence and our
consciousness then I think talking as if
we can be non egoic it makes it makes no
sense to me
if we mean right a particular role by
which we try to identify with our ego
agency a particular autobiographical
narrative role then I think that can
power
away and that can pass away in a way
that actually enhances our our agency so
that's sort of my answer what do you
think it's it's a lot of interesting
stuff in there but I'm still confused
because what I'm really finding is not
working for me is when I see ways in
which people try to like overly D
identify with their ego and it seems to
it seems to have some kinds of bad
effects or or in myself I see it like
the risk is that you fail to really
bring yourself to bear in terms of what
it is that you have or like ought to be
offering in a group dynamic that makes
add something you know good yeah the
extreme version of this is I've been
very interested in like trickster
archetype sorts of figures and something
occurred to me recently when I was
looking at several of them and I think
that they do serve a really important
function that Johnathan Pidgeotto talks
about a lot which is kind of getting the
person who comes out and really like
rings the alarm bells and is willing to
point out the absurdity of like large
structures that most people are afraid
of and something I've noticed about
these characters is that almost all of
them have an extreme narcissistic streak
also and so it I see how like most of
these characters it's almost like being
a trickster part of that is having like
an extremely gaudy ego almost an heart
and parcel with the role and so I'm
really I'm really stuck with maybe
there's something about the the like the
egoic perspective the classically
whatever ego perspective that's being
attacked that might be somehow
beneficial well okay so look there's two
things here I mean what was the first
point about bringing yourself to bear
well let's do know that your first point
was the the
things are people where people are doing
they're trying to act non-ego eclis I
guess I would need to know specifically
what that is if that means you know
adopting a particular man or a speech
and things like that I I'm I just I want
to know how that possibly could bring
about you know for me to get it to get
the ways you get outside of that that
narrative ego is like to get into a deep
flow state and again that seems to be
something in which you be able to bring
yourself to bear on situations it's
actually massively improved rather than
being diminished now - and that that's
not irrelevant to your second point
because the trickster figure right I
don't know if it has to be wedded to at
least narcissism or maybe even as what
you're calling a a strong narrative ego
for example or something like that
because the Taoist sages are pretty good
at you know representing a trickster
figure swans uh and loud say especially
Swan Hill right he just come he's he's
the epitome of a trickster figure but he
does that in a way that doesn't seem to
be our self-promotional in any fashion
and that's because as I've tried to
argue I think that wisdom is the
religion of flow he's bringing the
capacity for just tremendous flow to
bear on the projects of attacking the
Confucian system attacking the computer
Imperial state and yet it seems to me
he's doing that without having to be
wedded to being self-promotional in any
fashion so I don't know if the trickster
archetype needs to be narcissistic or
self-promotional because I'm trying to
give you a clear historical case and you
know and that's also brings us back to
our topic because these people were
considered sort of quintessential
representatives of wisdom within you
know Chinese culture and I think you can
find similar version I mean I think
there's a way in which Socrates is very
much a trickster figure in a law in a
lot of ways and yet one thing and he is
clearly capable of being
self-referential in the framing sense
that we were talking about earlier
bringing his agency to bear on a
situation but he's not self-promotional
in in that sense that doesn't seem to be
what's motivating him at least a
platonic version we had so I I'm not
denying your claim I hope you realize
that that it is the case in many you
know mythologies the trickster will come
across a and you get you get extreme
versions of this of course in the Joker
where that narcissism becomes you know
just destructive and and overweening so
yes the trickster figure can be that way
but I'm trying to answer I think a
deeper question that I sensed in your
question which is it is this necessary
to its functionality that I that I'm
challenging and I've given you the
reasons why I'm challenging it okay
thanks a lot I think that brings up
really helps to integrate a lot of the
kind of things that I felt like could
potentially get lost if you try or at
least in the way that I like sometimes
tried to be more Nani going so thank you
thank you and and you know this this is
a this is a topic I'm gonna be that's
why I alluded to him at the last I'm
gonna be delving into when I do the
after socrates series because you know
that the self-knowledge issue is crucial
here to that to understanding the
Socratic project and and what does it
mean to know thyself in a way that's not
you know narcissistic not saw
promotional there way that somehow
brings you into dialectic you know
brings your agency to bear it causes a
flourishing of your agency and the
agencies of others etc so I think I
think your question is very pertinent
it's very much in my mind I thought
thank you
Jake Jake you had your hand up first and
then Brent yeah I just wanted to if it's
okay just just pull on that ego thread a
little bit more because one of the
biggest resonances in your in your
series that I hope and expect you'll get
in to maybe a little bit with with David
Chapman
is is to Robert Keegan and his kind of
conception of psychological development
and I mean he takes the kind of
psychoanalytic view of ego which it
sounds like it's a similar one to the
one that you're taking us just this kind
of wholesale or this whole kind of
apparatus by which we make sense of the
world which includes our sense of self
but also our kind of models of how
things are and of ethics and how we
relate to others and the picture of
wisdom that emerges from from Keegan is
something like at least the way I'm
reading it as as a kind of permeability
of the ego where it's not that that
having an ego is bad or or even possible
or even avoidable but rather that it has
to be perpetually vulnerable to updating
and even wholesale kind of revolutionary
updating and so I guess I just have you
riff on that oh well thank you because
that I think that lines up with what I
was arguing a minute ago with Jordan
because if if what's at the core of this
functionality as I've been arguing is
something like relevance realization and
if relevance realization is something
that's an ongoing evolution right of
your your fitness your cognitive fitness
to the environment and it's you know
it's being powered perhaps by things
like self-organizing criticality and it
can go through radical restructuring and
insight that comports exactly with what
you just said right there that so that
machinery is going what you're trying to
do and this is what I think that's what
I said I think wisdom is ultimately
about trying to overcome the ways in
which our adaptive processes are
actually making us maladaptive which
maybe is ultimately what was at the core
of the psychoanalytic tradition but
anyways trying to inhibit that wisdom is
ultimately about trying to enhance with
the best tools available right trying to
enhance our relevance realization
machinery which would mean in that sense
to make it I wouldn't use the word
permeable but I but I don't know deeply
opposed to it the word I tend to use is
you know what we're doing is increasing
it side activity we're increasing its
ability to you know to move soon
Ruth Lee not in a sense of continuously
in a linear fashion but that the system
can move between assimilation and
accommodation without fracturing without
losing its integrity as a cognitive
system so yeah that's I agree with that
like a very very very heartily but so so
go ahead go ahead
are you gonna say yeah if again it
depends again how we I mean we've gonna
have to stipulate how we're gonna you
know what what the reference is for the
turn amigo and if we take it to mean
right because there's a sense in which I
and I want it I just want to make this
point because it might sound like I'm
contradicting myself so I'm sorry for
just keeping going but so I often talk
about relevance realization being Priya
going because in that sense what I mean
is the autobiographical you know self
reflective narrative that we have and
relevance realization it is presupposed
by all of that processing so in that
sense I think relevance realization is
Priya going but if we mean by ego which
I might say is like what we mean by the
self or something like that is that sum
total of machinery that makes us capable
of coupling to reality complexify our
cognition in right in a coupled manner
to the complexity of reality then yes I
agree with Keegan completely I don't
know his work that well and I'm just
coming into it and so I don't want to I
want to be very cautious here about not
pretending to have an expertise about
him that I don't have it the only other
thing I was gonna ask about is is I
guess one reason why people might think
naively that what you want to do is get
to a not neglect state is if you look at
how those stages progress they do
progress in what seems to be a direct at
least the the ego gets more capacious
and more inclusive of things that it
didn't include but I mean you speak
about integration and differentiation
which he also speaks about if one goes
up they don't realize it has to go up in
goals
that that's excellent that's that's
excellent what you just said is what if
I understand you correctly and
interjected I'm getting you wrong please
but what I what I hear you saying is
people are on there they're not paying
attention to that the true development
that's giving the emergent function is
one of complexification they're just
seeing it simplistically as you know an
expansion in some sense is that is that
correct yeah yeah the way he puts it is
you're you're progressing toward
guaranteeing the world and others and
yourself more and more and more of their
kind of unique identity which entails
expanding your your your sense of the
kind of the boundaries between things
and and and right
not pretty maturely making inferences
about the how they are but it doesn't
entail a total lack of differentiation
and okay yeah the oneness yeah it can't
be coherent yeah because if you lost the
differentiation ability you'd lose the
ability to pick up on novelty you'd look
up you lose the ability to pick up on
these alternative perspectives the
uniqueness of people etc etc all of that
would be lost you become insensitive to
it Thanks thank you that was excellent I
enjoyed that
Brent did you still have a question yeah
sharing a link in the chat it's the d DK
I whi deep actually sorry the link says
it wrong but it's di KY data
knowledge information wisdom hmm I just
I think this is a useful starting point
there's different variations on this
diagram but just thought I'd offer it up
as a conversation piece I think it's
because it's a kind of map that puts
wisdom in the context of these other
concepts and also kind of convergent
directionality I think it's a more
useful primer for a lesson or for a
group discussion because you have that
kind of map and I just just wonder your
thoughts on it where it fits into your
models well I thought
take an in-depth look at it so I mean
I'm familiar with things similar where
people you know where you have the
technical sense of information and then
you have the semantic extensive
information and then you have knowledge
and then you have something like
understanding where wisdom beyond it is
it is this is it something like that as
as a progression yeah there if you just
click the link there's a simple image
and if you do a google image search too
there's different types of this diagram
it means some have a lower tier of
measurement before data and some have a
higher tier of vision after wisdom the
one that I shared it has the context and
understanding on the edges so I think
yeah yeah yeah it's one of the more
coherent ones yeah yeah I see it I think
it's a useful orientation for her for it
anybody kind of entering this topic
rather than just us try to define define
the word wisdom where it's you know its
history yeah so I mean I I I did I thank
you for saying that I I was trying to
allude to that in that I was trying to
show a continuum from information in in
the technical sense which I take to be
like data and then information in the
semantic sense which is like information
and then to knowledge and then so so in
data information in the Shannon and
Weaver's sense is just a probabilistic
relationship between events so that you
can use one event to predict another in
that sense there's a Titanic amount of
information information and then people
talk and there's lots of work being done
now I know how does that how does that
meaningless sense of information become
what we normally mean by information so
I'll use your terms how does data become
information in the sense that's
something that is meaningful to us and
that's where I think the relevance
realization machinery is doing a lot of
important work I think when relevance
realization picks up on the correlations
that are adaptively predictive and makes
them salient to an individual that's
when you're starting to get information
in the semantic sense and then of course
as it says in there as it gets organized
when you get that and then when you get
higher order systems coordinating those
semantic pieces of information you get
knowledge oh and again that takes more
relevant to see what you're getting is
you're getting recursive relevance
realization and then to trying as I said
to try and figure out the what's the
significance of the knowledge that's
ultimately and not just in a theoretical
sense but in in this how its significant
existentially how its significant
practically I think that's when the
knowledge starts to move into wisdom so
III didn't see I didn't I wasn't aware
of that pyramid before but I think I
have something that I think is very
convergent with it because it's actually
arguing for that kind of continuum and
what you see is you've seen sort of
recursive relevance realization being
invoked which is kind of an Aristotelian
model that the process of information is
constantly being recursively applied to
give us higher higher emergent functions
so that that's how I would try and link
up with what you sent all right
Paul had his hand up for a while so then
Mike I think I have a question I'll try
to articulate what I'm thinking John you
talked about values I think you talked
about like values if you were moving
upwards to higher values let's say or
greater values could you be a little bit
more specific let's say I have a certain
set of values right now and there's
values oh you talked about aspiring to
values yeah I aspiring to values and
virtues that I currently don't have yeah
yes so always pair that I try to always
pair the two together if I forgot to I
that was a mistake on my part right no
no so yeah I think you said aspiring to
two values right so I'm assuming that
inherent in that process in order to
aspire to greater values you also have
to at some point come to the realization
that your current values have some some
form of deception
what depends what you mean by you have
to I mean some I wouldn't want to make
it a causal precursor because people
often aspire before they've come to the
judgement that their current values are
wrong they only come to seeing those
values in coming into question as the
aspiration process is ongoing this
phrase for this for example happens
pretty regularly when I'm teaching
people meditation they'll go in for all
these things and they want to you know
maybe be more peaceful or something they
don't quite know what that means but as
they start to aspire towards it then
they will start to say oh the current
value is that I'm living by and it's not
necessarily ones that are undermining
their desires for peace they may say oh
geez you know it's this value that I
thought I had it like yeah I'm really
coming to call it in question because of
the meditation so I don't know what I
would say it's a causal precursor I
would say that at some point in the
aspiration process you will come you
will at least reflectively
come back and question values that you
previously have but very often you don't
see their limitation until you've
transcended them is what I'm saying
right so I guess my question within that
is let's say if we're always if the goal
is to always move upwards for lack of a
better way to putting in towards a
greater a greater higher values or like
a greater expansion of values aren't we
always at some point resting at some
level of self-deception and can we ever
not be deceiving ourselves if we have to
orient towards the world
I guess I'm Mike my ultimate question is
is what is that self-deception bound to
if we have to orient ourselves in the
world and and sit with any sort of
understanding does that make me well ii
would not I'm not quite clear on so let
me answer the first one and then let you
come back to me because maybe if I enter
the first one that'll help you clarify
what you meant by the second one so yeah
I think I think there's a enemy I
I would agree very strongly with this
thesis that we can never be in a place
in which we have certainty
and and that and and and and what that
means is there is no place in which we
are absolutely secure and so in this way
I'm not sort of I think a classical
Buddhist right there is a place in which
we can be as we can be assured that we
are free forever from self-deception
precisely because I don't think as I
tried to argue you we're always having
to use heuristics and when they get
misapplied there's a bias and and things
like that and so can we get better for
sure but can you give me an algorithm
that will guarantee that this particular
solution I have to overcoming bias is
going to apply to all possible future
contexts that are comput orally
explosive no way I just don't think that
I just don't think that's true I just
don't believe for I think I mean I'm
riffing on arguments that I hope you've
seen that there's arguments around that
that's just not something we can pursue
and that's one of the reasons why I'm so
deeply critical of Descartes because he
seemed to think he had a method that if
followed correctly would with you know
completely inoculate us for all time
against self-deception in other places
he seems to undermine that but there's
at least places where he seems to
explicitly claim that so this this is
why I try to I mean and this term is no
slipping I use always use the term
optimization in contrast to maximization
we can sort of optimization means you
can continually improve but now
optimization because it's been rendered
a theoretical formal term is starting to
sound like what maximization used to
sound like I don't think we can become
maximally free from self-deception but
we can become optimally freer from it so
that's how I would I would answer the
fertile now the thing is that's he that
still gives me I think all the moral
motivation I need right it's like yeah
you should still go is you know keep
going as far as you can and it's
interesting because in some of the
mystical traditions even within the
Christian mystical traditions they have
a notion I'll talk about this later in
this series called epic thesis
well you don't come to rest even right
what you're doing is right in in the
after life the blessed life epic thesis
means you're constantly
self-transcending because you can never
achieve the perfection of God you can
never come to God that to that god-like
state so that's how answer the first
question yeah I was thinking about I
guess that's the way I was thinking
about it was developmentally like it's I
I imagine that even if you're putting
something to practice and you're getting
more insight and more realizing that
you're still happy you know stuff to
orient to the world and the world's
constantly evolving so like what's the
relationship but I think you answer that
is that I mean I think there's always
going to be new new problems and
whatever we can do in terms of
developing ourselves in order to I think
that's right and I mean if you use the
evolutionary knowledge I do every
species eventually goes extinct right
there isn't there isn't a final solution
to this but it doesn't mean that some
species can't survive much longer
through many more challenges and changes
so you know it's not like everything
washes out into a margin as equality or
something like that either
yeah developmentally yeah I guess what I
see development and I'm willing to
acknowledge this if this is something
that can be challenged but the way I see
development I see it in terms of the
normativity of agency so development is
the enhancement of agency not just
individual also shared collective agency
and so if we are reliably not perfectly
not finally completely but if we're
reliably optimizing the capacity for our
agency to adapt right to evolve itself
to the changing world that's that I
think that's the normative goal we
should be shooting towards
which I which I like I say I think you
get pretty clear measures of that within
all of the traditions even within the
Christian tradition which usually which
is usually represented as you know
there's a final culmination resting
point but within Eastern Orthodox the
Eastern Orthodox tradition though
there's this other notion of epic thesis
there's no no you're never finished you
can't be it's not possible I hope that
answered your questions yeah thank you
also I saw Mike you raised your hand and
Narayan has his hand so maybe I can go
hey John
my question so I've been a magician for
you know since I was 13 years old and I
frequently had this experience in
performing where we're you know the sort
of punch line hits and the person like
has this recognition that what they
thought they there's more to what they
had been through anything so there's
this like sliver of reality they're
perceiving and something happens that
indicates to them but there's like
something more going on than that they
were killed
I've noticed I've had experiences in my
life where I feel something similarly
standing on the other side like like
life is performing a magic trick to me
and I had this experience where like
almost like a door opens you know in a
room that you know previously thought
was completely enclosed and a little
light shines feels like precursor to
some degree of insight because I don't
know what's outside of the door I might
not even know where the door is but I
know that there's something broader and
it is openness so I associate that with
the word wonder it's like wandering in
of both world is something broad and it
feels like something that creates like
the fertile soil for wisdom to then
emerge I'm wondering that with that what
in the work that you've done how you
conceive of the relationship the dynamic
between wisdom and wonder so I
definitely I mean there's I think it's
episode 33 where I talk about wonder and
then that will come back again into
the discussion of wisdom it's gonna be a
big part of this the series of Socrates
because Socrates famously argued that
wisdom begins in wonder and then you
have the two different interpretations
you have the Aristotelian interpretation
that well what what what Socrates meant
was curiosity and then you try and
resolve it right with knowledge and you
see that exemplified in the Aristotelian
project where Plato says no no what you
do with Wonder is you try and deepen it
and enhance it until you get to the
state of awe because ah does what you
just said it it affords you a I think
you said like a fertile field in which
the the structure of the world and the
structure of yourself can come in can
come deeply into question and you are
motivated to allow them to 20 go
transformation and I think that's a very
clear so I would distinguish curiosity
from wonder along those lines and I
think you're right you should know by
the way that there's cognitive
scientists are starting to use magic
tricks as a way of testing insight and
insight problem-solving there like
experimental work being done on that and
so there's work I'm doing with Daniel
Craig and NAPLAN paper Mian and we're
trying to argue that there's actually a
continuum from like insight through to
flow right to something like
enlightenment and then there's work I'm
doing with John Logan basically saying
and and along there there's a continuum
from sort of you know finding things
salient to finding them interesting
interested in them right into you know
getting a sense of wonder and then where
that sense of being in things is now
being opened up as you said to
transformation to awe in which people
are not just sort of being motivated
they feel like there's a demand on them
to undergo transformation to the
awakening experiences in which people
who've experienced what I've argued
elsewhere and I talked about in this
series as canto normativity they're
really real that absolutely not in a
metaphysical absolute but they see it's
unthinkable for them to ignore this
demand to get as close to transform
their lie
and their world themselves so that they
can get as for then it's close to this
really real as you possibly can now I
think all of that is therefore
fundamental machinery that's needed if
we're trying to engage in that project
the aspirational project of self
transcendence and self transformation
that is at the heart of wisdom and I
that so I ultimately as you see I have a
platonic interpretation of Socrates
claim rather than Aristotelian and not
because I don't believe in trying to
satisfy curiosity and pursue knowledge
I'm a scientist but I think that that's
that the path to wisdom and what is the
current is that where wonder is being
met in that sense of right open you up
to put it in sort of a bit of a
framework that you might be familiar
with the series I think curiosity is in
the having mode and I think wonder is in
the being mode and that's what Socrates
was ultimately talking about was not
about having propositions but about
undergoing a powerful course of
development so that's how I would answer
that question morph oh thank you thank
you that was a great question no right
so I'm kind of going off of what Mike
was just saying about my own personal
journey in sort of discovering these
things that I consider to be wisdom I'm
aware that like I think using the
framework that you described it's sort
of like there's layers of self-deception
within myself and as I'm able to clear
up certain self-deceptions more of the
world becomes available to me and I'm
able to recognize it for what it is and
also the reverse as more of the world
becomes available to you
that helps shine a light if you'll allow
me to speak metaphorically into the
layers of your psyche and disclose other
layers of self-deception very much yes
yeah so it's like this nice upward
spiral thing going on one of the cool
things that I've noticed as I'm
interacting with various communities
around Toronto and online is that yeah I
have no idea about the types of wisdom
that are going to sort of like I'm going
to stumble into other than I can sort of
spot different wisdom traditions in
different communities
and so I feel like there's a bit of a
sense that there's a bunch of different
flavors of self-deception that are sort
of going on with me in that different
communities have come up different ways
of like unraveling those so I'm just
curious about if you can take a little
bit about your own personal journey and
if you've been able to recognize very
distinctive flavors like I know you did
some circling stuff and so it to me that
felt like one of those examples Oh
totally so and I have I have Peter to
thank for that
and and also coming into contact and for
Peter also putting me into contact with
guy guys hence talk yeah I love what you
said I thought was beautiful flavors and
because there's an element of getting
the taste for things that's that's part
of wisdom it used to be and so we sort
of trivialize the notion of taste down
to just sort of you know hedonistic
aesthetic aesthetic choice or something
like that but taste meant something
that's why we used to talk about good
taste and it meant something right so I
like I like that I like that that
metaphors really sang to me I think
you're right I think that this is I mean
and this is not an idea I mean turning
it into a theoretical idea I guess is
something that I've been talking about
for a long time but it's not an idea
that originated with me which is why I'm
really and I was trying to articulate
that again with this model of wisdom as
rashly self-transcending rationalities
where there are different flavors of
rationality for different flavors of
knowing and they have to be sort of
coordinated together in a
self-correcting self-organizing system
and and that's what goes back because
like I was taught in ecology practices I
was taught you know a contemplative
practice a right into the contemplative
practice drawn probably from arianna
Buddhism Metta I was meditating practice
probably from care of Aden right
Vipassana then I was starting moving
practice from Taoism right Tai Chi Chuan
and and and very much what you said and
then all along the way I was
learning the Neoplatonic tradition and
then starting to pick up some of those
practices you know and both
interpersonal and an extra personal and
interpersonal so I think that's right
and so I think you know there's a
problem here because there's a
scalability issue that was we is really
on my mind right now but I think we we
do have to try and get and I practiced
that myself trying to get a sense from
the inside and that takes a lot of time
and that's why I'm sort of hesitant
making this you really have to get aware
of multiple paths and you have to
experience it participant observation
but I would make it more than
participant observation I would make it
participant transformation that if you
go through path immersion you really
have to immerse to get this and then as
you get sets of these you get disability
this dialectic ability right this meta
systemic ability you've met a path
ability to to move between them and get
them to talk to each other and form each
other not not to converge on some home
reach homogeneous aldous huxley and core
or something like that but very much
like what happens in circling well you
get this dynamic coherence right that
where all their pieces are being held
together dynamically and so that's what
I that has been that has been a modus
operandi for me from my life now for a
long time
precisely because when I started on the
path of wisdom cultivation I already had
multiple traditions that had taught me I
didn't I've been immersed in
Christianity that I was immersed in the
Platonic world then I got immersed in
Taoism I got immersed in two different
branches of Buddhism and so on and so
forth and so and I and I don't see I
don't see an alternative to what we're
talking about I don't see an alternative
other than that the didn't to try to
meet that demand of you know participant
immersion
in multiple paths which we'll take up
long periods of life and and and the
analogy I use I don't know but it'll be
helpful to use but that's what I had to
do to become a cognitive scientist I
think I'd to really understand
philosophy really understand psychology
really understand linguistics really
understand cultural anthropology like
you know and it was in school for like
17 years because you you have you have
to get right and then you do the
synoptic integration between them which
doesn't mean reducing them all to one
doesn't all reduce to neuroscience you
get them all talking to each other and
there's reciprocally reinstructive
synoptic integration and that's the kind
of thing that's the thing I think we
have to do for wisdom and it's hard and
it's long but that's what Spinoza said
that's what makes it so excellent oh
thank you you're welcome
just wanna check if anyone has a
question that's alive Tim yeah cool yeah
I just saw before we began yeah I just
saw it I'm looking forward to it that
that date works perfectly so I'll put
that in their email back to you great
good to see you no friend yeah lovely to
see you too so yeah I think the question
I have here does follow on and is alive
and so it makes it makes sense to me
that what we're looking for is not to
reduce all of these various ways of
engaging and transforming ourselves to
one kind of reductionist thing however
it does also seemed to me that there may
be certain kinds of practices and I'd
advanced or suggest perhaps a certain
kind of dialogue as one of those
practices which draws on different kinds
of practices and kind of puts them all
together in one kind of float so you've
referenced before this notion of you
know breaking up the frame and then
reimagining it again and using
meditation and contemplation as
instancing that strikes me the dialogue
picks up the
floo so I'd be interested to hear what
your thoughts are about erase the
relationship between dialog and a
practice that can tie in lots of these
practices so we can begin to do more
things in one kind of a mode
beautiful beautiful so if you notice I I
tend to use these two terms a little bit
differently like dialogue and dialectic
where I take dialectic to be something
like or sometimes use deal logos to try
and indicate that because dialectic is a
is the psycho technology that I think so
it picks up on the interpersonal like
you just said all right but right
dialectic was also it relieve all
ontological so it's doing dialectic is
also a practice in which you're doing
the frame breaking in the frame making
your so you're doing what so that's the
you know the uuuu if let's do
Neoplatonism because that's what the
place where this was really developed
you're doing the procession right and I
what you're doing a lot of you know
breaking it up into all of these
possible variations and then you're
doing something like symptomatic
practice in which you're trying to draw
it all the way back up and then the
point is that this this disc or that the
inter intra personal discourse and the
intra personal you know frame
transitioning they're supposed to be
tightly talking to each other and when
you're reading a patinas for example you
he's clearly talking to these students
in the horizontal but he's also if
you'll allow me these metaphors he's
also moving the vertical and those are
so and together and then there's another
thing I was talking to guy about this
recently our our most resource
discussion was about that then there's a
third thing happening is you're
constantly moving between theory and
theory you're constantly moving between
argumentation and then a contemplative
control of what's coming out of the
argumentation and then their control
feeds back into the argument and then so
there's that fee so there's all three of
those dimensions working this is what
I'm arguing is going on in dialectic and
then there's the fourth there's a fourth
dimension of how those three coordinate
together and how this particular
instance is in a meta conversation with
other instances so for example when I'm
talking to guy his conversation with
Jordan Hall is coming in and framing
things my conversation with Jordan is
framing things you know that circling I
just had you know and so there's all
those four dimensions are constantly I
play and you can see them for example
clearly I play and I'm taking platini's
here as an exemplar because all of those
things I just said are all at work and
what's important for them for to answer
your question and I'm not saying that
flic Highness is the answer that's not
talking about trying to find templates
so which by which we can craft the
grammar and the vocabulary we need today
but what was important about Platina
says he was able to use what I just
described to do the grand synoptic
integration of everything that had
become before him right he was able to
integrate the Platonic there is Italian
the stoic aspects you know of some of
the encounter with some of the Eastern
thinking that he he probably believed
rushed up against you know all of that
so that's I think your question is
beautiful and I please understand that
everything I said is like it's it's Pro
Tem it's it's it's yeah you've taken me
right to the edge of my thinking on this
and this is what I'm working on right
now and this is what I'm trying to
understand you know the and how
dialectic could be this meta psycho
technology that coordinates with the
meta heuristic of wisdom cultivation to
give us what Jordan Hall says we need
which is the the meta psyche for
coordinating the ecology of practices
and so that's what I'm trying to do I'm
trying to get a deep analysis of the
Plutonian template such that it is
readily transferable into the embodied
in active practice so that we can get
something analogous to the synoptic
integration going just like you say so I
think your question is bang-on and
central yeah that sounds beautiful I
mean the only thing that comes up to me
to add is that well you've been studying
for so long right and being engaged for
so long
and that the manifestation of this
you're an important part of that as a
key piece and there's a sense of much
what we're talking about is actually the
most ubiquitous of all things it's like
a some kind of way of understanding how
human beings themselves enter into
broadly speaking developmental
relationships with each other and the
world which is the kind of thing that we
desperately we desperately need to
cultivate more of in the world and so
there's all this you know and I
appreciate this um as you referencing
Platanos doing being able to integrate
such deep traditions and there's so much
that's ultimately brought together so
that in some sense there's not a
negation of what we're working with we
can we can particular eyes the depths of
what we can to our time but then the
hope I feel I have is that that kind of
process I don't know if I can use the
word praxis I'm not really too familiar
with the word practice praxis but that
kind of mode of engaging itself can be
modeled and enabled thereby to permeate
into interactions in otherwise ordinary
social spaces exactly yes exactly that's
that's the Socratic ideal of the
examined life and the unexamined life is
not worth living he's talking about
meaning in life he's not talking about
just doing sort of academic
philosophical analysis of the concepts
by which we talk about certain key
issues in politics or culture or science
he's talking about just what you said
he's talking about facilitating an
examined life in the where examination
means exactly this this permeation that
makes me that makes your life as
meaningful as possible exactly - exactly
that's why I that's why I mean that's
why I'm entitled in the next series
after Socrates because like Socrates in
in many ways like he's The Fountainhead
of all of these right of all of these
issues in the and and these questions
and the normative challenge to try and
and me
them that's why it's so that's why
that's that's that's why I think what
you just said is so so central to
everything because if it doesn't
permeate if it doesn't permeate in you
know how you're going through your day
to day life then it's not what all of
these people were talking about it's not
you know yes Socrates wasn't dying for a
theory he was dying for a way of life
mm-hmm yeah that's beautiful
so I have a question for you John but I
also just wanted to make a note that I
mentioned after the hour mark we have
that facilitated group discussions but
there's a nice flow going on with this
Q&A so I don't know if we want to break
that
so when John's asking my question just a
few three the chat box just either say
QA or group discussions and then we'll
decide what we'll do after that so John
the question I have for you is so you
and I are investigating these authentic
dialogue modality and I said and I thank
you for that I thank you for that I
think you you've been you've been really
inspirational and insightful and you
know good a good calling a good friend
about all of us
I appreciate that and just sort of the
group John and I have been viewing kind
of modalities or in experiencing
modalities like we got an insight dialog
coming up empathy circles and we've been
regularly practicing in a private group
circling and so the question I have for
you is just what is your experience so
far circling and maybe what is your
insights and takeaways oh so circling as
well I had an insight and you were there
but I think you're asking me to sort of
perhaps share it now and I want to
explore this because it was so there's
two kinds of insights what are sort of
insights in the circling and and and and
and so they they belong in the circling
right they're they're about how the
circling restructures itself and and
gets that kind of flow and I'll come
back to do maybe a little bit about that
phenomenal phenomenal adji and
functionality but there was an insight a
more like calling of scientific ins that
I had which is
I noticed that there's expla and other
people were reporting in the circle and
I've read it in some of the literature
people often have an experience of kind
of a super salience of other human
beings they're very present and they're
almost shining and glowing right and you
know almost like the halos in some
mythologies right and that's very
similar to reports of what people
experience when they're on psilocybin
for example and so I'm still playing
with this idea but it did feel it
intuitively feels like there's fruit in
there that's going to be born right that
what's happening in circling right is
you're right you're connecting when I
enter personally in novel and fluid and
constantly insightfully restructuring
ways so there's all this new novel but
nevertheless intelligible ways in which
interpersonal distributed cognition is
occurring and then and of course what
happens is and we know this from all the
synchrony studies when people are in
joint attention right there you get
brain synchronization going I was
thinking well maybe what happens is that
though that you know that novelty of
connectivity is not it's getting
internalized so that areas of the brain
are talking to each other that normally
don't talk to each other there's a
dynamic restructuring of the grammar of
our cognition in that sense and that's
really interesting because that's
exactly what psilocybin does right it
gets areas of to the brain that don't
normally talk to each other it like to
talk to each other it reshapes the
connectivity and and I find that really
really interesting because that that to
me with it's this is not exhaustive by
any means but that's that to me is an
example of just the kind of thing I was
talking to Tim about you're getting this
interpersonal thing horizontal but it's
then leading to this kind of intra
cerebral complexification that's giving
you access to new you know new levels of
disclosure of reality and those things
are talking to each other in the
circling practice which I find I find
really really promising
and I want to load that word with a lot
of sort of earth know other things that
I found so interesting is I you know the
the way in which certainly gets into you
and I've kept a guy about this you get
into something like a collective flow
state in which right there's this
constant challenges right to to you know
to to X to articulate and to be
authentic and to be transparent and to
be responsive like into balance your
responsibility to your against your
sovereignty and all these like to it's a
very demanding environment well I find
it very commanding but you know it's
it's it's skilfully facilitated like
like you know what you you need for flow
where the demands are just you know the
zone of proximal development just beyond
your skills
so everybody's skill stretching and
they're getting sort of a Haws and and
you know it's flowing it's very much
like the group flow and so they're and
that makes sense to me because you know
flow enhances your inside capacity it
ends well I would argue and it enhances
your capacity to pick up on very complex
implicit patterns which of course you
need encircling that's exactly the
challenge think about it the chair and
that goes back to the connectivity issue
the challenge encircling is too you
can't you can't like keeping working
memory the complexity of the patterns in
the group but you your people they
resort to there's like well you're
sensing it right this is all intuitive
languages the language of implicit
processing and it's being really
powerfully engaged so you're getting
sort of flow in distributed cognition
doing this thing you know about the the
the novel restructuring of connectivity
all this stuff is speaking to me about
really powerful enhancement of you know
well activation and enhancement of
collective intelligence what's
interesting to me too is I haven't a
well I think I've experienced it in one
of the circlings we did I got a sense I
don't I didn't ask other people yet and
I've read about it in the literature but
people often talk about like almost like
it this like like like what they used to
talk about the third man factor that in
addition to all the people there's this
other presence and some
times people resort to spiritual
language to talk about this but I in one
of the circling I won't disclose any
names for confidentiality but they would
I got the very strong sense of their
being right that there was something
like I think this is just an aesthetic
imagery I I don't I don't have any super
naturalistic orientations on this but
there was very much the sense of that
there was something that centered in the
room that was above and beyond the
people there that was phenomenologically
how was expressing itself to me and I
think my brain was trying to make sense
synesthetic Lee that's how I would put
it of there of this of this kind of
emergent capacity to structure and
enhance cognition and and and like
there's collective intelligence and and
the brain is trying to like where the
hell is that coming from and I think you
get that kind of experience and that's
really interesting to me because that
reminds me of a lot of the practices
from the Neoplatonic tradition where
people were dealing theoria and fear gia
and they were talking about sort of
indicating spirits collectively and all
this sort of stuff and it's like maybe
even goes back to some maybe stuff
that's happening in shamanism because
the shamans dancing at the center of the
circle and there's all this stuff
happening so that's all of this is all
tenuous right it's all I'm just off you
asked for my impressions and some and I
there's some insights percolating in
there and there's I think there's
richness to be explored and I'm finding
it all very exciting is there anything
that frustrates you about the practice
maybe something that you're like longing
for it to have well yeah and I've
articulated this to the guy who created
the practice and he's a really
responsive and sympathetic to it now
when I say this I I want to be careful
because I think I don't want to because
I do respect the integrity of circling
for its own sake right and I understand
that but you asked me specifically so
this is not what I would turn like a
critique of circling as a thing this is
something you're asking me for something
that I would want I would want and this
is what I'm talking to guy about I would
want to try and into
great circling with via Sophia and
Guyana are talking about this in depth
to try and get something analogous to
what I was talking to him about
something like what photonic dialect was
so that the circling is not just
self-perpetuating right but it can be
exempted for yeah do a addressing a
topic like what is wisdom what is it to
live well right now that the the
dangerous you know to just degenerate
into your opinions and blah blah but it
would have to be it has to be genuinely
an integration of circling right with
some of the stuff that was in Socratic
and Link it has to be very much what
they took a long time to do in the h
world but that is something I'd like to
see precisely because I think circling
as it is is not the psycho technology
the meta psycho technology that Jordan
Hall wants it's like Jordan is also
doing this thing that needs to be
integrated with circling that needs to
be because he also right like when I'm
talking with Jordan it's kind of like
circling but it can also be topical we
can write and there's the concept of
moving between theory and Furion he and
I have been talking about that and so
that's that's what and that's why you
and I are working like an we well at
least for my end of it like can we is
their way of drawing these practices
into some sort of synoptic integration
not to make the disappear into a
homogenous core but so from that
integration to exact something of it
right emergent that can do the role that
we need the meta psycho technology right
right and I think a lot of people are
like independently attracted to to
developing this and working towards that
I know Tim in Australia he's working on
something similar to this as well um so
we have the QA one out over the group
discussions I think we'll just go for QA
maybe for 50 more minutes we'll do a
short kind of group closeout I just
wanted to answer Jennifer's questions
are there opportunities you circling
online there is there something called
the circle anywhere I believe I've tried
it it's it's not my opinion is not as
good as the impersonal circles but you
do get a good taste that what circling
is like so you might want to double
click on that I'll write down the link
in a moment
so that because there's any uh any other
questions for John maybe someone who
hasn't gone yet Eliot or Amy Amy
[Music]
Braemore at least you know like it is in
peds
normal discourse because it's really not
what what is what is effective or
interesting to most people to be honest
and I think this ties in with your ideas
or your analysis of centric and
 on
directed culture that I am wondering
where the jumping off will be from the
self-worth in the work within
communities to the broader framework of
dealing with society if you have any
thoughts on that yeah I hope I got all
of it you you broke up periodically some
sort of background music so I hope I
hope not I don't miss here you at any
point yeah I do I don't have any I mean
so I gave some very tentative stuff
about that in in one episode where I
sort of tried to introduce you know the
beginnings of the religion if that's not
a religion precisely because I take this
idea of I don't know what word to use
but the application and the scalability
of the kinds of stuff we're talking
about here very very seriously
and and and and you know other people
have made that criticism and I think
justify would be so it's a criticism
that Paul bender clay has made and he's
and he's put some good argument behind
it so I guess there could because the
point is and this is a the point is that
we are asking for you know a pretty
significant transformation of
consciousness and cognition and in
character if that's what aspiration will
results in a change in right and and we
need it and and we need it to be
scalable but you know between kids and
adults and between people in different
socioeconomic stages at different stages
and their careers etc and that's a
really really complex problem it's a
really complex problem and the only
things in the past that has done that
for us such an religions that that seems
to be the only things that have
succeeded to meet all of those demands
the philosophical schools meet some of
those demands but they don't get there
often not scalable try it in though in a
comprehensive fashion and so the problem
facing us I'm sorry I don't mean to
presume I'll assume if that's allowed
for the for the problem facing many
people who come to my series maybe I can
put it that way is that the existing
religions are not liable for them in
James's sense they can sort of
understand them propositional II but
they just they they're not they're not
viable for them they they they don't
call them they don't draw them they
don't afford the transformations and
they're suspicious of a lot of the the
politics and the metaphysics because
that's what the research shows and that
but the second or alternatives
you know the totalitarian ideologies
have also just wrenched the world and
blood and so those are not seem to be
viable so many people feel and I mean
this in a Jungian sense they feel stuck
they feel stuck and so
sorry all I'm doing is making the
problem more I'm just formulating the
problem or rather than answering it but
I'm trying to I'm trying to do that
before I I try to answer it so what what
I try to talk about is how could we go
about trying to create a religion that's
not a religion that could have all of
that functionality without becoming
either a totalitarian ideology or just
becoming some nostalgic version of one
of the existing religions and I don't
have a complete answer to that or
anything that even sounds too weak I
have a very tentative partial answer
about how to start moving in that
direction largely because of what I've
seen emerging for me if people coming to
me like sorry my awareness is emergent
not the phenomena I guess the phenomena
is also emerging well I'm coming into
contact with more and more communities
where people are putting time and talent
and effort into creating things that are
scalable that are livable
you know ecologies of practices
responding to the meeting crisis and
what I what I would like to do is to
take all of the cuz you know all of the
conceptual vocabulary theoretical
grammar because this is how its already
already being used and put it in the
service to try and facilitate something
like forming you know a co-op between
these groups so that they can talk to
each other and and that and inform each
other and that sounds kind of woowoo but
like I said I've already had practice in
that at least to some degree as a
cognitive scientist bridging between you
know the different worlds and languages
and practices of psychologists and
neuroscientists and they all are
committed to their own ontology in their
own methodology and yet they have to
come to see the value of opening up to
being you know track to having
transformative interactions with the
other disciplines so trying to do
something like that and I'm gonna be
working with Daniel Craig on
that next year to try and actually
create it and to try and also you know
obviously it's gonna need something like
a Creed a philosophy but I think that
should be generated into some collective
intelligent manner we now have the
technology where we could create sort of
like a wiki creed rather than any
top-down in position and then you know
the bottom-up co-op and the top-down
wiki could also be in discourse with
each other and then in discourse with
the perhaps cognitive science and maybe
look at my hands I'm waving my hands a
lot maybe that could give us something
that could address your concern that
could right give us the functionality
that could be comprehensively
transformative of consciousness
cognition character and communitas is
what we have together right now
communitas the that shared collective
intelligence but in a way that's
scalable across write different socio
economic and social distinctions and
also developmentally scalable from
children to adults that would be that
would be well it was sorry let me let me
drop that students because I don't want
to say that sentence that's that's the
goal I'm working towards whether or not
that's ultimately possible I don't know
yet but that's my take your question
very seriously and I'm working with a
lot of people to try and go beyond
talking about an answer and actually
trying to create an answer precisely
because we don't know like it's very the
situation where there's very urgent and
so your question I think is also thereby
very very urgent as well thank you
so I'm just Elliot hey um so I've you
mentioned interdisciplinary
conversations and psychologists are
silencer and I'm wondering I basically
about how you think of the role of
empirical research in this whole project
and since it's things like lose them in
awe are so complex and multifaceted I've
had a hard time operationalizing some of
them I do some work with with awe and
they keep coming up into this problem
where I'm getting more involved in
interdisciplinary stuff talking with
humanities in and out of the stuff that
that you want to get at is the only way
to extract it out of people is to to
talk to them and in ways that and you
know empirical psychology really deals
with such distillation of this and so
I'm wondering sort of the if you have a
sense of some of the best work you know
of in that space or maybe if the best
approach that you could imagine if it
doesn't yet exist yeah so let's do off
because so I like I think what you got
in some of the world so Gallagher's work
on off I think with some of the most
interesting work on bringing together
right the you know a phenomenological a
philosophical phenomenological aspect
and a direct experimental intervention
but also qualitative research and
self-report so they were trauma dating
so right there studying off and what
they did was design what they wanted to
do was make use of the overview effect
do you know about the overview effect
and so what they did is they created a
mixed reality that doesn't that's not as
metaphysical as it sounds it's it's it
but it's simultaneously physical object
reality and a virtual reality so that
people had the experience the same
experience of astronauts in space
because the overview effect tends to
elicit pretty reliably experiences of
awe and then what they did so that's the
experimental situation but what they
also came at it from a phenomenological
framework so what they did is they did
basically a kind of an in-depth
phenomenological analysis on a lot of
the previous reports and out of that
they generated sets of questions that
they were then going to bring into the
experimental situation and so they only
had self reports but they also were
taking some measures now the one
criticism I had is they largely did sort
of neurological measures like EEG and
things like that to go with the
self-report I would have liked it if
they had done some cognitive tasks as
well like you know do you have more
cognitive flexibility are you more
insightful or are you less egocentric
and we have you know experimental ways
of testing that but there's no reason in
principle why what why those couldn't be
brought into that experimental situation
and so I think if you were if you could
sort of improve it a little bit that
seems to me to be sort of you know
really exemplary work for bringing
together phenomenology experimental
intervention qualitative work
qualitative research and then of course
and then there was and then they cycled
back to through the phenomenology back
to sort of four ecard native science as
a way of trying to provide they do the
philosophical work of laying out a
framework by which they're going to try
and interpret the results so I think
that's a really good example of that
kind of work being done on something as
as you said that seems very nebulous
like ah all right thanks
so the people haven't yet maybe Jennifer
Antoine you guys have any questions
[Music]
Antoine I don't know if you're saying
something but we can't hear you
[Music]
okay no Ryan when he says influenced
aceptas Mike do you have a question
we're probably saying you had one all
right for me or for Mike get the right
if you have a question oh you mentioned
not everyone yeah yes so um mine's
actually kind of going off of what amy
was asking um and it's like thinking
about sort of forward facing into the
future where it seems like it would be a
good thing to have more people develop
wisdom I'm curious because like I I
coming I'm coming from the rationality
movement and one of the things that
we're finding is we're trying to teach
rationality to people is that a lot of
people just don't care about it and they
sort of are happy with the way that
things are and don't feel drawn to
personal growth in necessarily that form
or other forms I'm curious about your
thoughts on wisdom do you think that
it's something that people are drawn to
or that if we want to help create a more
wise Society we might actually have to
start like pushing people towards wisdom
yeah so I think that's an excellent
question
and I've had some experience with like
critical thinking workshops and things
like that about trying to get people
interested in rationality I think part
of the reason why rationality isn't sexy
to people is because of this thin
truncated notion of rationality that we
present to people because when I talk to
people about wisdom and about dealing
with self-deceptive self-destructive
behavior in their life people Oh tell me
more they want to know more and they're
like yeah you know my classes get filled
up right about right away at U of T so
you know and I get all kinds of
enthusiastic feedback or not it talked
about these topics so part of part of
why I'm trying to reformulate to read
the notion of rationality and include
the aspiration to rationality as part of
rationality is precisely to address that
concern right because if if the
attraction to wisdom remains separable
from and then you know distinctly
separable from the aspiration to
rationality I think we're in deep
trouble I think we're in deep trouble
because I think we'll get an ocean of
wisdom that's you know very romantic in
the pejorative sense of the word and
that is a lot about you know a kind of
assertive anti intellectualism and an
assertive you know my gut is a magical
entity that can tell me things that the
fools around me can't see and that kind
of so I'm thinkin abut I'm
trying to say that that's explicitly why
I've been doing things the way I've been
doing it I think really tight like it we
really need to really tightly tie wisdom
and rationality together and we need to
really broaden why you would want to be
wise and why that means you wouldn't
want to be rational because rationality
means to find reliable means for
achieving goals you want a goal that
people seem to want is to reduce their
self-destructive behavior and then it's
a very it's a very easy thing usually to
get them to see that their
self-destructive behavior is also driven
by their self-deception and people don't
want to be self deceived and neither do
they want to be vulnerable to being
deceived by others they don't want to be
bullshitted if you present rationality
to them as overcoming self-deception
producing self-destruction
chelating you against that
makes it way more attractive to people
if you present it to them justice it's
off and I'm not accusing you of anything
I'm just answering your question right
and if you presented weight standardly
presented as a largely an epistemic
project forgetting the truest possible
belief she can
most people are now like ah true I mean
truth as a norm has become sort of like
it's true for me and it's real for me
and so that thing like why who cares
right and so but then you say well do
you want your partner to lie to you
about whether or not they're faithful
well of course I don't know what oh
right well what is it you want like do
you do you do you you want you know you
know do you want it that when you think
that you're talking to people that
you're actually reading them correctly
that you're picking up on their mental
oh of course I do I want to know I don't
wanna know I wanna know what's something
you know they're people but why do you
want those things well here's why you
want those things right and the blob so
that's that when I'm teaching the course
on the psychology wisdom and there's a
huge chunk on the psychology of
rationality because the theory of wisdom
I have he's embedded in an account of
rationality that's that's how I it and I
do stuff like have them do a journal
project where they have to instead of
talking just talking but active open
mindedness I say no keep a journal and
just try and you know and I do this
practice myself try and find one or two
instances in a day where you were you
did the confirmation bias or you did the
availability bias right and what's
surprising is how initially it's ago
yeah and then they come back an oh crap
and they get this like they get really
enthusiastic about it because they start
to see it in their lives and they start
to see how it's sort of screwing up
their interpersonal interactions and how
it's you know really being detrimental
to the goals they they think they're
trying to to realize so it's a long way
of saying that you know you I think we
have to get much more Socratic in the
model of rationality and how we're
teaching rationality hmm I was thinking
more specifically around the the realms
of like I think there may be some people
that are self deceived about their level
of self-deception
so so that's a that's I mean that's so
that's where that's what you have to
give way from self-report to you know
some of the actual behavioral measures
that Stanovich and others have have
available that are available for us and
you can show people self-deception like
that's you know in the nine dot problem
and I can't you solve this problem like
well I don't know no you don't but here
oh right like you have to do like you
have to you so yeah totally so part of
what I do before I do any of this stuff
is I have this dog-and-pony show showing
all these instances where you know how
you formulated the problem is preventing
you from solving it or you know here's
you using the availability heuristic
here's you falling prey the confirmation
like you know and so yeah I spend like a
long time for first convincing people
that sometimes it's it's you have to do
you have to be it to be really jazz the
a guy immediate provides so I had a
student was like this usually are I
don't know there's all the crack and he
was like he's a he was a he's like it's
sort of a tough street kid right and he
was like uh and he was not gonna learn
anything from me and I said okay he
walked in this morning she just an hour
ago and he said yeah and I said you saw
the receptionist at the front desk he
said yeah I said describe her to me
describe what she was wearing no yeah
sure he described I said how confident
are you I'm really confident they got
the whole class up let's go out and look
at what she was actually wearing and he
was dead wrong and he just stood there
anyway all right and then he changed he
became one of my best students he became
one of my best students and so like like
that's what I mean that that's you
really have to that's what I mean about
being Socratic you have to and you got
to do that without pissing people off
and you know and even Socrates wasn't
that good at it because they killed him
but you know trying trying to do that
with and and you know I have about I
mean overall I have rarely very good
student evaluations but I have 10% of
people that like hate me
eight like like the student be clear we
hate me because of just that kind of
thing because there's other people like
he had enough integrity and strength
that he was able to like respond and
take responsibility but you imagine
somebody with the narcissism of trumping
you do that to them look at how he
responds he he launches you know full
salvo attack and tries to destroy you
and eradicate you so as if by destroying
you that will somehow remove that the
the the criticism because he's a he's a
he's a bloody child thinking identifying
propositions with the speakers and all
kinds of crazy I hominin crap like that
right but lots of people do act like
that so I'm telling you what I do that
works but I'm not claiming that it works
in any kind of comprehensive or you know
perfect fashion yeah oh thank you okay
so we have the cue of questions but I do
want to leave time for for checkouts so
we'll do one more question then we'll
move over move on to the checkouts
Antoine you've been waiting for for a
while so that's end with you almost the
more productive the interaction
eventually becomes or like the closer I
think it almost seems to me like being
ruthlessly forward with precisely direct
and how you're trying to convey an idea
you know there may be some fines it
almost as if the more ruthless I am the
more not ruthless has
it's yeah I find when I'm making my case
as clearly and directly and sort of
dispassionately as I can
people tend to they may not they may not
accept it but they won't drop into this
this sort of state that you were just
describing something like Trump talking
getting into so how much and also see
this as being another issue with with I
think part of it this is keeping the
value from possibly doing it's just the
the imprecision you're frozen are you
still there and fun
are you still there looks like we lost
them this is recorded John so he might
if he is God he oh he's back Antoine can
you hear you we lost you there for a
minute okay I I heard a you you had
ended what you said that I was just
about to replied you've went away so
there was a there's a bunch of different
things and I'm not I would want to
distinguish them so but I don't why I
don't want to just impose on you either
I want to try and understand so I think
there's lots of ways in which people
respond to certain signs because that's
what I think we're talking about here
signs that you're being honest that
you're you're being that you're actually
stating what you believe and and that's
important people also respond usually to
markers that you're trying to be as
clear as you possibly can
and I think both of those I think are
good what I'm trying to get clear is how
that becomes I'm trying to like you I
think you I'm not sure if I heard the
word right
but you said like being blunt what do
you mean by that
because their word has different
meanings one mean one meaning is you
don't care how it affects people when
you say what you say to them and
generally that doesn't go well if people
get a sense that you don't care how what
you're saying is affecting them then
they will take the same attitude back
towards you people usually people I mean
so people will default to tit-for-tat
unless there's good reason not to right
and so they did have said that that they
get if they get a sense that you don't
care about how your words are impacting
them right then they will reciprocate
and that generally breaks down
communication quite quite quickly so the
do you mean something other than that or
no
that's that's exactly what I meant but I
think that if you're if what you're
saying is if you've conveyed the truth
of what you're saying properly enough
most people are persuaded by it it
doesn't like if sometimes to to present
the most persuasive the most clear
version of your case that you can I
think you have to risk you have to just
almost totally disregard someone's
immediate emotional reactions to it's
right is that clear okay so let me try
and get it so I understand that
sometimes people appreciate that you can
say things that that might upset them if
you're presenting it I mean that's what
you have to do as an educator sometimes
you have to say things that are going to
upset people if you present it honestly
and if you present it in a clear fashion
however again and I had a lot of
experience with this I'm not so it's I'm
not just talking off the top of my head
because this is something I face you
know classroom to classroom student to
student generally people will allow you
to do that if they feel that you are
giving them some kind of tool if right
if they are learning from you something
that they can take away as a valuable
practice if they feel that all you want
is for them to adopt your particular set
of beliefs generally again I tend to
find that simply you know I'm going to
tell you the truth I don't care if it
affects you that generally doesn't go as
well I find that if I challenge people
but they get a sense that the way that
they're being challenged is giving them
some tools and ways of thinking that
they find valuable if the process is
something they can take away and
internalize rather than something that
you're being sort of proprietary about
and you're going to use it as a
weapon against other people that's that
generally works for me but like I said
if people just get a sense that I'm
gonna convert you then that generally
backfires for me sure well I mean well I
want to challenge that and I'm pleased
is that because I don't think people are
interested just cognitively and tools of
truth they're also really interested in
cognitive tools or relevance so you have
to do stuff to make material relevant to
people too and so I think perhaps that's
what you also mean by clarity so I mean
I might be I might be misrepresenting
your position but I think other than if
we mean by something more than just a
lack of conceptual confusion by the way
in which you're showing how the
information is relevant to to them in
some important fashion that you know I
think is also very important that makes
if I were to just start telling to you
with really clear conviction without any
kind of confusion a bunch of
disconnected truths and just sort of
pouring them over you I don't think I
would hold your attention and I don't
think you would appreciate me you know
wasting your precious time and attention
on stuff that isn't whose relevance and
intelligibility isn't apparently someone
separates what I say from the context
within the conversation when you're
trying like it's it's it's not just and
I also think that may be more effective
than I think that might be a decent of
decently effective strategy to is to
just run around saying truth all the
time that I think it's well I mean
trying to say that I think trying to say
the truth is more of Ekta v' I mean IIIi
guess what a where I'm disagreeing with
you and this is the Socratic principle I
mean I you know the natural philosophers
said a bunch of true things or what
seemed to be the most true but it
largely didn't impress Socrates because
it wasn't it wasn't helping to do any
kind of existential transformation I
mean it and I mean this is clearly the
issue even in science about trying to
create if I can't make whatever fact I'm
trying to uncover gonna get published
she's not gonna get published she's not
gonna be it's not gonna get hurt i what
i think we have to normativity as i'm
glad we do i think you know relevance
without truth leads us into and
I think truth without relevance leads us
can't lead us into empty theorizing and
and I think both of those are not
optimal for trying to lead good lives to
put it into a slogan and this is I mean
this is a bit of a this is a bit of a
difference I have with Jordan Jordan
Jordan Peterson he talks about you know
try telling the truth all day I don't
think you actually can carry that out in
like you can tell a bunch of relevant
truths all day but if I was trying to
relate to you everything that's
occurring to me and all of the thoughts
and sensations in my life I was trying
to be even absolutely sincere like this
is what's happening to me I can't I
can't convey it I just can't do it
there's too much I have to be selective
and I think we should
we should we should always remember that
we always being selective and I'm not
accusing you of this but some of the
time when I hear people talk well I'm
just gonna speak the truth therefore
they're forgetting that right they can't
jump out of the fact that they're
framing they're selecting this is you
know this is stuff that's come from the
heart of the philosophy of science
there is no view from nowhere from which
you can state things so maybe that's
what you meant by paying attention to
the context of the conversation and
within the context of a conversation yes
but I think I mean here's where I think
we're not paying enough attention even
theoretically to the context of the
conversations I think we're not caring
about the context of our conversations
enough and that's part of the reason why
they're breaking down into shouting
matches because we're forgetting a lot
of this other machinery the machinery of
relevance that allows us to Center our
attention together all right so we're
almost at the end and I usually like to
do
checkouts I did notice that we have a
new visitor in the the chat room guy
sense ock just joined us
hey Gary they're busy there yeah this is
the oh come on he's on mute
hey there I just how are you my friend
good I just joined I'm sorry I was like
okay well your name is been mentioned
many times and it's been recorded so you
and I can talk about it later perhaps
absolutely it's good to see you you see
it's you yes we're just in and check out
mote guys so you can kind of witness
this
so I usually like just to go around and
maybe say a question or a statement like
we'll lean on the concise sides would be
able six minutes about like something
that feels alive for you
stuff what we heard today and then I'll
hand it over to John for closing
thoughts so I'll go first and then maybe
I'll just take someone and then they'll
go then they'll take someone then we'll
just go around the room so what's life
for me right now is I'm engaging in this
letter wiki exchange with Andrew Taggert
on sort of a DIY ecology of practices so
until we get to this point where we have
like a robust scientific understanding
of what was the best ecology of
practices or until these monasteries are
like you know bearing fruit what's the
most wisest way to design our own
ecology of practices so that's the
question I'm going to be noodling with
and I'm going to take in Jennifer hi you
know I've been thinking a lot recently
I've had experience with somebody who
has a mental disorder so I guess a lot
of the time a lot of what I'm hearing in
this conversation and I guess in my own
brain I'm thinking about meaning and
truth and how he would process that and
I don't know the whole the whole thing
is kind of broken and I guess I'm just
kind of thinking about in the society we
have today people people with some real
mental problems and the challenges that
kind of poses for the culture and our
society at large as far as collective
intelligence and since making an agency
it's kind of a downer but that and I
don't really know how it relates to
anything else we said here but that's
what's going on in my head and if you
could pick the next person to go
Jennifer
naari on
all right what's feeling pretty live for
me right now is actually I'm curious
about the contexts of everybody that's
actually attending this session like
what is it that's drawing all of us
together to be on this chat with each
other
I know on the surface it's something
about John for baekje and wisdom but I'm
just imagining like there's this whole
world behind me that's bringing me here
sitting in front of this computer just
like being very curious about things and
I've been able to get a little bit of
snippets from each person's life with
the questions that you've been asking
and noticing how they're all different
but like deeply relevant to each one of
you and so I'm sitting here just kind of
wondering what it's like for everybody
else behind your own computer screens
and so I'm really enjoying my most check
out and I am going to tag in Jordan
that I can't hear you Jordan okay maybe
we can take in Mike well Jordan get this
thing set up yeah I'm uh I feel sort of
percolating was that felt like one of
the last pieces John mentioned within
that relationship with having truth
without relevance realization and vice
versa that's sort of dynamic importance
of holding holding both the should have
depth of care John seems to be
championing for attending to the context
of the interactions that were feels yeah
there's a good a good place to see the
rest of my attention and see where it
comes comes alive there so that's what's
up for me
what are you uh fortunate you're gonna
think I'm back now
there you go you're yeah you're back
right so I guess the two things are
similar to was just said I'm I've got
this idea
Oh what would happen or what's the
potential in paying more attention to
relevance it's in addition to truth just
like in him on a moment-to-moment basis
when you're conversing with people and
the other thing is something that was
not really delved into just mentioned as
part of a meditative practice by John is
the I think it's the like the
internalizing of the sage practice I've
heard about that before and it got
mentioned again so now it's back in my
mind they kind of want to give it give
it a crack and I'll pass it on to Tim
cool Thank You Jordan
yeah what's coming up for me is to tie
together a few of what's being present
in this check out there was mentioning
by Jennifer of the difficulty of what to
do about all of this in relationship
with someone who for whatever reason if
we can say broadly is not in some degree
does not have some capacity currently
extent to involve themselves with what
it is we seem to be circling around as
valuable and then this ties in a little
bit with Narayan your interest and
curiosity but the context is bringing us
all here and it strikes me that the
context that we each perhaps might share
is of course very very simple which is
some sort of deeply deeply seeded need
and desire to be in relationship with
each other a certain developmental
relationship of care and the sense I get
is that we're all attempting to realize
better ways of entering into those
relationships with each other and those
we encounter in our lives and the world
and the final piece is just well how
like what how how do we do that better
what are the conditions to enter into
this kind of relationship with people
and that's what I think about a lot and
I think in some fundamental sense
there's a you know it's you it has to be
a mutual buy-in right there's a mutual
buy-in you can't change anyone without
engaging yourself in the transformative
practice with them and that's a deeply
mutually sovereign thing and the only
final thing to say is that it seems to
me that a certain certain sort of
fundamental loving openness as a
presence is perhaps what enables someone
even in the very depths of this
connection to feel in that kind of
contextual way to feel somehow in that
non propositional way that there's a
third there's a fertility to the setting
of their experience which they may be
able to participate in and so yeah I'd
suggest that love is knocking away in
there is something very important and
perhaps Jake if you go next
sure thank you the question that I'm
leaving with are all kind of about
ethics and how to think about ethics in
light of wisdom amend this kind of
different view of what what rationality
and and knowledge mean because I do feel
like ethics kind of occupies a weird
space between some of the different
kinds of knowing that you talk about
so I'm tempted to say there's a truth in
ethics in the same way that there would
be in science but there's also obviously
ethical experience there's there's the
kind of participatory quality to ethics
and you know I I can never kind of
escape the specter of many people who
seem to have gone very far down a wisdom
path who nevertheless end up behaving
and kind of ethically dubious ways in
fact reliably seem to behave in
ethically dubious ways so yet that's
just that's just a kind of living
question for me is how do you have a
conception of ethics that's that's kind
of embodied in the live and entails
ethical experience without falling prey
to this kind of you know I can
I am the the Bodhisattva bun can do no
wrong type behavior that leads to
monstrosity so anyway that's what I
think though and I will pass it to Brent
thanks my closing sentiment kind of
builds on and it was coming up for me
when Amy and John we're talking and and
the Ryan a little bit and it's basically
this idea that that hasn't come up in
this conversation is conventional wisdom
and it's typically a pejorative mmm-hmm
and I think it's an important thing to
consider when we talk about wisdom
because it's like a mask groupthink
delusion potentially maybe it's
something harmless like you participate
in some social construction like
Christmas and that's the conventional
wisdom but maybe it's something more
Imperial or militant right so that's and
this is a more sociological question and
it relates to things kind of
outside the domain of psychology
somewhat so I think we should keep those
things in mind as we build our
individual and collective sense making I
know I want to quickly close with an
anecdote which it's it's personal to me
and I think it's really helps give
context to this conversation when I was
a kid I went to my dad and said like I
was into Socrates and learning about
Socrates and I was kind of just blown
away by the fact that Socrates was
famous for his ignorance this was kind
of a point of pride Socratic ignorance
and I said as explaining to my dad I
said I mean Socrates was the wisest in
the land because he knew nothing right
isn't that amazing and my dad it's not
not a philosopher but without missing a
beat he turned to me and he said oh yeah
well I know even less so so the takeaway
there is you know just this this
humility before knowledge and and you
can help you we all should have it in
the basic sense that Socrates did but
maybe that's not enough you have to go
further and just be a complete oblivious
sponge for knowledge I'll pass it on to
Antoine I do wonder because you know
Jennifers I might have maybe it's as I
think it is maybe I think it's more than
it is because
is insufficiently
optimized to read people so that's one
of the many questions that ones I guess
for myself it's like to what degree
exactly is that behavior actually
beneficial so let's go hi so I'm curious
to focus more on your longing part of
wisdom like on this journey of wisdom
being more wise things has to shift
I mean supposed to shift spiritually
physically biologically and how do we
get to play with belonging when things
are shifting with the result of a good
wisdom journey and this was my question
and I I think I'll pass it to Elliot
thanks well I'm grateful to have found
this space especially because I tend to
be kind of cynical or pessimistic when
it comes to the the prospect of
collectively making sense of the world
and wisdom seems to be something that
somehow were not able at least to get on
the same page about in general and so so
one of the questions that this kind of
re-ignited for me is the question of how
scalable is this approach that we're
here to enact this evening and and how
how much of a
is it a niche thing is it something that
the idea of reflecting on the nature of
wisdom and trying to live that what's
the potential for what what does it take
to bring it to scale or is it is it more
of a niche thing and I can imagine
everything from a sort of I mean this
level society to Oxley and sort of
melete to kind of pull on the strings
and I feel like we'll be somewhere in
between as far as who's who's interested
in this and integrating it and so yeah
my question of what what this sort of
pursuit looks like at scale is it's
still at the front of my mind and who do
we have left as Jason which I can you
know does your audio work if not maybe
just write your question in the chat box
[Music]
Gaia
dude would you like to say a few words
yeah it's been kind of cool like not
being here for all of it and just
hearing that everyone respond to having
just what you went through and I
basically what I what I think I'm
hearing is things are more mysterious
than I thought and I somehow feel closer
to what is more mysterious in some way
and I just that sounds like a really you
guys had a really good time together
yeah so Jason I don't know if you can
hear us but again feel free to write
your question down la is that Jason you
there yeah I think so yeah sorry yeah
still learning how to drive the controls
here yeah great
first check out I'm interesting I guess
I was interested just where had this
more time to distributed cognition like
you know where say individual identity
ends and maybe where collective identity
begins and you know maybe a forwarding
space taking space you know where that
sort of nebulous own sort of interacts
and
how to navigate that sort of space that
was sort of where off sort of left at
great and John you can take it home
what's what's the most alive for you
right now what's most live for me right
now is I wish we could all talk for
another three hours because I want to
answer or at least respond to you maybe
I should that were brought up because I
found them a lot of them like insightful
and intriguing and thought-provoking and
so that's there's that and then as
always but that is not in any way
diminish its importance I'm very
grateful for the way that these things
for that I'm grateful the people are
interested in my work but I'm also
grateful to be part of this to me people
like you Peter and you know Tim and guy
and the rest of you you know all of this
is deeply encouraging there's a lot
that's going on both globally and
locally even personally for me that
isn't necessarily encouraging but I find
all of this terrifically encouraging so
I just wanted to also express gratitude
for that mmm and I definitely echo that
there seems like this is strange family
emerging these cast of characters they
keep coming in my life so I want to send
the gratitude for everyone coming and
especially you John for taking the time
to do this that was a great session yeah
and stay tuned for more I'm sure we'll
have round two with John and then
there's a Andrew tag are coming and the
guy I'd like you to do one of these as
well if you're available well I want to
know when guys gonna be on because I
want to be here when guys are should
come fashionably late to that one as
well
[Laughter]
ferried everyone you can hang around
this chat for as long as you want I'm
gonna press I'm going to stop the
recording yeah
until next time thank you so much pizza
for organizing these and