[Music]
regular viewers of the channel will know
that we've done quite a lot of stuff
around gender quite a lot of stuff
around masculinity and this is just such
a big story and such an important moment
to unpack and such a complex thing to
unpack as well we were we were called by
the Guardian yesterday for a quote and
it just felt not appropriate to give a
quote snowing on a journalist used to
work in the media for quite a while so I
know kind of how the quick turnaround
news thing works and it didn't feel
right to give a quote that then might be
taken out of context because I think
it's gonna take us at least 40 minutes
and maybe more to really unpack it know
you mentioned you work in the media I
used to work in advertising as well so
it's a very interesting moment for an ad
to be this kind of cultural lightning
rod
you know I've having worked in an agency
knowing how an ad is made and knowing
all the different dynamics that go on
within it it's it's quite an interesting
phenomena to to observe yeah just for
anyone who's been living under a stone
for the last couple of days I haven't
seen this I mean the amount of views
that it's had it was up to about 9
million views in a very short space of
time at two days hugely polarized
reactions it was running about 10 to 1
dislikes to light ratio it's now up to
about four to one which we'll talk about
later because that already some people
are questioning whether that's kind of
completely authentic and it's really
interesting I thought it was done in a
way it's done very well because these
things these huge amounts of budget
behind it and it's very easy to get
polarized into if you don't approve this
then you must be a sexist you must be a
misogynist but you look at the level of
the response and either and there are
some people that even I've seen people
tweeting this is like whoa this was so
needed because look at the level of
response look at the level of there must
be far more troglodytes misogynists out
there than we realise by the response to
this film and that's really unfair
but I think to unpack it properly it's
gonna take a little while to look at the
cultural context to look at play a few
clips from some of the people we've
interviewed especially Warren Farrell
because I think his perspective is
really valuable in this in this point
but let's let's start by talking about
the film itself yes because it was done
by a very high-profile director Kim
Gehrig so a female director who did a
very well-received and very successful
campaign called this girl can and we're
going to play a little clip from that
now and we'll just sort of then unpack
the differences and what it says about
the cultural context Mississippi bring
the damned I'm the hottest round y'all
can stop me now
[Music]
this girl can't I think it's a great
campaign it's actually by death by
pretty much any definition was a great
campaign it took a real need and a real
issue which is women feeling like they
didn't want to exercise because they
didn't feel confident their bodies they
thought people were watching them I have
a lot of female friends who told me
about this about the kind of feeling
especially like in the freeway section
of the gym like I really want to go in
there so it took that need it did a
great campaign around it and they got
something like well according to an
award entry they did you know 1.6
million women doing exercise
attributable to some way in that to that
campaign which is great so really
different response to the Gillette ad
and I think part of that is because so
this girl can everything in there is
aspirational is this girl can do this
you can do this you can do this it's you
know kind of don't hold me down great
very empowering nothing wrong with that
did you let add if it's this girl can
it's very much these men should
completely different energy to it yeah
and I mean it's very early to start
saying whether the Gillette had a
success or not but the the way that it
sort of raced to attend to one dislike
ratio and then it's come back somewhat I
don't know whether that's just cause a
lot of kind of early adopters and people
who kind of immediately hate clicked on
the ads were kind of anti the message
but there's a lot of suggestions that
that Gillette are deleting some of the
comments that there is in some sense
they weren't expecting the responses
they got and actually I think you picked
out on one of the ad agency campaign
campaign a kind of official Bible of the
ad agency there's already been a senior
ad person who said that this isn't a
successful campaign yeah I'm pointing
out Fernando de shoot who runs new macho
who was also an X brand rector of links
another brand that has men as their
target audience that's interesting what
he was saying about I thought was a
really nuanced article he wrote I was
actually surprised to see a major
advertising publication put that out
there so this is a guy he used to be the
head of links links links and was
responsible for links rebranding
from probably American viewers will be
aware of it but links especially in the
90s have really kind of crass
advertising which was the idea was one
of them was you spray yourself with
links and a woman actually falls out of
the sky like it like an angel you know
they were kind of it was ridiculous and
they had to they change their
positioning to be a bit more mature and
he did a very good job of that so he was
pointing out the fact amongst many other
things about why the campaign isn't so
great is that it falls into the
progressive mantrap he called it and way
oversimplifies what we're men are really
at as well you know he's on this
research with looking at talking to
2,000 men and women and I thought one of
the most interesting things he points
out is that it's not that there's either
progressive man or traditionalist men
most men have are holding different
viewpoints at the same time so I think
they focus on the symptoms of
masculinity saying okay the main crisis
has symptoms men are more violent men
are not well behaved with women they are
not a man so they focus on that and not
what was the underlying issues they
focus on the symptoms if they didn't
focus on men are in crisis why they are
in crisis that is what I said in the
article they are in crisis because they
are performing who they are unknown
being there so it is empower them to be
who they are they said okay why don't we
teach them how to be and that was then
the execution and mistake that is this
idea of teach them how to be and do it
also in in a way that is not very
Olympic so I guess I'm gonna frame this
film that we're doing now it's gonna be
we've done a whole series called men and
women after me too based on the premise
that if the cultural conversation right
now looks like a dysfunctional
relationship and I think it does what
does a functional relationship look like
and why I think Warren Farrell is such
an interesting voice in this is
that he was one of the earliest and most
high-profile leaders of the feminist
movement and then started doing men's
groups listen to men's stories and then
became known as the father of the men's
movement and but his real skill and his
real job is relationship counseling like
he runs relationship counseling with his
wife he's a therapist it's like you
cannot have a functional relationship
between men and women if one side is not
allowed to speak the more I paid
attention to the dialogues that were
happy to though the the discussions that
were happening in the men's groups I
formed the forms of 300 men's groups and
those were ways where men opened up and
said what they felt in the safety of
other men who were saying gee I didn't
realize anybody else but me felt that
and so but then when many of them when I
started to incorporate those what I
heard in the men's groups when I started
to incorporate men's pain and feelings
into my presentations of two groups at
colleges and universities I found myself
going from very large standing ovations
large audiences standing ovations and
always being invited back to two or
three more speaking engagements versus
slowly all of that dwindled and I knew
that if I continued speaking and
incorporating men's feelings and fears
that I would continue to have fewer and
fewer speaking engagements and I had to
make a decision you know did I want to
have you know now that I saw the formula
did I want to be formula speak and have
a huge income and do very well and be
very respected and and and applauded or
did I want to go ahead and and try to
discover my best truth and speak up
about that and try to represent and
incorporate men and it while still
retaining a compassion for women and and
and make that part of my life and my my
contribution and I decided at least I
would try to incorporate the best truth
that I could why I think this is really
key right now is we're in a cultural
context immediately after me to those it
was actually said men now is not your
time
speak now is your time to listen
absolutely I can understand that I think
we've said before like me too was a
valuable before it went too far was a
valuable speaking up of women who
perhaps had never felt able to have a
voice have never been able to express
some of the things they express
fantastic and perhaps it was appropriate
then for men to listen and women to
speak but you can't stay there because
by definition that is not a relationship
it's not a relationship it can't be a
relationship it's so where when we're
both allowed to speak what would we be
saying and we've also got a very quite a
lot of lived experience lived experience
for want of another problematic term
because we leave men's groups and what
we see so we see men coming to our
groups with a whole range of different
issues but one of the big things that we
see almost all the time is men with a
real sense of shame around themselves as
men and I think that's such a big thing
in the cultural context right now and
it's not recognized it's not spoken to
it's still like where we're operating in
the 1950s almost where the big problem
is just toxic masculinity and it's a
really unbalanced picture and I think
that's why this is such a difficult
thing to unpick because if you went
through the film frame by frame you
probably agree with most of the pieces
within it like yes I think I think as
men we should kind of hold each other
accountable I think we should aspire to
be the best that we can be I think we
shouldn't objectify women I think we
should stand up for the underdog I mean
all of these things are valuable but
what is the cultural context that this
is being put into yeah and I think the
other thing just if I think back to what
we experienced leading the men's
workshops is that a lot of what we're a
lot of what we are experiencing together
is getting into a space where we're
often Takai ourselves and we're not
efforting we're not coming from a space
of feeling inadequate having to prove
ourselves by getting validation from the
outside world I'll be the big
tough-guy whatever it is we call we talk
about relaxed confidence so it's a sense
of being connected to myself being
authentically me and from that space I
don't need to act out in these ways now
that comes from connecting to oneself
that's an inner journey but we may do
with others and with the support of
others but ultimately that comes from a
place within and one thing that is
difficult about the ad is that it is
effectively telling people how to behave
you know and I think the the refrain and
the thing they have in the description
is say the right thing
act the right way and that for me and I
totally agree with you now looking at
individual points in the film it's like
yes well I mean that's being a decent
person of course I'm not going to
disagree with a lot of that in the wider
context and the bizarre situation of
Gillett a razor company telling men to
say the right thing act the right way
hey who are they to say it and be what
axioms are they basing that behavior on
I mean it's usually that's the domain of
religion or philosophy to to decide what
are the right ways to behave how do we
you know it's very bizarre and it's an
open question I'm very curious what is
the right way to behave and the right
way to think and behave and you know
according to to the left just and just
to preface a potential counter-argument
which I've seen to this point which is
that brands because they have so many
they have such a big audience that they
have a moral worth but they do have a
moral responsibility to tackle issues
and look at social issues okay let's
assume that's true and I think there's
something in that brands do have a huge
audience and you know brand having a
social role is not necessarily a problem
in and of itself but the nature of that
role and the way it's executed can be a
massive massive problem and you know in
love ways I think a lot of the pushback
with Gillette has been this is far too
much and the toning which is slivered is
condescending it's patronizing and the
big issue goes back to that you know
think the right way act the right way
it's not really okay for anyone to say
that you know there's no sense of
inquiry into okay what is it like for
men what's going on let's have a really
open discussion it's more
didactic so yeah I think the cultural
context is the really important piece
recently there was an article in The
Washington Post why can't we hate men
now you could say that's an outlier but
for that to be commissioned by a
mainstream publication when no one could
even imagine commissioning something why
can't we hate women it's it's a very
it's this idea of do men men do not have
to fall for women to rise and the other
point very recently even at about two or
three days ago there were the APA
guidelines which were clearly
ideologically driven and were
criticizing aspects of traditional
masculinity which included they
described a stoicism ambition for the
sake of it in the end they were forced
to issue a clarification and that
clarification ended up pretty much
saying well men who pursue their own
goals at the expense of everybody else
are dangerous and bad and in the end
they ended up describing a psychopath
like Psychopaths are bad it's like well
okay so why did you call it traditional
masculinity I think Warren Farrell makes
a really interesting point as well about
how the cultural conversation is going
right now where let me see in the
workshops men are really quite confused
and and kind of scared about it feels
like a lot of people feel like they're
walking on eggshells
I think part of that is because there's
a huge social pressure to be more
vulnerable speak more but then at the
same time Warren Farrell points us out
there's an equal pressure to shut the
hell up and listen on one level we have
a narrative that says men need to be
much more in touch with their emotional
side they need to be much more men lock
things down and that's really bad and
women often complaining about that and
then on the other side when men do say
how they're feeling they're often
described as whining or complaining and
there's a little compassion for it this
is exactly accurate and this is that
this is one of the challenges that we
need to really confront is that that we
say men speak up share your feelings
it's like Lois Lane and Superman Lois
Lane wanted and begged Superman to cry
but she has zero interest in hearing
about anything from Clark Kent women do
want to hear men's feelings and hurts
and pains if they're assured first that
their Superman that they're the
protector but when they meet Clark Kent
and he's more open about his feelings
and his pain this just turns the women
off and women don't understand this
about themselves they think that oh you
know my husband really cried when his
old when his mother was dying of cancer
I really supported that so doesn't that
mean I support a man expressing his
feelings the answer is yes and no you
ears you're supportive of a man
expressing his feelings what he's when
he has empathy for someone else's pain
you're not often support or look more
introspectively about whether you are
open to a man expressing his feelings of
anger or hurt or upset about something
that you did but when you experience it
as a criticism from your husband from
your boyfriend oftentimes your boyfriend
experiences you as backing off as being
less willing to be sexual less willing
to be emotionally open being more
distant from him after that he needs
your love he wants your love when he
expresses what hurts him and gives him
pain and he sees that you back off he
tends to repress it because everybody
else as well as you in the society has
encouraged him to back off from
expressing his weakness in any culture
there will be some misogyny but there
will also be misandry because of I mean
misogyny comes wrong you have a negative
experiences as women you have a bad
relationship with your mother or
whatever and that can get internalized
and some we see if that's that that acts
out and I think but the art the topic of
misandry where women have bad
experiences with men bad upbringing was
bad romantic experiencing and then
internalized a generalized resentment
towards men
there is it's not most people don't even
know what the word misandry means and
what's really I don't think enough
people recognize water the the culture
that we're in for example we did an
interview with Cassie J who did the the
red
so it's a film about the men's rights
movement she went into that film
genuinely as a feminist who was going to
do an expose on the men's rights
movement and she had her mind changed
during this film we've interviewed her
I've met other people who were involved
in the film I have no doubt that her
journey was genuine she was convinced
there were issues around men's rights
that were not being reflected in the
culture and what was the reaction to
that to her film in another universe she
would have been seen as a feminist hero
she produced a very intelligent
documentary in a very difficult area to
make any kind of money in whatsoever and
was very brave
she would have been seen as a feminist
here but because she didn't have the
right opinions the film was attacked she
was given a mauling on most of the kind
of mainstream TV channels that she went
on to this happened we recently put out
a piece also by Heather huiying who the
evolutionary biologist around toxic
femininity to say okay both toxic
femininity and toxic masculinity are
very problematic terms but if we're
going to have one then let's have the
other as well and see let's have that
let's have that conversation I mean I
think the whole framing around is is
dodgy but let's let's at least bring in
both sides of the conversation so that I
think is the cultural context of why
people are reacting to this it's because
it's part of a non perhaps overreacting
to it as well because it's part of an
ongoing narrative that has come from the
university's postmodern relativism and
has been increasingly pushing out into
the culture at large and I think this is
the key thing in terms of the cultural
context to understand I've seen a lot of
people asking and I think with genuine
confusion why is anyone upset about this
ad you know how did anyone have a
problem with men acting this way and as
we said before it's not necessarily the
behaviors that are going on it's that
within the framework of what you just
mentioned of let's just lay out the
system basically of what this kind of
the kind of postmodern worldview is and
why it matters to this conversation so
it breaks the world down into identity
groups and then also breaks it that work
reduces everything to power relations so
that's one thing going on within that
framework men especially with the kind
of the way third grade feminism is going
right now maybe not where it came from
but the way it goes in some circles men
are at the top of that hierarchy by
definition it doesn't matter what Batman
you know what his situation is by by
virtue of his group identity he's at the
top of that power hierarchy so in this
extreme form he's the cause of all the
world's ills is inherently in a position
of power and privilege and therefore
needs to be in some sense and has been
throughout history yes as well yes
exactly and and from that what I've
noticed is a sense of men are inherently
dangerous and they need to be taught how
to behave and they need to you know
we've talked before about this idea of
testosterone itself being kind of a
poison and you know little boy and this
does happen little boys in school being
told not to roughhouse being you know
forced into behaving in a way that's
more conducive and less masculine all of
that is going on and it comes from a
sense of it comes from a very specific
worldview and yes and it's rampant in
critical theory and universities in
particular in its most extreme form and
I think a lot of people have a slightly
more nuanced take on this particular
kind of ideology but on it's mostly in
its most extreme form it obliterates any
nuance it obliterates it fails to
appreciate that men commit suicide at a
far higher rate than women do men are
imprisoned a far higher rate there are
far more male failures there are a group
of hyper successful men and there are a
lot of male failures at the other end
what some people have called the greater
male variability hypothesis and also
obliterates the fact that throughout
most of history men were
self-sacrificing for their families they
were going to war they were sacrificing
their life their lives and their futures
for others and this is completely missed
in this kind of idea that men were just
hauling all the power and privilege to
themselves it kind of feels like we're
we're stuck in a dysfunctional
relationship between men and women that
is now manifesting
everywhere and Warren you've you've done
work with with relationships for an
awfully long time do you see that
parallel and if so what do we do about
it yes we are we are definitely caught
up in an in a dysfunctional relationship
that would be kind men we know we're
asking men to you know to sort of
express their feelings recognizing that
we're repressed we're so repressed that
we're the sexes that commit suicide and
at a level of six times to 6 to 1 over
women when we're in our 20s and when
we're 85 and older at 1,350 percent
greater amount than women and if that's
not dysfunctional and tell me what is
now suicide is probably the ultimate so
in order for us so we are wanting men to
open up on the one hand and then we're
saying don't mansplain you've dominated
the conversation shut up this is time
for women to speak up this is time for
men to shut up so the totally
contradictory messages that men are
getting told that they're filled with
power and privilege and yet walking
around in reality feeling shamed and
fearful and that women have a type of
power that they're not even allowed to
talk about because they're the ones with
the power and the monopoly over it so
it's it's that is about as dysfunctional
as it can get
we have to understand that we have these
attractions to each other for for
fundamentally dysfunctional reasons we
were never designed to be functional we
were designed to survive and now we have
the opportunity for the first time in
human history to be functional as well
as surviving and this is a whole new
dialogue that needs to be together but
though feminists have monopolized that
dialogue of women good men bad women the
oppressed men as the oppressors and
that's about as dysfunctional as you can
structure a dialogue it's as it's like a
person going into therapy and saying I
came here because you know my wife is
filled with problems and and I have been
telling her what to do for many years
and she doesn't pay any attention to my
direction
and she's a 100% wrong on these 14
different items and I'd like you to help
align with me to help you understand how
wrong she is by the way if you do align
with me I will continue hiring you as a
therapist I control the money but if you
don't align with me that'll be the end
of you as a therapist and we're
basically having feminists say to the
world if you want to teach in gender
studies you have this party ideology to
follow you have to believe you have to
articulate that men we live in a
patriarchal world dominated by men that
made rules to benefit men at the expense
of women and if you don't follow that
ideology there's not a chance in that
you'll get a job at any decent
university unless that ideology is at
your forefront and you just have your
own unique ways which we give you many
unique ways no problem at all as long as
you have unique ways of expressing that
ideology as effectively as possible to
your to your students and do not deviate
from that or allow anyone else to come
into this university to talk in a
different way about that and so you
cannot define it would be hard to write
a novel with a fictional situation that
would be more of a dysfunctional
dialogue the the monologue than the
monologue that is happening now well you
know we've we used to have a battle of
the sexes that's been historical but now
we no longer have a battle of the sexes
we have a war in which only one side has
shown up the other side called men have
put their heads in the sand and hope the
bullets will miss that's a dysfunctional
dialogue I've had conversations with
people where they have simply denied
that women have any power whatsoever
which is ludicrous
in in a patriarchal system it's
impossible for a woman to have power
even in the sexual realm and I'm having
a conversation where they were the nine
even that women have power in the sexual
realm which is not only just bizarre but
it also it's incredibly demeaning
towards women it's demeaning saying you
you're saying that women have no power
and no agency throughout history until
the 1960s really I mean that's just a
completely ludicrous perspective to be
coming from yeah but it makes perfect
sense in that in that
postmodern context we were talking about
before where you you cannot let go of
the victimhood you can't let go of it
because it's where your power comes from
in that game so you have to no matter
what evidence is presented in the world
around you matter how different the
world is now than it is that it was in
the 1950s you must still if you adhere
to that particular religion let's call
it you must still maintain that you are
the victim and that and then you have to
find other victims as well they it gets
kind of a you know people called it race
to the bottle if we grant that women
didn't have a voice in public until the
1960s which i'm which i think is is
pretty true and where we're hearing
women's voices women's stories for the
first time for the last 50 years
have we really heard men's emotional
truths at all because it was never part
of traditional masculinity that men
would be emotionally vulnerable so ok
we've we've only listened to women for
about 50 years but how long have we been
listening to men's deeper truths about
their experience we have to realize that
the male-female evolutionary dance has
evolved as a tango for millions of years
and it's very important that women speak
up about what they do and don't like
about their parts of the tango and that
we recognize that there are thousands of
different women from different
backgrounds who have different answers
to that question that women don't just
have one message to deliver on that
issue at the same time all the exact
opposite is also true
it is not true that we haven't listened
to women
we haven't listened to women speak the
feminist message for more than a
half-century but we haven't listened to
men express their feelings ever at all
that was exactly the opposite of what
masculinity was about so let's open up
and hear boys and men's stories but what
do we need to do we need to know how to
listen so on the subject of men's kind
of emotional stories not being heard
it's also quite closely linked to that
idea of men being forced to play certain
roles or you know for whatever reason
playing certain roles I think one of the
best criticisms of the Jillette ad is
actually from Fernando the
advertising guy we talked about earlier
where he points out that they are
effectively doing exactly the same thing
in that ad they are saying you must
perform a certain role to be the right
kind of man
so Gillette is really doing what
Gillette was doing in the 1950s this is
how to be the right kind of man and
they're doing exactly the same thing so
they are effectively just I'd say moving
the goal posts repackaging it and the
core problem remains the same of
pressuring and shaming people into
behaving in a certain way and hidden
within that is the idea that unless you
are threatened or compelled to act in
that way you won't act that way that men
by their nature are not good
that there is something inherently toxic
about masculinity about men and that's
what's what's terrifying is that unless
you're under this compulsion to to rein
yourself in and behave you will act out
and that's that's really that's toxic
yeah and it's not true
I just think of as soon as you say that
I think of the many beautiful moments of
male support and brotherhood we've seen
the workshops I would quite like anyone
who wants to mature let marketing team
to come to a workshop but just to
witness it just to see how absolutely
off the mark that is and how absolutely
damaging and toxic it is to put that
message out there they make a big show
about the boys of the future you know
the boys right now will be the men of
the future telling boys right now that
there's something inherently wrong with
them because of their sex that's gonna
cause problems when they're men of the
future so thank you for watching we're
gonna put the links to all of the other
films below in the show notes the Warren
Farrell and all the other men and women
after me two films that we've done and I
want to say thank you for we've just hit
50,000 subscribers so thank you very
much for that and and also a thank you
to everyone who's moved over to our
members area on our website from patreon
we're closing our patreon
at the end of this month so if you want
to support what we do and you want to
get access to exclusive content
and monthly calls and there's a brand
new forum there's lots of great stuff on
our members area of our website and
patreon will be no more our patreon
let's say will be no more in a few weeks
so that's the best way to support us and
we'll put info down in the show notes as
well
[Music]
you
[Music]