the planet is in chr√©tien the planet
itself the environment and the people
that are causing this crisis everyone's
life is a value and we should make sure
they've got the opportunity to live a
beautiful productive life we are hurting
other people through war and violence
then we're going to hurting ourselves
this manifest world too often is
dominated by horror and human suffering
and pain cultural narratives are
promoted that are beneficial only to
elite these are not true we must create
solutions from the bottom up governments
in the world are not going to do it for
us food production must be an issue of
sustainability taking care of the earth
the old order is beginning to break down
that comes apart of it's very
distressing we are dealing with
extinction level problems now
this is a true manipulation of
uncertainty in your proliferation care
we are ready to take it makes quantum
leap in other news the crisis is
meaningful because it's forcing us into
consciously if all that is required is a
radical shift in consciousness this is a
little of the solution and we're looking
forward with hope we're part of an
immense shift that this is not a pipe
dream is happening is happening on a
mass scale right now the world story
weaving through the minds and psyches of
hundreds and billions of people but the
story is changing we're moving into a
different story of self a different
story of the world a different story of
the people we have an opportunity to
play a role in the greatest transition
drama the world has ever seen things
aren't working so well anymore it's a
lot harder to fully believe in our
stories kind of birthing us into a new
understanding of what's real and what's
possible and who we are we're in the
process of awakening on a mass scale we
are entering somewhere we've never even
been before as a species we truly are
living in an extraordinary time you've
never lived in a world where small
groups can touch the lives of a billion
people there is a community of change
agents people who believe fundamentally
change who are working actively towards
it we're not just talking about it the
secret to change is not fighting the old
but finding the power to fight for the
new people who are voluntarily rising up
and taking matters into their own hands
people who have become active in the
transformation taking place in the world
Savannah
that movements that unprecedented
swelling off of the hidden mainstream
that's the biggest movement in human
history we have the opportunity to come
together and create unprecedented global
human thriving we humanity now the
potential to design our own evolution
that has never happened before
exponential change is happening an
extraordinary rate of innovation and
breakthroughs is leading towards a world
of unprecedented abundance we live in a
world today where your dreams are things
that you can completely manifest
yourself today there is nothing that we
cannot do whether it's to go in mind the
asteroids extend human lifespan change
the conversation from one about
complaining about problems to one about
solving problems making your vision
happen every year person has a unique
and necessary role to play in this
transition that's why you're here the
shift on planet Earth requires a
critical mass of people saying yes to
the inner ships give the better you the
you a chance we love what you're doing
and you have big dreams your impact is
amazing I think that the world is going
to be saved by entrepreneurs and I think
entrepreneurs seriously advanced us in
terms of innovation and new ideas what
we're starting to see is a generation
that sees themself as potential change
engines with or without resources just
in and of themselves they are open they
have less invested in the status quo
that's why there is so much hope in a
younger generation we can make a
difference right now we don't have to
wait till we're grown up to do it right
now
we are young and we have new different
ways of thinking flashlight that runs
only on the heat of a human hand work it
is a new way to detect pancreatic
ovarian as one cancer that cost three
cents is excitement to us I took for mom
once in a week - I need my own box we
can do this I thought it was just one
child and I put her into pool and watch
that her life was transformed so today
there's 220 students enrolled the
sexiest thing in the entire world it
being really smart and being thoughtful
and being generous the new feminine has
no gender it's a principle that men and
women both possess defined by gentleness
and compassion and heart but women all
over the world are finding a new power
and the transformation of the world and
it is happening quickly imagine a world
where all girls are given opportunity
and education we can break the cycle of
illiteracy poverty and disease in a
single generation we just want to be
connected to something higher
consciousness is an expanding
I think the important thing is to have
the central tenets of your being love
compassion and tolerance everyone knows
that the Pope which is focused on
compassion has become the new voice of
conscience whether you have a spiritual
perspective or a religious perspective
evolved the way we are to get there are
a lot of challenges that will come up
before we get to where we need to go but
we're getting that the beautiful thing
about life right now is is that there is
no dream too big and there is no
challenge and you cannot overcome making
a change making the world a better place
is not only your responsibility it is
your choice your blessing it's your gift
it's your opportunity to make your life
mean something so thank you
the