I hate both phrases toxic masculinity
and toxic femininity and you know the
piece that I wrote for Colette I think
was called on toxic femininity to to
make the point right up front you know
before I got into it in the piece that
this that this was going to be that
conversation or at least a very small
part of it actually there's a lot more
to say about it which is that and I
guess I would also there's a lot more to
be said and I would want to really
separate out over in toxic masculinity
space the stuff that a subset of men do
that is actually toxic to use this sport
that is problematic is also problematic
word now and the things that men are
more likely to do and that some people
don't like it but but deal with it right
so you know being more likely to maybe
interrupt in a conversation being more
likely to take risks this is a more
masculine way of being on average and I
don't poison us in school boisterous is
also medicated out the boys right very
much so so that's a whole other
conversation but absolutely the fact
that the schools are designed for girl
ways of learning the schools mostly are
not designed for boy ways of learning
and so boys get slapped and corralled
and told to sit in straight rows and
look forward at the teacher and take
nice notes what they're probably closer
to illegible handwriting than the girls
have that's not doing boys any any any
good so you know the actual toxic male
behavior so I would say that you know
most men on average will display some of
the stuff that most men tell you will
are more like to be boisterous than most
women and all of this but but aggressing
you know being violent aggressing
pushing oh in the sexual sphere this is
what toxic masculinity should mean right
like this this is what that should refer
to so if that's true then over in the
toxic femininity sphere what what kinds
of things are on average when
more likely to do but this is just a
more feminine a more female way of being
they're more likely to to be in groups
same-sex groups and talk as opposed to
do like men are more likely to get
together and do and women are more
likely to get together and talk I think
on average and maybe they're doing
something at the same time you know some
some kind of craft or or eating together
and men are more like like go out and
play game or build something or fix a
car and that's you know very
stereotypical but it's also true so in
that talking there is the building of
relationship and there is also the
building of kind of storytelling some of
which is true and some of which isn't
and so people will complain about sort
of women tending to be gossipy the way
that will complain about men not sharing
their feelings and I would say those are
sort of equivalent in terms of like this
it's just like actually somewhat
stereotypical feminine or masculine ways
of being and there we are like we can
continue to talk about it but toxic no
right
by comparison so men are on average
bigger and stronger and so when they go
toxic when they go off the rails they
are more likely to go physical and
society-wide it is easier to point out
and to make rules against physical
violence and so toxic masculinity actual
like violence is relatively easy to call
out and you know what the me2 movement
could have been was a empowering of
people to actually call out real
harassment and worse when it happens me
too
went off the rails when it could have
done good in part because of what
actually can be toxic in women the same
way men can go violent few of them do
but it's bad women are much less likely
to go physically violent or an average
smaller and not as strong of course
we're not as likely to have used
physical violence as our
and right men are more likely to have
used physical violence as their weapon
when they went violent women are much
more likely to use wiles and sexuality
because especially for young women that
is where their power is and young women
have such vast power over basically
every other demographic at least in
American culture in in some cultures and
you know in the Far East where elders
are respected more this is not this is
not going to be the same kind of dynamic
but in a culture that has a tremendous
amount of freedom to express yourself
and your identity how you want to anyone
who is any young woman who is at all
close to the beauty norms for her
culture and that is it's probably less
true than it used to be but it used to
be most women from you know I don't know
the ages of fifteen to thirty something
like that and you know our diet and Big
Pharma and such of messed with that to
some degree but most young women have
had the revelation sort of whether it's
waking up one day or emerging over
several months of I now have a way of
moving around in the world and of
controlling people that I never had
before and wow that is something that I
don't even know what to do with that as
a power and most women figure out how to
deal with it I think and you know make
some mistakes along the way and you know
hurt some people but you know it all
works out in the end people hurt each
other in relationship with one another
but there is a particular kind of I'm
going to be as explicitly sexual as I
possibly can be and then cry foul when
anyone but perhaps might intend to
target or maybe even anyone says
anything to me that reveals the truth
that we all know which is that
you are explicitly sending sexual
messages constantly and drawing the
attention of all the straight men in the
room and affecting what everyone else
can do why are we not allowed to say
this it's you in any room where there is
a beautiful young woman
who is actively exposing her sexuality
either through you know phenotype or
behaviorally or usually both it's the
elephant in the room you never talk
about it never ever it would be rude oh
you don't allowed to do that that's just
her choice well but isn't isn't she also
changed their dynamic for everyone and
is that less dangerous than a dude who
threw a punch yeah
in the moment the dude who threw a punch
can be stopped like don't do that on the
other hand this thing just like the
authoritarian nonsense on the left is
accepted it's culturally accepted and
the authoritarian nonsense on the right
isn't culturally accepted mostly and
physical violence for men isn't
culturally accepted mostly another
factor in that you say it's culturally
accepted is and I've had this exact
argument where I've tried to make the
point that women do have sexual power
I've had people say it's not possible
that the nature of the patriarchy means
that they don't have power and I thought
of all the all the places where when do
have power it's surely in the sexual
realm right no and and I'd always have
and you know the yes rape is older than
humans you know there are other primates
rape and are raped and it's awful and
it's true and it's never going to end
completely but it is becoming more rare
as we actually reveal that you know
women are fully human as well you know
every culture that actually has actually
the less inequality between men the
higher the rates of monogamy and the
less violence against women and the less
frankly patriarchal the culture is the
more inequities in status between men
the more likely there are to be very
powerful men who actually control
everything very disempowered men who
have almost nothing and all of those
women who are if they're straight and
they're looking for mates trying to get
with the few men up here and not the few
men down here and that's not a stable or
good Society it's just it's just not so
you know Jordan Peterson got a lot of
flack for his comment in a different New
York Times article about enforced
monogamy right and I read that article
in forced monogamy that's really not a
term we use much but it is a term over
in evolutionary biology and it's a
concept in evolutionary biology which is
to say monogamy is enforced by women
monogamy when it emerges as a social
system as a mating system as it has in
not very many mammals lots of birds for
reasons that we won't get into here but
I find fascinating anyway when mock
monogamy emerges usually out of a
polygynous system that is in which a
single male mates with multiple females
and therefore there are a lot of males
who don't have any meeting opportunities
at all when monogamy emerges out of a
pledge in a system it is almost always
when we can figure it out when the
animal behaviors can go in and figure it
out the women who are enforcing the
monogamy who are preferring a world in
which there are pair bonds and when one
partners and therefore you know help
with child care and just having you know
partners for everything going forward to
the degree that enforced monogamy is a
thing it's enforced by women it's not
enforced by men and I know for sure I
haven't talked with him about it but I
know for sure that that's that's what
Jordan meant by that as well one of the
interesting side effects of this
conversation not being had in the
mainstream and so many things being off
topic for the mainstream is that and I
wasn't really aware of this until
started doing films about sexual
dynamics and men and women after me too
and some of
topics that we've covered this huge oh
this huge group online sort of a
different kind of you can say Macau
men's rights activists like the center
of gravity online especially on YouTube
is it is very different from the
mainstream conversation and it seems
that because that conversation is not
allowed to be had the conversation
around some women's sexual power for
example the only place that exists is
online and it often goes very toxic it's
not women can behave in these ways women
are people too it becomes women always
behave you yeah women always behave in
these ways women will always look for a
man who's better than you etc etc and
it's fascinating it's like if this
because this conversation is not in the
in the sunlight it often goes toxic and
then goes really septic it seems oh I
think that's exactly right and I think
that's very much what's happening over
you know so on the on the extreme right
you've got people making population
level claims about women and on the
extreme left you have people making
population level claims about all men
and both of them are wrong and not to
say that you know all men aren't more
likely to display the horrors that some
men display than they would be to
display the horrors that some women
display while still being very very
unlikely to do so but I do think that
this is this is why this is why I wanted
even though I hate the terms this is why
I wanted to make you know help make sure
that there was a term to mirror the one
that is being paraded around on the Left
if toxic masculinity then okay toxic
feminine and II and you know what in
both cases hoping that they cancel each
other out right yeah can can the eight
of you over here on the eight of you
over there just you know get together do
your awful thing to each other can we
lock you in a box together and then open
the door in two years and either you're
better or you're dead I think that was
something but it's not it's obviously
not everyone and it's not a majority in
either group and the mistake is
imagining that
you know just to take to take the
masculine side for the moment we can do
it with both to imagine that being
interrupted in conversation as a woman
being interrupted by a man in
conversation I'm gonna jump - Wow you're
capable of rape aren't you know those
are different things a woman
let's see how can how can we do it for
the for the female side you know two
women get together and talk about what
happened and an event the night before
they're gossiping oh well then you're
going to abandon your husband as soon as
you know better guy comes around and use
your sexual Wiles to capture someone
with more money no most most women don't
do that and most what men aren't and
wouldn't be and couldn't be rapists but
in in both sides there's a there's just
no there's no good faith left I think
and you know i I've I've mostly not seen
the so you pronounced the acronym mug
Tao looked I'll yeah and and mr a is I
mostly haven't seen those discussions
because the few times I've gone in they
are so they're so toxic and and so awful
that I just haven't spent time there but
I you know I do feel the same way about
in deepen over in an authoritarian left
space it's not there aren't the same
kinds of incitement to violence right
but but it's just as awful one of the
phrases that I wasn't familiar with him
till we started making films about this
topic was hypergamy I didn't really know
what it meant I had to look it up but
also it's it's tends to be used as a
kind of catch-all conspiracy theory by a
lot of the guys sort of in the more
mgtow
MRA type area hypergamy meaning that a
woman will always look for a mate who's
above her in status and it's used as you
can never be certain with a woman
because she will always be looking
elsewhere yeah she's always looking
elsewhere
you can't help that it's in her nature
and men you have to be aware of this
what do you make of that as an
evolutionary biologist yeah you know
there there are things that men and
women do that our evolutionary and not
symmetrical and not universal but still
sex specific and hypergamy while not a
super common term in the literature is
is a term that emerges from the
evolutionary literature and it does it
does touch on a reality which is that
throughout most of pre human prehistory
and recorded history as well precisely
because of the sexual power that a young
specifically through a bunch of history
a young very young unmarried woman had
she for a very brief moment in time had
a chance to increase her lot in life
greatly and at some point that that
window was going to close and so she and
maybe her parents maybe restated family
depending on the type of society that
she was in we're looking for the
absolutely best bet and so how might
that manifest in a modern is remaining
and dating scheme a young woman who is
well aware of her own sexuality and that
she's a her prime and who every time she
walks out the door has eyes on her which
frankly you know young young women just
have eyes on them all the time you just
need it's hard not to know how much the
world is looking at you if you if even
if you're not exposing yourself just if
you are of a certain age and like I said
it all fit sort of the beauty norms fear
if your culture is our are women going
to be aware of those eyes and and
potentially looking for an improvement
in their lot
perhaps is what's so what's the
counterpoint what's
and it's not it's not symmetrical it's
not a mirror image because male and
female are not mirror images of one
another at all
well the counterpoint I would say is the
trope from literature and from reality
and from everything in between that
women upon having raised a man's
children to some level of independence
who will find themselves without a
family as he goes and finds the next
newest 20 a nubile 20 year old right
that that men stick around through you
know for a for a relationship until they
now have the kind of power that you know
men's power grows over time and women's
sexual power anyway
tends to decrease decrease over time so
at the point that those lines kind of
cross men are much more likely to
overturn relationships and find someone
else who looks like their wife did 20
years ago or 30 years ago so are both of
those things true do they happen they do
is it everyone
no is it a risk yes does it you know
does it warrant the idea that this is
what all women do know do are all men
going to consider or actually abandon
their wives at the point that they
aren't young things anymore
no they're not and you must men don't so
just like most men don't behave that way
most women don't behave that way either
something that just came up when I'm
thinking about these sort of two
perspectives is in both of those
perspectives the other sex is seen as
the enemy in some sense and in fact we
should be collaborative and we are I
mean we are when it works sorry I
interrupted you no yeah I was gonna say
in in both these perspectives there's
sort of an implicit or explicit
assumption
it certainly implicit in a lot of sort
of feminist theory like if you if you
picked apart if you picked apart the
Kathy Newman interviews I've seen some
people do there's an implicit assumption
a lot of her questions that men and
women are pitted against each other
and if you go on to sort of the more
extreme ends of the the male-dominated
manosphere there's this explicit yeah
we're now will yeah looked at yeah women
are that our interests are not aligned
there essentially so different that we
can't even exist together right
it seems nuts to me and in fact if we
are if we are thinking explicitly
evolutionarily well we have in our past
as what most long-lived social living
primates have are two hierarchies within
any group and there's a male hierarchy
and there's a female hierarchy and it's
confusing now when men and women are
both doing you know work together that
isn't inherently gendered and so that
that has confused a lot of what people
think they know about how it is they're
supposed to be interacting with one
another and and the fact that in some
workplaces you know the fact that actual
sex can come in do you like them at the
prospect of sexual relationships comes
into workplaces is also very confusing
but overall women are much more likely
to be compared to for the women and men
with other men than men with women that
men and women tend to be tend to have
interests be they sexual or not and I
think I mean in fact and this is this is
a bit off topic but you know as as a as
a happily married person myself it's
just easier it's it's far easier to walk
into relationships with with with new
men like okay I know that whatever we're
doing there's we don't have to wonder
like is is it this other thing well it's
not like you guys like you're here in my
home with my husband and like you talk
to him first like that's that's where we
are that's not what we're doing so we
can have a relationship that hopefully
is you know a bit more like it might
have been between two women or two men
but because we're not actually the same
sex maybe we can actually do it without
the compatible combative stuff like more
easily maybe even
then two men could or two women could
whereas we should expect that men are
you know always sizing each other up to
some degree and women are always sizing
each other up to some degree but it's it
should it should be a different less
fraught set of interactions between men
and women in some regards you mentioned
that we used to have hierarchies male
hierarchies and female hierarchies yeah
is or are a lot of the problems that
we're seeing at the moment a lot of the
difficulties the results of bringing
those hierarchies together yeah
can you explain yeah no I mean this this
is you know I wouldn't go back and you
know I've taught I've talked with some
very earnest actually young people looks
like we just go back to the traditional
roles it's like god no like I would
certainly love for us to to once again
celebrate mother full time motherhood if
that's your choice
which seems to many young women seem to
not imagine that that's even on offer
for them but it's never have been what I
would have wanted and the idea that we
should go back to a world that is
prescribed in that way that is
circumscribed for women in the domestic
sphere sounds sounds confining at best
so I'm extraordinarily grateful and
that's very new but it came with a lot
of chaos it came with a lot of
destruction of of sort of an
understanding of okay there are many
spheres and women's spheres and women's
spheres weren't entirely domestic there
was plenty of you know there was plenty
of empowerment but having men and women
do mostly separate work kept relations
between the genders much simpler I think
and so this is this is an unexpected
effect of maybe first wave a second wave
feminism most of the effects for which
I'm grateful this is a mess and it's not
cool
how to carefully get out of it although
it is clear that those extremes on both
sides are not the right way wherein you
demonize an entire population and try to
get them to subjugate themselves to you
and your whims or else they're going to
keep yelling at them that's not going to
help
hello
[Music]
you
[Music]