welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where equal hear and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
welcome to the dark stoah this is a very
special edition
it appears okay first of all just let us
know if it's if the noise is bad and
then we'll move inside just want to make
that clear okay so for those of you who
are new to this these are events where
Pat Ryan the most dangerous man on the
Internet walks us through really
mind-blowing challenging concepts often
about the future of humanity and in this
particular series and sees it
season two we're looking at how to break
down the blue church using its own
methods and the structures a lecture
essentially for 40 minutes and then part
two where we get to ask questions and
this will be recorded and put on YouTube
so if you don't want to be seen in the
question section but you someone asked a
question you can put in the chat and I
can ask it before you and without
further ado I will hand it over to Pat
make sure everything's good here hello
everyone thank you for waiting this one
out sorry for the temporary delay to get
started here the last two episodes if
you haven't been watching them have been
dedicated to kind of a militant takedown
of the blue church and it's been it was
fairly aggressive toned so in this one
one I'm gonna turn it down a bit because
in the last episode I made heavy
allusion to the concept of alchemy and
the concept was lost on a few points and
so I'm gonna dedicate this entire
episode to what is alchemy how did it
come to be why is it a thing and what
can we do about and why am I so focused
on it right now my mouse is being very
erratic I do apologize hold on this is
technical glitches are always a pain
excellent just do that there so I would
like to get started but I'm having the
worst time trying to get started here my
mouse is really really on the fritz so
I'm gonna wing it we're gonna run a
focus on this sorry for being flustered
folks
there's the share screen here we go
that's excellent
so this season is called devouring
humanism and that's a play on words
either the humanism is to borrowing you
or we devour it back this is episode
three our chemical cognition the reason
I'm picking out chem alchemy is because
it is the one of the first casualties of
the Scientific Revolution when
scientific methodology came into be they
quickly had a falling-out between
philosophy and science and set out
alchemy needs to go away because we're
going to measure everything and so for a
while that was okay and we got all kinds
of cool things out of it like computers
or coca-cola that was not a Coca Cola ad
they're not paying me but the
unfortunate part is we're rapidly
approaching a situation where we kind of
need this again one for our own defense
and two for our own progress the new
church will disagree with me heavily on
that so this whole deck is my attempt to
explain why you need it so alchemy chem
that's it it's Ken al is the Islamic
edition meaning though but Ken where did
chem come from it came from ham
surprisingly the son of Noah and we're
all technically members of the
prestigious know a yacht club according
to the Bible and he had a couple kids
one of them was ham and that was going
well for a little bit you know put all
the animals in the boat and then it all
went pretty well until no I had some
rowdy naked juice and all of a sudden
there was those dingdong Fiasco where
him saw his dad naked and that didn't go
so well for him so he cursed him and
said you have the curse of ham you're
going to be a servant forever now ham
wasn't necessarily a servant but his son
was Kenan I believe so that's this is
this is where the ham comes from now and
we call it ham now because ham is often
delicious but in the region where this
word originated from it's actually
pronounced hum so hum
so you have that that that guttural CH
noise so when it was first written down
in English or at least other languages
latinized languages came out as as Cham
actually even though it's pronounced hum
so it came out as Cham when when you
wrote it down
well Chum is there's a reason for that
because it turns out a lot of Himes
descendants became Egyptians that's
actually the lineage of ham is a lot of
his descendants became Egyptians now the
word Egypt comes from the Greek I get
this which means part face boy has some
racism right there but also there's
another net and a definition of Egypt as
well it's called hem cuz because the
sons of the sons of Noah the sons of ham
the sons of ham and that does Kim so
that's kind of this weird evolution of
etymology here where it becomes
surprisingly even Syria calls itself the
land of Khem and that's actually an
important part of the apocalypse
mythology of islam as well so you see a
lot of radical Islamists they actually
used this Apocrypha notation to actually
attract some of the more serious
jihadists into that region which is
going very poorly for everyone involved
but this is all director of Haman even
like when when American slavery was up
and roaring a lot of the biblical
justification was to say well your
slaves cuz cuz that's the curse of ham
you know your that's that's life sorry
pal you got cursed by Noah cuz you saw
those ding-dongs so now your slaves
forever not exactly the best
rationalization but it's all they had at
the time and so chemic was also a part
of Egypt and it meant the black lands
and the Arabic word for alchemy which is
alchimia it means the egyptian science
so alchemy literally translates to the
black arts for all of these reasons
that's where you know you hear the
mystical black art wording this is the
etymology of it and now that I've taken
you down this kind of Pepe Silvia route
of how this word came to be we could
actually move on and
talk about you know what is it actually
talking about it's not necessarily just
what are these Egyptians doing although
comparatively speaking they built
fucking mountains like that's amazing
right so what kind of black magic were
they using there so that's that was also
part of the mythology and this is like
the antiquity Bronze Age stuff so well
we'll move into how the Grecians got
involved in this going back to the
egyptian mythology we start with Imhotep
he was the advisor Joe Joseph and he was
the world's first deified artist the guy
was a brilliant mathematician geometry
and architect for all kinds of pyramids
and because of his brilliance he was
actually deified surprisingly and his
deification is often confused with off
it was the moon god of wisdom magic
causality measurement judgment law and
basically Roz secretary so that's
thought the idea of like tight
measurement careful autistic definitions
of everything yeah in hotep and Thoth
are pretty interchangeable in fact you
see the hotep where Thoth center was you
see there's there's often statue
confusion between the two so also
surprisingly Thoth in antiquity or at
least an alchemical II was confused it's
Moses as well because Moses is the
lawgiver the the premier of measurement
the bringer of of doling out precise
units all these three people are
dedicated to like measuring stuff so
then we throw in Hermes and he's the
messenger of the gods and a soul guide
who would escort souls into the
afterlife now this is a bit of a jump
saying these things should all get
confused together but remember the
purpose of a messenger was also to bring
law and to bring justice you were to run
to this location and bring this measured
message to legal delivery and so all of
these things kind of revolve around the
same concept roughly so what happens
when you add them all together will you
come up with this guy whose name I'm
always going to maggle and that's Hermes
Trismegistus
but that guy right so this guy is like
this mythical
gnostic hermetic entity that pops up
whenever societies go total autism so
they go like they measure everything and
they're really about pure reason and
they're about like sticking to the
letter of the law well this guy shows up
every so often that happens there
whenever people really like stick to the
letter instead of the spirit of the law
this guy comes along in mythological
history and it kind of confuses things
he kind of comes in and says yeah but
here's some gray area here there's some
weird stuff here you shouldn't get so
hung up on the words and everything else
and so this this particular Hermes guy
is actually an edition of Thoth and
Hermes in the gnostic tradition and the
the Hermetic tradition as well in fact
you may have heard the phrase
hermetically sealed in medical context
well that's where this comes from the
idea of how chemically sealing stuff so
air doesn't get in that was only
possible using alchemical processes at
the time and surprisingly that word has
stuck through for most of scientific and
medical usage hilariously so this this
guy is like an archetype that pops up
whenever people get too robotic about
their own existences so it makes sense
that this guy's popping up now and in
the internet place right now so in
addition to that that that Hermes
character that was a Grecian Egyptian
fusion and you see a lot of the
alchemists of medieval Europe really go
towards that character around the the 13
and in the 1500s and that makes sense
because the the international entity
known as the papal Church was was really
sticking it to people in terms of legal
application and you know follow the
letter of the law in addition to the law
of your king follow the law of the Lord
follow the law of God follow our laws
all these laws all over the place it's
just a mess so so when the alchemists of
the Middle Ages come into play
their initial obsession is turning lead
into gold using what's called the
Philosopher's Stone and this is where
most people kind of get into alchemy
probably because a Harry Potter
but the it's much more than that and
it's much more than it looks like the
idea that you can turn lead into gold is
obviously an attractor for all kinds of
talent people who kind of understand
chemistry you can think of it as a way
because it is you can think of it as a
way to attract people out of their black
art Cubbins which they're scattered all
across the place it's not like there is
one black art academy that you can go to
you had individual people who were
keeping their secrets really tight to
their chests sometimes stuff worked
sometimes it didn't but if it worked it
really worked and you didn't want to
share that with everybody if I knew that
these chemical compounds could cure a
sickness yeah I'm keeping that
thanks bro you can pay me and I'm just
gonna rock that all time and no one's
gonna know I'm gonna be hesitant to even
give that to my apprentices so how do
you how do you get all this talent who's
really holding it close to the chest how
do you get him out of the shell how do
you get them to play nice and sort of
like alchemical open source well you
come up with this mythology saying
turning lead into gold so everybody you
know try your magic stuff here we go
we're opening up the door and everybody
try it out so now because of the promise
of wealth people come out of their you
know their hidey holes and now they're
actually trying to do the thing and they
wrap up this mythology as a
philosopher's stone and there was a time
in English history where the philosophy
with the people believed the English had
a philosopher's stone and that the
French were invading to steal it and
that was used as justification to raise
like defenses militarily it's it so it
was a wild tradition it was a wildly
useful tool to to rally people it's
almost as if the myth of the stone was
out communing of itself
and the idea of the stone is really
personified on what's known as emblem 21
of of Michael Myers Atlanta a few goons
where he proceeds to write about various
different emblems and different types of
like mystery histories and stuff like
that and emam 21 is the ingredients to
build what a Philosopher's Stone or I
should say the recipe so to make me
where's my mouse make of the man and
woman a circle of that a quadrangle of
this a triangle of the same a circle and
you will have the stone of the
Philosopher's that sounds cryptic and
many people have tried to understand
this and not a lot of people really got
it I like to think I got it so I'm gonna
walk you through what I got
we'll see what happens now I brought
this up before in season 1 for all you
that might remember this little snippet
from entropy remains undefeated this
whole part about michael mayer and the
palentine he was a court Alchemist of
the Hapsburgs
and this whole like you know these two
things this and this are pretty linked
and we're talking about egyptians and
we're talking about black art and now
Kamiya it's all suddenly connected right
so so that's that's where all this comes
from and an Isaac Newton was a huge
practitioner of alchemy
it was it's considered actually the last
magician in some circles so this whole
thing is a long tradition and it's it's
messy
everyone's our chemical practices are
different everywhere you go and so
because of this it was a foolish attempt
at turning lead into gold this this lie
this grand promise that was possible
actually directly led to the theory of
Atomics atomic theory in particular
because people were then forced to like
okay can you actually do the thing can
you do the thing it was like a
reputation check it was like a mass mass
accountability effort to say all right
what can you actually do about nature
and so this pursuit kind of went to the
wayside after the Spanish invaded South
America and they brought back all that
gold there eventually so full of gold
that they just stopped this this silly
pursuit of the Philosopher's Stone after
that they actually uh did a severe
hyperinflation of gold and they're in
their economy for like you know 100
years it was pretty bad
and so this is where because the
alchemists are successfully making
progress in terms of iterating towards
something that's measurable and and
something that's repeatable and
something that's more compliant to
scientific methodology instead of like
well if you boil two frogs legs and
you're around your head and you jump up
and down you got a whooping cough cure
you you could say that all day long but
because the the pursuit of the out of
the Philosopher's Stone and turning lead
into gold that was that reputation check
actually was beginning to lay the
foundation for scientific methodology
and all the things there and at that
point we're starting to see a divide
between philosophy and science and it
ultimately ends up in a fairly
also divorce its Galileo he's a loader
of people bias and academia he had hit a
lot of beef with the church to the point
he got exiled I think twice from all all
of Christendom and he he said this is
stupid fuck this fuck that I can
actually you know that's the moon I'm
gonna make it look really close at it I
think the strongest argument the church
had at the time is if you had a really
long stick you could poke the moon and
that was like the strongest
counter-argument it's like I mean maybe
that's a really long stick
but Galileo is able to really lay the
foundation not only scientifically and
say look I'm not only am i observing
these astrological features I'm going to
start predicting them as well and he
does and people say oh shit there's some
you know something's here and so this
idea of measuring nature starts to take
precedence over the over the over both
the mystical of alchemy and the divine
of the church so these two like non
measured things that claimed legal
authority and then here comes science
science is saying we're measuring stuff
now fuck off go away this is measure
time so this whole this this is the
beginning of the divorce and we get to
the end of the divorce with the Vienna
circle so these guys you might recognize
a few of these faces especially sad boy
over there but these guys were hell-bent
on destroying metaphysics they just
couldn't stand it they didn't like it
they didn't like any of it
and the names not important you can look
them up if you know em you know if you
don't doesn't really matter but this was
this was a group of people who really
doubled down hard on on the measurement
century the idea that everything can be
measured and fuck you we're gonna
measure everything even if you disagree
so now now science is getting its balls
and it's starting to charge headlong
into politics and into sociology and
every goddamn thing it just tries to
measure everything but as we know when
we get into that hyper measurement phase
well that's where the Hermes character
comes in every single time he always
pops back up whenever a society goes
hyper measurement like this
so what is that you know what is that
what are the terms of that divorce you
know you take the kids I'll take the
money kind of situation
this is business wint internets
everybody's favorite shit poster on on
the Internet Wittgenstein is one of the
Vienna circle people and they finally
get around to measure stuff and maybe if
they just keep measuring better it's
gonna get bad at that you know it
doesn't get better we I'm at the point
in my life as a programmer where every
time I see your programming geek I just
think I'm building another stupid human
trap it's that there is no progress I'm
just endlessly iterating towards some
psychological thing that can be
exploited and it's just getting silly at
this point so you know what do we do
with this what do we do when
everything's measured and we are and
everything's predictable and if it isn't
predictable we can just use the law to
make it more predictable how how how is
alchemy rise from such a embarrassing
defeat where everything can be measured
and there's that you can't even do
that's that that crazy black art
witchcraft stuff anymore
it's the Revenge of metaphysics it turns
out the AI the black box you can't
measure it you can measure the input in
the output you can't measure what's
going on in it and those Neanderthal
brains that chimeric cognition mmm not
gonna measure that either so now we have
this place where all of your rulers and
all of your tactics to measure and get
this like you know fuck metaphysics oh
this is a hard backstop this is this is
a hard I pump the brakes for a second
you're not going to get the results
you're looking for here in fact trying
to measure it is mathematically
impossible because of certain things
like the vanishing gradient and other
types of techniques so you get stuck in
this like gaussian mess when you're
dealing with AI and black boxes and your
techniques of statistics probability
that's that's a heuristic of measurement
for sure but when you have entire
markets being ran by these black boxes
and voting elections and advertising and
everything ran by this I mean what is
your sign is gonna do to that how can
you possibly measure that you can't use
signs anymore you're gonna start
cracking down on law and things get
messy so metaphysics is back and it's
ready for some blood and these two
techniques are really are really gonna
knock it out the park
so I said I had a anything about the
Philosopher's Stone and why it's
relevant
so anybody's been to my site it's cult
state this is the background there's
been the long time background of
everything I've done and it's been this
equation and it's the Philosopher's
Stone equation now yes I am trying to
build a philosopher's stone that is true
but it's not the Philosopher's Stone you
think I don't care about letting go
that's not what I'm out that's not what
I'm trying to do what's to end up
happening is because of that mythology
of the LEED Gold is actually this whole
pursuit is typically fixated around the
quadrangle now what do I mean by that
OOP wrong way so let's take the first
part of this equation make of the man
and woman human relations we're dealing
exclusively with humans first this is
the first part of the out chemical
equation so right off the bat we start
with soul alchemy that's where we start
we don't start with lead we don't start
with atomic theory we don't even start
with mathematics we start with people we
deal with human relations once we
understand human relations how to poke
and prod how to make a person do one how
to make a person do the other thing then
from there we can extract a circle and
what's the circle it's the economy so
you're a bourse
the whole purpose of an economy is they
have its circular where I put money into
it and then it rolls through the economy
and then it comes back I issue credit to
you and then you issue it back to me
that's that's that's a circular pump of
economics that's the whole point of
issuing credits the whole point of
currency and keeping track of debts so I
have to now take from human relations I
have to trap them in a debt economy
once I get that I had my hora Boris I
have now figured out the next part of my
soul equation my soul alchemy now this
could be done in a variety of ways
sometimes it can be done in a very
brutish way which is basically slavery
or it could be done in a you know it's
your fault you fucked up kind of userís
way so however you want to twist it
there's different techniques you can do
to trap people in this circle but once
you trap them in this circle now you can
extract the next part of the equation
and that's the Quadrangle it's the
mastery of the elements once I have
humans and I'm steering them through
with the economy now I'm saying okay I'm
gonna hire scientists here I'm gonna
hire babysitters here I'm gonna hire
guards here I'm gonna have all these
people exploring nature to exploit
nature better they're going to learn how
to steer nature I'm steering humans so
they steer nature that's that's the
change so far now once I get real good
at that I now have to master my
distribution because if I just mine up
all the gold and and I give it to
everybody then the gold doesn't have any
value I have to actually put a time
delay in the in the and the gold moving
from one place to the next otherwise
it's just garbage so what do I do I need
to control the distribution in the
organization so a triangle is its order
it's the order from the top down so now
I have to master the distribution of all
of the elements I'm able to extract from
the planet and from each other and you
have to do that in either royalty or
democracy or pick you you know pick your
flavor of the week and once I have that
I can now extract the final circle which
is the firmament which is the edge of
the universe I can use that pyramid to
touch the heavens
and that's what the Philosopher's Stone
actually is I think I might be wrong but
I think that's what's going on so it
turns out that this has nothing to do
with LED to go led to gold this is about
turning us from our default state of
smoking pot and fucking off into an
organised species that can actually do
some pretty amazing shit typically at
the expense of ourselves but you know
there's a price for everything so it
turns out that the we are the
Philosopher's Stone humans are the
Philosopher's Stone how you organize us
that's the Philosopher's Stone that's
why it's on the back here one dollar
bill and it's an equation of how to
assemble a civilization from scratch
just give me a man and a woman I got it
from there I don't need anything else so
it's the ultimate leverage point it's
the ultimate Archimedean fulcrum and all
I need is just two humans and I could do
it I could build this entire thing from
two humans
so this brings back the idea of instead
of the black arts we're gonna call it
the black box arts because that's what a
eyes are the black boxes you don't know
what's going on oh so we're gonna start
with the alchemical atom just like the
equation said start with a man and a
woman we're gonna start with humans
that's where that's where that starts
that's where I'm starting so right now
we're trapped in the ultra measurement
phase of science which is basically
saying everything can be turned into a
math function and I don't need the rest
of the body I just need focus on the
brain I can do psycho technology all day
long and not include the rest of the
body and all this other you know
impressive prestidigitation we've
involved ourselves with but this is just
wrong this is not correct because we're
starting to see these problems we can't
we can't translate this to approach to
AI we can't translate this approach to
my Neanderthal brains chimeric brains
you just can't do them at all you have
to use something else entirely
so let's just let's let's give the
scientists their their reward and say
thank you for all the help but you can
sit this one out for a bit so we're
gonna say thank you move on little
scientist guy let's treat humans as a
black box let's not make assumptions
about the black box let's just say I put
things into the person which is going to
be energy and matter and then there's
going to be a behavioral
I don't need to know what you are I
don't need to know your cultural
background and all these other things I
may be able to extrapolate that or
categorize it at some other point but
those are just optimizations down the
line let's just start with the basics
here oh and because entropy is a thing
we have to account for waste as well not
all input in a human becomes behavior
so what's the waste turns out I think
the waste is ideas and symbols
so you get all your input your energy
and your matter and what is relevant and
immediate becomes behavior but if it's
not just packing in my brain it's an
idea it's a thought I'll get around to
it is heat waste it's the way this is
this is the heat sink of our input it's
not just a driver of behavior it's both
and they they live here in the same page
at the same space so let's let's start
with this concept of looking at humans
the black box human the black box Arts
let's make transmutation chains of these
humans where the output of one human is
the input of another start with a mother
give him a mouse come on come on mr.
Mouse oh my god
start with the mother the output of the
mother is the input of the hunter
so either could be the mother's love the
mother's care the mothers attendance the
child becomes a hunter the output of the
hunter stabilizes the tribe because
they're getting food which allows for
farming output of the farmer goes to
herbalism and once you get all these
things you can now make Weaver's and
then from there you have a leader to
backtrack all these things but they're
all stairs also waste
there's also waste ideas and symbols the
waste goes to the shaman becomes the
input of the shaman
now the output of both of these things
when you transmute them together open up
a totally new transportation chain where
you can now have miners because the
shaman and the leader are working
together to organize people to do some
really hard labor and mining is fuckin
hard labor when it comes to the Bronze
Age you're swinging hammers you're
swinging you don't even have good tools
you're like you're buck naked and a mind
just like kicking rocks and shit like
it's hard work how do you get people
there well you need you know you need
these two people to do it so you
actually need the you need to recycle
the waste of this part of the
transmutation chain into a shaman so
then you get your miners on the output
of the mine are obviously blacksmith to
the toolmaker soldiers then that
produces the output of slaves you can
get builders from there from the
builders you now have secure places to
do coin minting and from coin minting
you get merchants so this whole
transmutation chain goes into place but
again the waste has to be accounted for
the waste of the shaman and the waste of
the metal workers becomes a
mathematician now how is that possible
well because the mathematician has to
keep track of the logistics which are
very complicated expensive and heavy
here
and they also have to keep track of how
they're trying to find the relationship
between all these numbers that are
keeping track of so they need both of
them and the waste of both of these
allow from applications that come into
play that's how math got started was
keeping count of stuff it didn't start
because you know I wanted to troll
people on the internet with a funny math
meme it's it was practical
so then output of the merchant becomes a
linguist because they are keeping track
of contracts and they're looking at
trade and they're trying to sell their
wares and and language is the easiest
way to really convey those type of
things but you merge the mathematician
with the linguist you get a banker so
from that from the mother I can get a
banker that's my entire transmutation
chain right so I've assembled the humans
in a way to manipulate nature each one
of these people is manipulating the mat
is is demonstrating a mastery of the
elements to build a transportation chain
which allows me to make my pyramid so
now I have my transportation chain and
this is where people start fucking it up
because once you have these chains in to
play this is where the storytellers come
in sometimes the storytellers are useful
most of the time they're a bunch of
assholes now why is that the case
because they do what's called
abracadabra which literally translates
to I I will create as I speak that's
what it means so I can whisper at the
beginning of this chain and the idea
moves through the transportation chain
and as I put my idea through the
transportation chain the transmutation
chain changes its behavior changes its
output so from a whisper to the right
person
I can move geopolitical chess from just
a couple well-placed words if I get it
right storytellers eventually start to
see that they say if I talk to this
person I get these results and now this
becomes less important you don't have to
innovate in this space anymore you don't
have to take care of your transportation
chains and attend to their needs
you just need them to hold their place
because you need the app you need the
abracadabra to work you need that you
need two mythologies and the stories
that work more than the actual medium in
which the stories are passing through so
now you're flipping your priority and
this tends to piss these people off
understandably
and of course intends empower these
okay so what happens uh yes his back he
has opinions - he says science can help
here
he's right probably could so had a
science help well let's take a look at
it it does chimeric transmutation chains
and what do i mean by that well the
scientist comes in and says well I can
make this thing called a computer and I
can replace these people
now I didn't remove them from the chain
I didn't remove their function from the
transportation chain it's still there
it's just not a human anymore
okay so then another scientist comes
along and says oh well I can use replace
these people with robots okay that's
probably true you probably want soldiers
and builders and farmers to be robots
that's probably efficient you're
iterating towards this efficiency you're
justifying it it's good it's looking
great then someone like me comes along
says you know brains of our ancestors
boo plop them in there now they're doing
stuff now all of a sudden you're still
getting the transportation effect of the
chain and the scientist is happy
scientist is happy that you're still
able to get the same effect and ideally
even better so you're you're reducing
the input needs and you're increasing
the outputs you're getting that progress
at efficiency but at the same time well
you're storytellers don't work anymore
because originally all the
transportation chains were human but
there's no point in this chain where I
can inject myself my story passes
through the whole chain anymore because
of other brain won't get it a robot
doesn't understand it
shamans don't get it so abracadabra is
gone there's no more magic it's there's
no more of this of this hacking of the
system you now have to focus on the
transmutation chains themselves that's a
bit of a challenge because then these
guys get real mad cuz that's how they've
been running society anyway is these
storytellers the fucking nerds ruin the
game I mean what is what is the you know
what is the mythology of Russia
interfering with the elections right
well those Russian BOTS there's Russian
BOTS doing these things you put someone
in the transportation chain it wasn't a
human so their narrative stories busted
it doesn't work anymore so this means
our monopoly on sentience is over
basically
because all of our assumptions about how
society should run and what laws we
should have and all these things
we're totally based upon Homo Sapien
cognition monopoly and now we have
Gaussian computation and chimera
computation in the mix now so that's
gone and the measurement boys are having
problems with that they're doing the
Cass Sunstein nudge stuff to kind of
figure out where they can where they can
make their uh where they can get their
stories through but it's it's not it's
not getting the gains it used to be it's
not having the effect that used to be
but this is where that hermès character
comes in once again even in the even in
these jaws of defeat this hopelessness
that it looks like there's actually an
interpretation here in which alchemy
comes raging to the front again and it's
very simple that's the new black box
you
that's it so the input is noise the
output is knowledge and the waste is
symbols
so now he's back and now we're here and
this is why you want to use alchemy
because science is done it's not done
because it's not that I'm pretty and
that I'm anti science per se I'm just
like I know when things are dead and I
know when things are just extending
their life unnecessarily and science is
Western science in particular is doing
that right now so when you when you have
these types of things in play you're
going to need alchemy to make sense of
it once again it's back and it's it's
very important to learn to look at the
world in this way just as a technique
not necessarily as a reproducible
methodology we're not even going towards
reproducibility anymore there are a eyes
that come into being which find some
correlation and then people depend upon
that correlation holding so trying to
trying to homogenize everything into an
explainable fashion that's just long
gone so blue church isn't like that
sorry but you know that's life and so
the other benefit of looking at alchemy
here and I think that's the end of my
presentation but there's one more point
if my mouse worked how frustrating
the other point here is that in addition
to alchemy doing these things allowing
you to make sense of what you otherwise
could not make sense of and that's take
away here because the future is gonna be
full of things you can't make sense of
alchemy is also a fantastic collection
of different epistemologies throughout
time you have different cultures
different interpretations of how people
made sense of the unknown that's very
valuable material to go over when you're
doing sense making operations and
training in that type of thing so I hope
that gives some clarity as to why I'm
focused on alchemy so much and why I
made so much reference to it and then in
the second video or the second version a
second video this season and why you
know the idea of like copper being the
feminine well that's that's a now
chemical idea what did they mean by that
you know explore that explore that
meaning what what were they what were
they using you might as well think of
antiquity cognition not as superstition
just think of it like like one of
ancestors brains came up with it you
wouldn't dismiss it outright just treat
the past like another culture cuz it is
so I wouldn't just outright dismiss like
Japanese thinking cuz I don't like rice
I wouldn't do that I wouldn't dismiss
Bronze Age thinking just because I
thought it was superstitious there's
some valuable stuff there and we have
the tools to mine it now you don't have
to sit there and just shun it be like oh
I hope the focus on this cuz I'm too and
told you I'm from academia you don't
have to do that anymore I have AI
systems that will literally parse these
ancient texts so stop being fucking lazy
anyway that's all thanks let me under
share my screen oh thank you so much for
that Pat I was just thinking what a gift
you know I I really appreciate that
somebody is taking the time to to break
these things down and I'm gonna start
before we get into Q&A by asking some
clarification questions and so everybody
else feel free to write your questions
in the chat and then I can point to you
and you can unmute and ask them or you
can ask me to ask them for you but
before we get into that maybe it's
because I'm more inebriated than usual
today but a couple things I didn't fully
follow so this story teller is the
storyteller the alchemist or is that is
the alchemist something more than the
storyteller yeah they're so another part
of soul alchemy is storytelling because
what you're doing is you're affecting
the transmutation chains so that's what
the person who built the transportation
teams that's an alchemist the person who
maintains them as an alchemist and the
person who's hacking them is also an
alchemist right and when you say use
alchemy or or be be aware of it or
recognize it is basically the cognitive
tool the slide where you had all those
symbols like the Quadrangle the the the
hierarchy and the elements okay one of
the things that I kept thinking about
throughout this presentation was whether
or not this relates to Carl Jung's
an excavation of alchemy and whether or
not you have any knowledge of that Oh
Carl Jung is my safe word
he's uh he's I'm a little bit jaded on
Carl Jung and it's it's for the
stupidest reason imaginable they he he I
should say he he is there was a part of
hot there's this weird part of Hollywood
that warships Carl Jung like it's the
fucking weirdest thing they they worship
the shit out of them and there are like
entire armies of like sycophants and
fans just like if you don't if you don't
say the right thing about Carl Jung then
oh my god they'll just slap the shit out
of you and I've had knock-down drag-out
fights with them about this type of
stuff and they didn't like any of this
because I think that this tends to
happen someone actually has a pretty
good breakthrough and other people it
attracts people who try to use that
understanding and then because they
aren't Carl Jung they don't really
understand the breakthrough as well as
he did so they're just kind of they're
kind of parroting it mimicking it and
they don't know why anymore so it's my
experience has been full of those people
but I know that that Jung and Freud work
together pretty extensively and they had
a significant spiritual falling-out
between the tool going in two different
directions so I mean like I said I
prefaced my interpretation of the
Philosopher's Stone I said that this is
my particular interpretation it's not
deep with a capital T interpretation and
I'm sure mr. Young's interpretation is
his as well so that's that's the point
of alchemy there's no methodological way
of proving what's right or wrong that's
kind of the confusing part - all right
we got a question from Peter Lindberg so
is there any modern alchemists or
thinkers or intellectuals that are into
alchemy that you respect her would
recommend this one I don't respect him
but I respect his mastery of alchemy
that's George Soros that guy knows what
the fuck he's doing that guy knows his
craft he's full
that is a person who is spent considers
a student of Karl Popper most people
don't know that right so like Soros is a
student of Karl Popper and even wrote a
book called financial alchemy you know
he's into that now whether he's like
self identifies as one or not I don't
know but when it comes to like modern
techniques of how you do alchemy in the
post-industrial and the Information Age
he's pioneered quite a few of them so I
tip my hat to understanding that even
though I don't like what he's doing with
the transmutation chains but uh he's uh
that is one skilled motherfucker for
sure in terms of you know not big bad
boogeyman of globalism I would say the
competent storytellers that happen on
the internet right now there's not it's
not necessarily one person as much as
it's a collective there's there's like
groups like this for example they're
learning how to be Alchemist without
even knowing it surprisingly they're
trying to make sense of the stories the
organism of the storytelling that's
going on and then there's a story
tellers that are constantly outwitting
them I think that's a beautiful
cat-and-mouse game so there might be
some alchemy there too who knows
we're to measure the effectiveness or
the success of a story what are some of
your roots that you look for other than
its ability to propagate across the
chain yeah
the ability to represent all three of
those cognitive techniques
so the chimeric the Gaussian and the
human one so if anything can actually
speak to all three that's going to be
the alchemists of the future if there's
any archetypical character that kind of
frees people from this hell that you're
describing we kind of kind of talked
about that at the last episode of the
first season regarding how you bring
Girardi and sacrifice into the AI
conflict space so that's that's one way
that can temporarily mitigate the hell
we're in right now can a human do it
probably not but maybe I don't have a
lot of high hopes
humans maybe I'm a bit jaded but I've
I've personally given up that I've
searched a long time ago so I might not
be the right person to ask on that one
just to give people more chances to ask
questions in the chat I'm just gonna
keep going here
remember those now yeah so somebody had
a nice meta comment that your or you're
telling us a story right now right so
that's right is is basically our only
hope like let's say we buy into this
frame is the only hope that we get
better and better stories hmm there's a
there's a point of diminishing how would
you define better there's a diminishing
return on stories so at first you do
need the stories to direct the waste the
output the symbols and everything else
you need stories to kind of like launder
the waste of people's minds all those
symbols and ideas that are in there the
stories are good like being trash 'men
of ideas it's a necessary function
garbage collection is really important
but the eventually once you get to the
abracadabra techniques once you're able
to whisper at one part of the chain and
you can mutate the entire chain power
conquer gets around that and abuses go
nuts and the storytellers do not give up
their throne easily because they don't
have any other skills they're not
actually craftsmen or you know people
who build stuff that people want they
just they just steer a narratives and
we're seeing that fight today they do
not want to give up that power by any
means necessary
so on one hand storytelling is essential
and on the other hand it can ruin
civilizations if it's if it's a point of
contention even Plato I think was Plato
Socrates or Plato as Plato he said
storytellers rule Society he didn't say
mathematicians or scientists he said
fucking storytellers rule society and
he's right so there's is there a good
story is there a better story I don't
know but I know there's a cycle where
you need stories to get the trains you
changed and chains started and then
storytellers come along and then abuse
the shit out of them and then around
around
and abroad do you have a question you'd
like to ask
he's a tease don't mind him alright
mimetic caper I think he had a question
earlier about the philosopher's stone
equation if you like to unmute yourself
and ask that
you
you
don't
I gotta let you guys in meet yourselves
it's our bad so in your version of the
philosopher's stone equation do you
consider the four elements to be purely
physical because there are very various
symbolic meanings to the four elements
in astrology and I think Carl Jung has
some but I'm not sure about that look
into that
unmuting sorry mastery of the four
elements doesn't necessarily restrict
itself to the physical control of it
you'd also need to control the stories
about those elements their distribution
their usage what ideas those elements
can generate every part of the mastery
chain implies all the symbolic stuff as
well I just want to make sure wasn't
like purely the physical elements like
physical world
Mandelbrot did you want to ask a
question now that you can alright I'm
gonna hand it over to Ravens question
yeah so my question is kind of
referencing that the higher keys that
you brought that originated with the
mother so do we need a new mother to
begin the creation of a new chain of
hierarchies yes
Eve was a mistake Eve was a mistake I'm
saying it I'm getting recorded it was a
mistake there's actually some rather
fascinating interpretations of Eve not
just a biblical one or the Judaic one
there's somehow chemical interpretations
as well that just like that totally defy
the mind it's funny the archetype of Eve
is one of those things where you're like
okay it's the first woman it's not
really a motherly spirit to her I don't
know of any story of Eve where it's like
oh I'm a good mother that's not really
one of those things that propagates
around it's kind of weird when you think
about that and technically she was like
Jerry Springer material like I mean just
look at how she ran everything like the
idea of like oh here's the tree of
wisdom and I'm afraid to you know eat
the Apple myself so I'm gonna rope in
the only human I can reach and get them
into the blame cycle too and then I'm
gonna have kids and one's gonna kill the
other
that's a Jerry Springer episode right so
so not exactly the world's best mother I
think it's probably worth reviewing why
Eve is not considered a mother I would
start answering your question looking
why that archetypal archetypical
association just doesn't exist
Hannah would you like to ask your
question these other types of brains but
I was wondering if you could just read
ascribe them again for clarity the
chimeric one and the AI and you know who
the story is needing to go to mmm yes so
the using what I'm suggesting is
basically alchemical entropy it's not
just input and output it's also waste
and the waste is ideas and symbols and
things like that so stories are kind of
like garbage collection of that waste
otherwise they just simmer in your head
and they can either drive you insane or
they can change your judgment making
process or some way affect your behavior
so the story is a way to get those
symbols out of your head
and waste is a admittedly yes it is a
bad term I'm using exclusively in
entropic terms heat waste is what I mean
so think of it like an input waste or
you know just simple waste is probably
more accurate but the the storytelling
is an essential way of getting that that
waste out of your system and and
listening the stories also gets that
waste out of your system - so you don't
actually have to tell the story just
listening to it as a way to get it out
and flush out your system which is good
now regarding the other two contenders
for cognition where we have the Gaussian
stuff which is basically AI and then we
have the chimeric which is mine and of
all brain please take a drink the cheers
mates
these are brains in which we can never
really truly know scientifically you
can't actually just like install and now
you're in and now I'm a caveman running
around look at me go that's not actually
a thing we're gonna be able to do so
even
from its very existence it is a black
box and it will always remain one the
you can get some behavior or poking and
prodding out of it poke it with input
see the output share basic psychology of
course but what the storytellers look
like for both of those things fantastic
question the idea of like how do you
tell a story to an AI well it wouldn't
be like a human remember the idea that
I'm proposing is that storytelling is a
waste retrieval mechanism a waste
organizing method so you have to
identify what the waste of Gaussian
computation is and then steer it and the
same things true for chimeric brains as
well so if my if my categorization is
predictive that would be my approach if
that makes sense
got a question from Jessica what is the
best way for someone to deprogram their
minds from Ridgid scientific learning
youth
yikes I've hadn't had much success in
that probably not the best person I
asked the finding there are 13
unanswered questions in science right
now I think maybe 12 I think the pond
care conjecture was actually resolved
but there's like stuff about dark matter
and that's just not resolved there are
genuinely unresolved questions and there
is some discussion and debate about a
philosophy of science is why that is why
hasn't if science and all of its power
and all of its predictive modeling and
all of our genius and computers and our
cognition and all over the place why
can't we solve these thirteen points do
we just need more complexity if we had
more complexity do we do we resolve
these questions I don't think so
this has opened up an interesting debate
I think about ten years ago where it got
so heated as to why these questions
couldn't be answered where the debate
basically boiled down to his math
invented or discovered that's how that's
how insane the discussion got they were
definitely theories of mind were
contending pretty heavily in terms of
what did we get wrong where do we make
the mistake it was it was a glorious
moment of scientific introspection which
usually doesn't happen like you see you
see this introspection kind of appear in
peer review and other parts of the chain
but you you don't see it like
collectively at the entirety of the
scientific institutions themselves so
trying to find those points to then
challenge yourself and say okay do I
simply put faith in scientists to solve
this for me and it's a non participation
sport and I'm just simply watching if
that's the case why do you fucking care
about science like if it's if not if
it's not participatory then and you're
just watching it like a damn commercial
then stop fucking caring because you're
just you know not you the person at the
preferably used or I'm talking about if
you're not gonna get involved it doesn't
matter to you and if you think just
science falls from trees if you wait
long enough great
consumer experience of science question
why that's your experience of science
what are you being deprived of if that's
your take what aren't you being exposed
to that's his place to start but yet
finding you know seriously trying to
answer why these things are unanswerable
is a good way to the challenge your
assumptions about the scientific method
just a quick follow-up on that towards
the end of your presentation you said
something about science being dead could
you elaborate on that and define how you
use the word science in that expression
the scientific methodology in particular
so two scientific methodologies limits
are laid bare and exposed when you deal
with Gaussian black boxes and chimeric
cognition so you're not gonna you're not
gonna get its god forbid like what does
Neanderthal math look like do we do we
just assume it's just oh it has to
follow the laws of love Cheers does it
have to follow the laws of logic just
because we followed the laws of logic is
there a biological component to what
logic we're selecting for that's the
other thing we might say well no the
symbols of law logic hold definitely for
all of time okay yeah yeah that's
repeatable in both the domain of the
physical and the mental and symbolic for
sure yes
that's true but what logic are we
selecting for what are we focused on
what are we improving upon at the
expense of not improving upon that is
does that hold what we're focusing on
when a chimeric brain does the same
thing
maybe they focus on something else what
would a beaver do if it was trying to do
math right what kuiper will focus
primarily on geometry I'd imagine or
maybe stochastic mathematics would be
its original position if it could
actually do symbolic mathematics it
would intuitively understand stochastic
mathematics where as we struggle with it
aggressively so you prefer oh a
different brain in it the logic it
focuses on and builds and accelerates
with this is probably going to be
fundamentally different than what we're
focusing on so that's that's what I mean
by a scientific methodology being
successfully challenged all right Daniel
would you like to unmute yourself and
ask your question though waste
I sure I hope my bandwidth old the
question was misty I'm curious but this
notion of waste in terms of waste and
story question is is the waste Co
hearing into some sort of super ago
workforce and it's all calibrated so
this AI whisperer shaman character can
play it like a flute is that that echo
line up maybe
could the ideally yes that's effectively
what a storyteller is they're able to if
you if you can storyteller affects the
transportation chains so and it does
that by tapping into that into the
symbolic waste so you have these a is
there a transportation chain of them it
injects one I data point or knowledge
point or story or whichever or narrative
and then all the other a eyes follows
suit now they eyes don't know they're
following suit they're just following
what the output of the previous one was
so instead of so acting like a whisper
yeah effectively and it's it's changing
the entire transmutation change that's
correct
and so something can be planted in the
story maybe that has a time-sensitive
blossoming that's right thank you
question so is there possibility that
this kind of super structure of society
of civilization can kind of develop once
of its own kind of thing in line with
stuff like Kevin Kelly talks about the
Technium having a kind of its own wants
what technology wants is having a level
of complexity that kind of breaks away
from human desires and we'll yeah mm-hmm
yeah that's um I mean we're already
there regarding high-frequency trading
algorithms and some of the advertising
and electoral stuff that's going on it's
not even
it's not even us doing it we literally
can't get out of the high frequency
trading we're stuck in it or we we
actually depend upon it so is the
technology demonstrating a want or a
desire the same way we do it in symbolic
terms and symbolic language probably not
but from an evolutionary perspective it
certainly is it's demonstrating a
selection criteria at the very minimum
it's saying these type of a eyes get to
exist whereas other ones don't so these
get all the resources where other ones
don't
and in this case high-frequency trading
algorithms they get a lot of the
resources and they keep things afloat
and then there's an entire ecosystem of
people who hack them like they will
literally write blog articles to
headline them just to head-fake to add
the high frequency trading algorithms
some bullshit news so like I mean
there's all kinds of stuff where
journalists are doing that like crazy
insider trading stuff and they don't get
busted in one day the SEC is gonna look
into women it's gonna be hilarious but
until that day comes we depend upon
those high-frequency trading algorithms
to you know make line Gober and as a
result it is selecting for us as much as
we're selecting for it but I think it's
starting to select for us at this point
so it does it is demonstrating once it
needs it's selecting it's is
demonstrating a selection pressure let's
just leave it there so that I have a
question about like geopolitical Dark
Arts mainly around Russia and the the
philosopher Alexander Dugan because I
know he's a pretty eclectic thinker and
he's into I think he flirts with chaos
magic and like radical traditional
Orthodox Christianity do you know
anything about that like how other kind
of players are using this type of stuff
that's not like glitter scientism yeah
that that's an example of that's an
example of the alchemy I'm talking about
where you're playing with the different
types of cognition but we've seen on the
chance this type of thing manifest or
certain memes flow and other ones don't
that Pepe is just everywhere these days
there's all kinds of stuff behind that
and it's not just tricking the human
reader it's also actively tricking the
ai's - and and the humans then the human
readers are in turn tricking the AI
back recursively as it goes down and
down so that's definitely chaos magic is
good is it alchemy yes it is practiced
subtly in the traditional sense where it
is it is a black box and you by trial
and error you say okay do I get the
signal I want yes no okay keep iterating
iterate and iterate and so you're
actually it's almost like it's almost
like scale-invariant entropy where it's
constantly reducing down to that which
cannot be reduced any further and then
you build your structures on top of
those irreducible x' so in the sense
that they're trying to find the
translation change between Internet
citizens as well as a eyes as well as
the structure of communication it's
building those it's it's flooding into
those transmits flooding those
possibilities and only the most viable
transmutation chains are then selected
harvested and other things are built on
top of that whether it's a political
system or religion or anything else so
yes
the Russians are actively trying out
this type of stuff the Chinese have been
doing it but they have they're they're
not very creative on this front they
they just found a way to hack most of
American progressive blue church stuff
they're not necessarily innovating the
same way the Russians are the Americans
special special operations certainly are
doing so SOCOM is doing that I know that
the radicals to radicalization stuff is
doing that there are certain parties in
Islam that are doing that they don't get
a lot of credit but Muslim Brotherhood
is most certainly playing that game and
it plays it very well so yeah there's
definitely geopolitical contenders
Christian said something about scalar
resonance and Daniel had a question that
was a follow-up on that Daniel would you
like to ask that question sure I don't
know what the previous I don't know what
Christian was referring to in context of
this talk but I thought was interesting
question feel or rent resonance I'm just
wondering one would discern whether say
a spell or something whispered by this
AI is president like when there's a
scalar resonance scalar resonance could
you elaborate on that concept well yeah
that's the thing there was it was put in
my chat by Christian Hart
if they would like to speak to that but
I hear like you know I see Tamim in in a
personal interaction and it has
cascading effects in the largest social
world that's what I'm hearing
I see where the yeah so the idea of
[Music]
scalar okay meaning of scale resonance
structural yeah that's that is
indicative of what I think is how human
socialization works so the idea of
transmitting units of culture which is a
meme or transmitting transactions
financially if that's money transmitting
signals of you know mating signals all
of these things are protocols of human
communication and they do have structure
and by structure I mean limitations so
you don't they don't have like a
structure like they have like hard code
and they have like you know data bases
and that's not what I mean what I mean
is there are hard limits to what type of
information can go through that and what
type of information is transmuted as it
goes through that so that's the action
structure
self bumpers and gutters yeah right yes
that's right gutters yeah
and so how those are time delay between
one another memes are playing off of
that so for example the type of research
that goes on when it comes to me more
fair like this is some horror stuff like
I'm gonna jump into two things and
they're absolutely terrifying the first
is when the DoD researched memes for
weaponization back in 2009 they found
that all kinds of stuff for starters
they found all kinds of wild stuff and
then they found there's a document
floating around on page I think 96 where
they explore suicide memes meaning memes
that drive people to commit suicide they
found repeatably demonstrably repeatable
that suicide was contagious contagious
mmm-hmm meaning one person does it and
then other people around them do it
right and they were able to activate
that through memes alone mmm-hmm right
that's fuckin crazy pants and then
someone else decided to go further with
it was something this wonderful little
space that everyone called tumblr it
turns out that when you take tumblr and
you turn it into a data science
experiment what you're doing is you're
able to find mental illness and what it
looks like in the data science space so
that you can then identify isolate
reproduce promote d-- promote whatever
you want to do you can orchestrate just
by the memes alone you can say okay this
person is is ADHD this person has
bipolar disorder this person has these
and I can look at the actual data
science flow of that that they have
science structure of that so then I can
identify people who have the same
structural signature but they don't know
they're mentally ill yet so now I can
really fuck with them and they were
doing that this this was being done
across the board for advertising for
military academic experiments this was
being done so the scalar resonance is is
probable is I'm taking a shot at the
definition here but that type of thing
where I put the meme in the channel and
then I get the behavior and then it's
spreads and then that tracks more and
then that spreads and it keeps going
yeah it is it's it's debits trying for
scale invariance memes are always trying
for scale invariance and it's every so
often you get that one that just like
pops off right so that's how an a I can
discern it is there a human with a body
in it
not without the data well well I
shouldn't be so glib you would need the
data but there are people who know when
things are fucked up hmm something's
wrong here
they can't put the word on it and they
don't have the phrase or the training or
the discipline to understand all of it
but they know something's off and they
get antsy they can answer you if you
don't take him seriously so Pat one
thing I'm trying to take away from this
which maybe I need to take like a day to
digest is what does this skillset of
alchemy mean for say somebody in the
zoom room you know we're not necessarily
trying to manipulate large groups of
people I mean I can't speak for anyone
other than myself but what what does
this unlock you know in in a normal
person's life not enormous life but a
normal person yeah I would say for me
for the average person who's like hey
this is some wild shit that I'm
listening to you could probably apply
this to certain parts of your daily life
to be honest if you think you need to
know the answers to everything and you
need to know the knowledge parts of
every point kind of step back and just
pretend that you're one of your
ancestors you didn't have science or the
internet or books or other people that
you can just lean on and say hey solve
this for me do my cognitive work for me
how did people make sense of that stuff
that's a good that's a good practice to
go through yourself just to look at your
daily life like why do you have the
friends you have why do you have the
balls you have why do you have the job
you have right you're not gonna get
scientific answers on those things but
if you approach it out chemically and
then you start applying it to yourself
and your own decision-making and your
own paths and all these other things you
may come up with different conclusions
than the conclusions you've currently
been coming up with so there's there's
value in that novelty at the very
minimum
you
any other key takeaways I see Hannah
mentioned that she'd like to hear
today's takeaways and so would I take
away is alchemy is a valid epistemology
discovery strategy it is once again
useful because metaphysics are back and
they're back because of Gaussian
computation and chimera computation and
next time you think people are stupid
which we all tend to do step back for a
minute and say wait what a eyes are at
work here what's actually changing the
flow of things is it that the people are
stupid or is it that the Skinner box
they're in is making them stupid and if
the your answer is the Skinner box well
now you have the tools to actually
analyze that Skinner box
so we're almost at an end key I know you
messaged Daniel privately saying you're
formulating a question do you have the
it do you want to bring us home once
again why does this always happen I
don't understand well I do in some ways
and I really appreciate Patrick for it
being able to go through these things um
and story-tell in general and you know
just I left after emblem 21 because it's
my dad's birthday tomorrow guys happy
birthday to you too Daniel
uh with all that said thank you for the
useful alchemy um even though I haven't
listened to it yeah and i will hello so
a question is on Eve I guess because
that's an interesting symbol for sure um
and it's because that's the first thing
that I came into when I joined the zoom
cult when Raven asked the question so oh
thank you clips um can you explain the
answer to Ravens question again if
that's okay yeah it's a it's T the idea
I started my example with woman and I
started there because that's where you
start with so alchemy you start with a
man and a woman you're supposed to start
there and well she was asking maybe if
you get a new mother you get a totally
different transportation shame that's
true and that then she asked about the
archetypes of mothers that existed and I
just went off on Eve cuz her but the the
idea of Eve not Eve is rarely associated
with like motherly acts and I wonder why
there's a there's an interesting lack of
that type of storytelling behind the eve
the evening where it's not a loving
mother she's not a caring mother she
she's just like maybe she's just on the
hook for her mistakes for all of time
who knows but the motherhood part is
just completely glossed over regarding
Eve's actions and I think that's worth
exploring why that is
yeah that's really cool um I don't mean
to say that in it like it the way it's
just because it was another point about
the Girardi and interpretation of Eve if
you know if I don't know that one and
then the other thing that came to mind
when you mentioned that is like the
symbolism for Mary and is it like Adam
and Eve like the children of God first
before I like being a mother to children
but it makes me sort of very curious
about this those symbols so I'll
definitely be reading into that yeah
there's there's some wild
interpretations depending upon what sect
you're looking at and what time you want
to look at that sect to because the
Christians have made through all the
sects they have very different
interpretations the same through Judea
the same for the Gnostics the most
interesting one I've read was that they
weren't necessarily the children of God
they were the fire of God and that's a
that was a mistranslation the idea of
birth of instead Adam was the fire of
God and Eve was the fire of Adam that's
that's a wildly different interpretation
the idea of fire meaning you know fire
is one of the first things that mankind
could actually spread logarithmically or
exponentially so I like this thing on
fire that everything is on fire right so
it's the very first exponential
technology so the idea of the fire of
God we are the exponential technology of
God and Eve is the exponential
technology of Adam so that is a
fundamentally different way of looking
at that entire mythology so that's why I
say maybe it's worth revisiting that
type of stuff all right with that we'll
bring it to close let's give it up for
Pat thank you so much again for your
time if we're taking us there is this
journey I'll turn it over to Peter to
plug a couple things and then we'll call
it you can see his face I'm here yes
Monday next week
stacked event at the stoah other
look to Jonathan Bajau he's coming in on
Monday forget what time but it's the
ecstasy of 2020 so I talked about Cova
de riots and all that shit check that
out and then hear the Don and John robic
he was coming in we're gonna listen to a
song steal the culture that was John
mentioned that term here at this though
is for a session cured that Don made it
to some cool you know dance song we're
gonna listen to that and we're gonna
talk about how we're gonna steal the
culture so check that out really cool
yeah I think for Daniels birthday we're
gonna put a drunk eat some cake and then
taken to an underground strip club so
you can live vicariously through us
there open friendly strip get six feet
all right thanks everybody thanks so
much for questions have a wonderful
weekend you folks thanks a lot
that you want to say on yes sir