all right welcome James Jones from cube
spawn thanks for joining me and give a
brief rundown of what cube spawn is and
then we can talk cubic spawns the first
stage in a long term project and the
first part of it is to get some
functioning hardware to be able to take
digital templates for products and turn
them into physical things so that sounds
pretty straightforward but if you take
the hundred-foot altitude look at it
it's this bewildering landscape of
extremely complex technological
gibberish if you take the 40,000 foot
look at it from out your airplane window
it's a fairly simple idea the idea is to
change the distribution model from the
current physical model where you collect
recyclables in the United States you
know you truck them to California and
you put them on a ship you send them to
China China does a bad job recycling
them takes the materials that aren't
burned or buried or otherwise misused
and it turns them into products that are
then shipped to Europe now you get to
romp halfway around the world trips
baked into that product by the time it
arrives on the shelves and somebody buys
it and this seems immensely foolish to
me because the amount of embedded carbon
and everything just keeps going up and a
lot of stuff is one-shot you you make
the product you get it to the market
ends up in the landfill if you look at
Walmart's numbers it's something like 80
percent of all the products they sell
are in landfill within six months so you
think about the size of those warehouses
and the mega tons of goods that go
through them and all that stuff ends up
in the landfill I mean it's just a
landfill store go buy junk and then go
throw it away
so all of that is very dumb so the idea
with cube spawn is localized recycling
localized fabrication turn everything
into a template and the materials are
already there every metro area has a
huge municipal solid waste problem and
that municipal solid waste is semi
refined materials that were
product just a few months ago they were
on a shelf in some retail outlet or they
were an Amazon and see Amazon's another
nightmare because of its embedded
shipping it's just got the stuff goes
from warehouse to warehouse to warehouse
back and forth before it ever goes to
consumer a lot of that stuff has you
know a hundred thousand miles on by the
time it gets to you and that's just
insane the International shipping
industry some of the statistics relating
to that are mind-blowing in terms of
just the foolishness of that we don't
need to ship a list of every word so the
project's purpose is to try and reduce
all of this unnecessary shipping
encourage localized recycling and bring
about a state of affairs where you throw
stuff in a bin it immediately gets
classified by a robot living in the
bottom of your trash can and ends up
going back to a manufacturing facility
so that nothing travels more than 10 or
15 miles at the very most
instead of thousands and implementing
the technology has been a rather
complicated journey because I don't know
anything how do I build this thing you
know so I've had to learn revive a lot
of ancient skills I was an IT guy for 35
years and prior to that I did a little
bit of machining I worked in a gun shop
and did some other stuff but you know
I'm no master machinist I'm not a
mechanical engineer amount electrical
engineer I don't design circuit boards
I'm not a master programmer I've done a
lot of hacking around to keep stuff
running an IT but that does not make me
a master coder or a full-stack developer
or whatever is needed which it turns out
there's probably four to five developers
for this because it's the software
becomes rather intricate when you try
and get a whole nest of machines to
communicate with each other and
coordinate their actions and do so in an
efficient way
so a lot of a lot of detail there but
but ultimately if we go back to the
high-level vision what I'm trying to do
in a
a in a non pretentious way as save the
world from itself by fixing some of
these big problems the distribution
problem you know the linear economy the
take make dispose pull stuff out of the
ground turning products move it to
retail outlet so two peoples buried
again that's worked fine for the first
250 years of Western civilization isn't
working anymore
back to the shipping thing the amount of
shipping that we do is mind-blowing and
so take there are approximately 50,000
ships on the sea the the statistics are
that the most probable cause of death
for a right whale or a baleen whale now
is getting run over by up ah
that's insane I mean the the whales used
to communicate over thousands of miles
the oceans are so noisy now they can't
even hear what ships coming and that's
one of the many many problems so fifty
thousand ships on the sea at any given
time twenty thousand of room in port the
other 30 grand runs on the water
steaming away they're unregulated for
emissions the largest 15 container ships
and they're about 50-100 container ships
on the Registry's the largest 15
container ships emit more particulates
in pollution than all 770 million
terrestrial vehicles and you know so the
15 biggest do that what are the rest
doing nothing good and then all the
cruise ships and all the other stuff you
know we need to the oceans not really
our playground it's it's a habitat so
it's basically like turning the entire
forest into a giant four-wheeler park
you've got machines running everywhere
and that does it no good so correcting
that problem and then if you localized
manufacturing and you incentivize
recycling all the materials that are
currently being thrown away suddenly
become a valuable resource for the next
cycle of products which
means that litter is disincentivized why
would you throw away perfectly good
manufacturing materials so littering the
landscape and dumping them into the
ocean and all the other insanity that we
currently engage in loses a lot of its
incentive and you are incentivized
instead to capture as much as possible
of it and convert it as efficiently as
possible into the next cycle products
because that lowers cost and lowering
cost is a shorter term thing where
you're worrying about this external
secondary system of tracking everything
in dollars and cents but the reality is
the tracking things in their inherent
value and tracking things in their lack
of negative value it is actually more
valuable than tracking things in dollars
and sentence so internally the system is
kind of money list it doesn't really
need to keep track of it needs to keep
track of statistics for efficiency so
that you can't improve but nobody should
really care whether it's you know this
cost a dollar or cost seventy five cents
because it's a bad metric it doesn't
actually measure what is going on inside
of a process it's a arbitrarily assigned
externality and that another thing is
people talk about the you know the
global economy being we have all this
shipping going on and we have all of
these materials moving around and it
turns out that of 86 trillion dollar
worldwide economy that about eight
trillion of it is environmental damage
what ends up on the bottom line of
companies is them failing to pay for the
damage that they're doing to the
environment it's almost 10 percent of
the economy and I think if you look
across the board for low margin
businesses like mining you take mining
and because of the all the really easy
mining is gone so now we're working sort
of less productive mines and less
profitable ores and so forth so I would
find it very difficult to imagine that
you have an open pit mine somewhere
that's yielding a 10% rate of return and
ten percent of the economy is going into
environmental
so you're pulling a net loss on
destroying environment yeah yeah that's
kind of a bad investment capitalism it's
definitely not I mean it's gotten us to
where we are but we need a new system we
need something that looks at the actual
truth of what we are doing right
something we can use as a real yardstick
yes over hundreds of years we've had
this idea that our earth is like this
bounty of endless resources that we can
just take from and throw out into the
world but mainly the ocean without
realizing that clearly isn't true it
goes somewhere it has to be part of an
ecosystem it has to have a finite like
it has to have a loop to it to be part
of the world or it's going to sit
somewhere and probably have devastating
impacts and our current system of like
just make it will figure out if it does
 but then you're gonna eat like you
have people with money and power who are
stopping us from knowing that truth
because they're the ones who get money
and power from it's not knowing that
truth and including themselves they want
to remain ignorant the fact that the
chemical they produce causes cancer or
infertility or any number of problems
within the ecosystem you sterilize some
form of sea life that comes up you break
a chunk of the food chain you know and
we have been doing this consistently now
for 200 years I think a good example is
the old coal tar you know coal tar was
one of the first things all sorts of you
know fantastic dyes came out the Germans
started discovering Wow you can you can
turn yarn blue with some of the extracts
from this but the parts they didn't need
they just don't know River which it
turns out was a poorly chosen idea and
that's that's consistent across all of
the manufacturing world manufacturing is
35 trillion I just recently found an
article I was quoting it out at 12
trillion there's 35 trillion dollars out
in 80 trillion dollar economy it's
manufacturing so if you're going to
solve a problem
what part of how do you evaluate which
problem to solve and so
me manufacturing is clearly the root of
most of the activity that takes place so
if you're going to address changing the
nature of how society interacts with the
planet what's what you go after well
manufacturing it's the big one all the
material wealth that exists in our
society comes from turning one material
into either changing its form or
changing its its end use through
manufacturing so manufacturing is pretty
boring it turns people off they're not
interested and want to think about all
that but it's the crucial underlying
thing that drives almost all of the
other activities banking banking is this
little froth at the top of the pot it's
not what's really causing things to
occur resource extraction is at the
bottom you know and it propagates up
through all these steps but
manufacturing and our need for novelty
and continuous supplies of new material
goods and that back to Walmart does six
months lifespan of the products that
they produce if those products are not
produced with recycling in mind you know
you end up with stupid things like juice
packs juice packs we get 15 different
layers of materials sonically bonded
together the you're never gonna recycle
it because it's just almost impossible
to separate those you'd have to you know
you'd have to dissolve everything and
then precipitate it all out it's not
feasible it doesn't even make sense and
really our juice packs worth all that I
don't think they are I think we'd
probably come up with a different form
of container especially if you're
working you know the old milk bottle
concept that's a thing we already have
one so it can cost more for that 20 line
not having a long-distance Freight for
any more than what is essential if
everything is produced locally including
containers you know how much glass is
there I live in San Antonio Texas it's a
largest city in the United States
physically even though it's not the
highest population area solid waste here
is astounding people throw away stuff
constantly
a lot of its class
you know and if you're hauling glass a
few hundred miles well you have a fuel
of fuel consequences of that are pretty
impactful but if you're only producing
it and distributing it within a
neighborhood and see that I think that
if you put manufacturing in place you
make if you put high efficiency you know
high performance fully automated
manufacturing in place then prototyping
stuff becomes much easier because you
have completely digital tool chain for
design you uh you make the product and
and digitally in simulation and then you
produce one and say oops well I didn't
right you know you have a you have an
error correction loop right at the end
you produce one copy but you don't have
to produce two hundred of them and then
circulate them with people and have them
tested the way products are tested now
you can test very small quantities of
prototypes because they're very easy to
produce they're produced from a template
if you have designed the template
properly then you get exactly what you
asked for and if that is correct then
you can deploy it in the field and then
people in Botswana can have your product
the same day that you release the
template because they download whatever
it is feed materials in one end and get
the gadget out the other end and that
that means also that for open source
solutions that relate to agriculture or
medicine or you know the 3d print
prosthesis the hands that they're
printing for kids with their Mozilla
that to me is a perfect model of what
I'm talking about because somebody
designs this articulated gadget that
spits on your your terminal limb and all
of a sudden you have a hand you know
it's probably not the the most
sophisticated product but I think that
would change if you had relatively
sophisticated manufacturing everywhere
because then you could have the best
that medical technology can produce
anywhere no more than the cost of
materials and energy because yeah and
when someone upgrades it when somebody
comes up with a better solution for any
of it it's available to everyone after
they've tested it hopefully sit on
everyone's doing a billion copies of
something that was
par but why would you do that you'd wait
until it was tested there'll be the
early adopters who try it out and want
it first and then those were like right
no I want it now that it's tested I want
that well yeah the beta there and you
know the beta versions on the on the
thing but you know obviously you want
you want consensus to come back and say
hey this one works really good and all
that's wrong with is the thumbs funny or
whatever you know and then correction
happens and you end up them with decent
prosthesis and see that applies across
so agriculture I'm working with some
people who are putting a project
together in the Philippines so in
February we're gonna present this
hopefully this person has contacts with
some of the attorneys in the judiciary
and they seem to think that they can get
this in front of president de corte so
the objective is to write proposal and
get it in front of them and build a very
small pilot community that will use a
lot of passive solar it'll use a lot of
that there's quite a bit the technology
coming out of India that's like the
biogas generators you know where human
waste and kitchen waste goes into this
digester and they mix it with cow manure
it produces methane the methane goes
through a set of scrubbers and then it's
used for cooking gas so that's something
that's technologically pretty easy to
achieve and it provides this feedback
loop a lot of people in the Philippines
are desperately poor so it's become a
very poor nation it was actually very
prosperous in the 50s and something went
wrong and but that kind of technology
building a small pilot village with all
of the passive solar water collection
you know Philippines really wet so no
shortage of water and putting all of
those systems together as a pilot and
then making it replica replicable
through this technology so that they can
produce all the technical parts for a
system and deploy it across the
Philippines multiple locations so I
don't know whether this will come to
fruition or not but it's certainly it's
one of the many efforts to try and get
the ability for a mini factory to
leverage other people's solutions so
that they can be deployed anywhere you
know design it in Boston deployed in
Botswana it's it doesn't there is no
distance anymore if you build localized
factories the other thing is make
factories cheap so that everybody can
have them and in response to something
you mentioned and now my mind's clouding
up and I can't think what it was exactly
but the concentration of wealth again if
you look at manufacturing well big
companies concentrate wealth shipping
companies concentrate wealth raw
materials and energy all of those areas
are the areas where the the billionaires
are created you know Amazon is sort of
this outlier and the technology
companies are a very recent development
it's always been manufacturing and
materials and energy but now technology
has found a way to sort of broker
everything we do on top of those
foundational elements to society so you
have Microsoft and you have you know
Google and Amazon and all these things
so there's a lot of money in those but
it's a concentration of wealth that
comes from brokering real things that
people want whether it's goods or the
management of their computers or
whatever if you deploy manufacturing
everywhere locally concentration of
wealth is very difficult to incentivize
because the local if you interact with
the system you own a partial share and
it's a co-op model the idea is that so
my local Factory in my community there's
10,000 people it serves I own one ten
thousandth of it there's no incentive
for somebody else to buy my share they
don't get anything for it and that way
you can basically you can sort of de
monetize the process of producing goods
because I'm not gonna make money off of
it I all I can get from it as Goods and
those goods are proportional how much
material I feed into it so your
disincentivizing the concentration of
wealth for 35 trillion dollars of a 96
dollar economy that's likely to have a
fairly significant impact even if there
were only 1% market penetration and
people only 1% of people you know I
think what's the advantage has become
obvious who was it
one of the Futurist speakers was talking
about the marginal marginal cost economy
basically where automated production
reduces the value of goods or the cost
of goods to their marginal value it only
costs materials energy and of course
there could be labor and freight and so
forth in there but the idea with this is
to eliminate the labor by through
automation and eliminate the freight by
making it locally so two of the
components of the cost go away from a
product and now it's just the materials
and energy and the reason for automation
is you know people say well you want to
take everybody's jobs yes I do
that's been the objective for last 150
years people who have wanted to give up
the misery of time driven slavery of
having to report to work it doesn't mean
that you can't still pursue an interest
like if you are really good at painting
houses and you like painting houses
we'll go paint a house somebody wants it
but train a robot while you're at it so
that the drudgery of those kinds of
tasks can be removed it doesn't remove
the opportunity you can still do it and
if that's what you liked it maybe you
like to build boats you know build a
boat nobody's gonna stop you from doing
those things but it removes the drudgery
build a boat record the design now make
50 boats but look machines do the other
49 because you've done such a fantastic
job on the first one or a terrible job
on the first one isn't it whatever but
for the point bees can do it yeah the
point is that it's not ill it's not
limiting people's potential
it's simply leveraging people's
potential by allowing them to automate
automation doesn't should belong to
corporations you know Automation is the
cumulative
idle wisdom of literally hundreds of
millions of man-hours of woman hours of
effort over the course of the last you
know hundred years those efforts were to
make life easier for the people doing
the work to a large degree they wanted
to make things easier for them to make
their company make more money sure but
also to eliminate the drudgery of time
you know a hundred thousand knots to
make a fishing net the kinds of things
that automation does is to vastly
leverage humans human productivity and
that resource should not be available
only to companies it should be available
to individuals automate automation
ultimately shines when I have automation
on my little homestead and I don't have
to weed the damn potatoes I can turn it
over to some machine who is perfectly
content with you know yanking weeds all
day then then you can then you can
explore your own potential or do
something more interesting and
automation takes care of the grunt work
that's what it's for that's why we built
it to begin with we built it to get to
limit the amount of drudgery let me had
people stand and find machines no the
orphanage is providing children to the
textile mills so that they could stand
in front of the loom and make sure they
didn't screw up we've moved away from
that for some reason but we haven't
moved far enough we haven't moved to the
big obvious end point we have a lot of
Technology the biggest problem is this
because of the commercial system
automation is so expensive no one can
afford it so that's the other part of
the objective of building this system
It's Made humans are still cheaper yeah
and they shouldn't be because machines
you know you're never gonna get a
machine that shows up to work 365 days a
year and it's happy to do it you're not
gonna get humans to do that absolutely I
mean I wouldn't do what a machine would
do if we still had to manufacture things
locally in the way we used to do because
shipping
so expensive because you do not be able
to pay people $25 an hour and have that
cheap good available at Walmart when you
can buy a human being for $50 and just
use them till they're disposable and buy
a new human being and buy a new human
being and we have really took serious
you know hands and such then yeah it
doesn't make sense to automate when you
can instead be a horrible evil human
being and use humans till they're
disposable a bland new to the realities
of what living in that job is like mm-hm
simply defer it on to some core bastard
who has no choice and that's you know
leveraging people into the terrible work
so another project has come up is that
somebody in Bangladesh or somebody who's
a developer in Houston actually inside
the TED talk they they talked to me
about kids want to take it to Bangladesh
to try and enable smaller businesses to
be able to kind of self actualize
instead of ending up working for some
big textile mill some foreign company
they won't even work for domestic
companies in Bangladesh can actually
make a living so that nothing has really
come from that talk yet but I've gotten
pinged a couple of times by the party
involved so there is some interest in
that and even if it doesn't work out for
Bangladesh it's a model to try and
implement elsewhere or anywhere to to
try and get the idea with this as
machines are all open-source you know so
you go down your local hackerspace and
download templates and try and build one
of these guys and once they're
operational my biggest problem is I need
to I need more time and I need to drum
up funding and I frankly have enough
money for right now my my wonderful
girlfriend has taken care of me now for
a number of years as I've worked on this
project but that's just not possible her
the nature of job has changed and some
other things have changed in so I don't
have to go back to work and that's gonna
impart a delay in making the kind of
progress that I was making a few months
ago I've got another partner
giving me a machine shop and owns a huge
recycling business and recycle their
cycle that's a hundred thousand square
feet of the building and it's completely
jam-packed that are afters with dead
machines from industry machines most of
Martin more than five years old I I
can't believe you know the one of the
machines that came in there was a two
million dollar chip copier but after
eight years it was junked to industry
this is giant 100 foot long stainless
steel monstrosity with every imaginable
piece of automation attached to it did
Emma was junk they just wanted her gone
ain't charged him for it they just
wanted all the way yeah it was two
million dollar machine when they bought
it and that is unfortunately the state
of things where industry cycles through
stuff that are phenomenal paste and you
know then everything is still too
expensive for ordinary folks to get all
these materials to build the things they
that would enable them to own automation
it's like the materials are out there
the ingenuity is out there the passion
the knowledge all of it it just needs to
be organized it just needs to be brought
together in a way like there aren't
enough materials out there I know I put
a lot of them out in my blue box every
week way too much of them out every week
and if to be able to produce that into
something right away to be able to use
it in a 3d printer to produce something
would be amazing to be able to produce
as much as possible locally I know
there's stuff I buy that I don't need to
buy and then there's stuff that I
absolutely need and a lot of it is
access to it as opposed to needing to
own it like the tool libraries and that
sort of ingenuity and then I need things
that are in my house right like I need
plates I need cups I need I'm not gonna
borrow those or have a share in them but
even in those to be able to have them
broken back down into the ceramics I
don't know what ceramics looks like when
we make it back into something but to be
able to grind it down and make it back
again we need to be able to have
closed-loop production cycle and right
now we have to kind of close the loop
for them for the industry that is broken
meaning and using you know cokes bottles
using the things that are available and
eventually close it so that because if
we bankrupt coke hopefully there's not
going to be any more plastic bottles
right so there's a point where hopefully
it breaks its own system and then
they're not producing it anymore and
then we can design things in like we
don't need coke bottles we need glass
bottles that are that are and then the
plastic needs to be in things that maybe
are more like the prosthetic hands and
things that maybe that is the best
material for for that and plastic is
such a it car seats
car seats are this ridiculous huge
monstrosity that keeps your kids safe
they're very necessary but they're only
good for a few years and then the
plastic breaks down enough that they're
not safe anymore and you can't you can't
even you have to pay to get them recycle
then you can't sell them and you can't
reuse them like it's there are so many
things in our society that like we need
to figure out what the best material for
it is and the ingenuity is there someone
comes up with a new material but then
they're working against the market like
they're the market isn't designed for
new ideas the market isn't designed to
like is your idea better than we want to
incentivize it it's designed to be like
you have a new idea that's better can I
buy it and keep that on her shelf can I
like not be on the market place and so
disincentivizing well monetizing
everything first of all so a car seat
that's only good for a few years of
planned obsolescence you know it would
not take that much to put more additives
in the plastic to make it either have
high recyclability or extend its
lifespan or build it out of
you know luminol is a fantastic material
and 97% recycling right and you know
aircraft seats are typically out of that
and they're a safety device I presume
that you could probably come up with a
child's car seat that was an aluminum
frame plastic is great because it's
resilient that springs back to its
original shape and its impacted so
there's all sorts of you know great
things that plastic is good for but
engineering products so that they
fulfill the requirement and have high
recyclability should be criteria also
instead of just making stuff and then
leaving the consequences to the wind
which is what currently happens in a lot
of cases or there are some in some cases
there is actual harmful intent in
designing things that have limited
lifespans for the purpose of selling
more product that's people have argued
with me that now there isn't any such
thing it's just that stuff actually does
break down and there's a there's a point
to be made some things do fail after a
certain amount of time and that's okay
but there's a lot of effort in fact it
was very open in the 50s and 60s when
they started shifting over from the
shifting over to a consumption model you
know it's like how can we make this fail
because we've designed it the way it was
designed before is a little too good
it's gonna last 20 years letting and
work I mean we can't can help people not
replacing their stuff for 20 years
yeah you can't keep a business open in
that regard like I mean there's a truth
there like there's a certain amount of
what we're doing to the economy which is
positive getting more into the sharing
economy getting more like to libraries
but the truth is a tool library can't
sustain the power tool industry lately
what a power tool industry needs to be
sustained financially is for people to
have a power drill that's used five
minutes in its lifespan not that it's
rented out to all of your neighbors so
that we can all use it all the time and
then if we need more of them we buy more
because of the demands not because oh
look shiny and red and we want to I want
to have access to a power tool for that
five minutes I need it one time in my
life oh and modularity so that you know
the part that wears that is easy to
replace that's that's something that
engineering is well aware of he said I
mean military equipment a lot of
military equipment while it is very
expensive when they designed a Black
Hawk helicopter they designed it so that
the entire rotor system can be serviced
with 11 tools the
old helicopters took 200 tools and then
a giant shop full of special tools to
put things together but the Black Hawk
was designed to be field serviceable the
engineering is within reach and we could
make a car that was the same way you
know modular engine modular chassis all
this stuff it snaps together when it
wears out he swap out the part that's
bad not move on and it takes ten minutes
and it's probably completely automated
well we don't do it that way because the
secondary market for I like the joke you
know you look at a new $30,000 car Wow
120,000 dollars worth of replacement
parts all in one place because that's
what it is you know Wyatt Ismail it
would cost an incredible sum of money
mm-hmm so work everything is in place to
do what I'm talking about which is to to
and decentralized manufacturing you know
people talk about descent I've gotten a
Bitcoin back when it started and I got a
good theory amande you know
decentralizing currency is okay but
currency once again is the froth at the
top of the pot there's all this stuff
that is inherent in the nature of the
distribution of wealth within society
that is physical has nothing really with
money so why not address things from
that physical level and decentralize at
that layer the American can quit
worrying about finance if everybody has
material wealth available to them at
their in their economy I've I have a
problem there's all these projects that
people want to implement but they want
to implement them top-down through some
sort of an administrative change in the
way people do stuff and I frankly don't
have a lot of faith
I don't like following any rules I don't
have to you know I don't way to keep
super elaborate complex accounting to
keep the IRS happy I just don't make any
money it's easier and I have a lot of
material wealth but I don't buy the
stuff like salvage it so so talking
about doing something top-down or bill
you know the money free party look at
that cool idea but just learn how to
live without so much money instead of
trying to redesign society so there
doesn't have money because people don't
follow rules anyway and now you're
talking about an entire phone book a new
rules on how to get society door nice I
don't see how that works and I also see
that here's another thing where this
project keeps mine is completely
ideologically neutral if you're I tucked
I've talked a lot of people online about
this so I talked to people in Pakistan
talk to people in India well Pakistanis
Indians don't be long you know they have
this deep suspicion about each other and
it's built by the propaganda of the last
50 years and all the other stuff but
they all use these the same models of
cell phones technology is neutral
whether you Hindu or whether you're a
Arab or whatever it does not it's
technology does not provide present a
barrier and I see every one of these
administrative approaches to changing
the structure of society is having
phenomenal number of barriers if you
because they're all ideological so this
is a completely non ideological way to
address the problem here's a gadget
here's what it does it'll benefit you in
the following ways and then sanitizes
this range of behaviors which is so
speaking of that what I've been doing
with them and some of my stuff is top
down some of its bottom up and all the
top down stuff is like has they
reinvented bottom-up like it can't be me
sitting in my room by myself come up
with an idea and then selling it to
everyone because one I'm not capable of
doing that and I can't actually
communicate the idea and there isn't
then we have to market it then we have
to like get instead of like no
recreating it from the bottom up means
you already have the energy there you
already have people wanting that if at
least the people who are creating it
they want it to come into fruition so we
care that but with what I'm creating I'm
like well it can't be talked to and
can't have new rules in fact we can't
you just can't have rules it has to be
meeting people where they're at we can't
create rules I'm not I'm not a
politician I can't pass new laws that
have for how I want you to behave but I
can ask you if you happen to
not be behaving in a way that I think is
not conducive to the environment or my
life why are you doing that and how can
I help you not maybe you're never gonna
get there right like maybe you're
drinking I'm just because you just take
a sip maybe I think you're drinking
coffee is horrible unless I'm gonna ask
you what would get you not to drink
coffee why do I even want you to not
drink coffee right like unless I can
instead of passing a law no one can
drink coffee creating a space that is
more well what what is it there right
like what am I actually asking you to do
or not do and how how can I ask you to
actually get those needs met in a
different way that isn't coffee a
simulated coffee flavored beverage but
it doesn't drive some coffee beans and
it doesn't you know damage the
environment by turning every every part
of the tropical world into a plantation
see results from by directly modifying
the nature of the problem this sort of
results from implying that what I'm
doing needs to change I'm not going to
change on the basis that external
opinion exactly that's very much what
I'm talking about which is to you know
decentralize manufacturing decentralizes
the concentration of wealth because it's
community based and it decentralizes the
concentration of wealth by eliminating
enormous amounts of shipping so there
isn't some gatekeeper who can go collect
that it decentralizes the implementation
of engineering if I come up with a
brilliant idea I don't have to go to the
Patent Office and I don't have to fight
get a hundred thousand dollars with a
lawyer time in to get my idea protected
because I need to do is commit to the
blockchain that I came up with this
thing it's derivative of these four
things and you can make it on your
machines in your community and I'll get
a tiny little incentive for were having
provided the design but it won't be you
know outrageous because that's that's
part of so I come up with the new
prosthetic hands and so on the market I
can make that worth a thousand dollars
and you're not a you're no longer no one
is allowed to print a 3d hand only I am
and it's a thousand dollars which is
lower than they are
way higher than most people who are
lacking a limb because they got blown up
by landmine can afford and so who sets
the price of how much I get is the
adventurer and then the next question
which may be the same one is so then you
so now it's open source and I don't get
to decide if it's community decides that
or whatever that set up when you come up
with a new way to make a new finger who
decides how much that fingers worth they
mark it and how much has it then added
on like the improvements on the original
design and the original design who
prices it so my thought is that it's
derivative first of all pricing is
determined by demand which means that if
I put a design out for the greatest turn
of spinner you've ever seen in your life
and nobody buys it it's worth nothing so
I see I see a a a black chain based
system that has consensus and everybody
who is a participant in you know if I
decide to set up one of these many
factories in my community so that would
initially make me the authority in that
community and that would give me a
percentage of vote for the overall
system to decide what the value of
particular thing was obviously it's
going to be very dispersed because if
there are a thousand systems in
operation and their design propagates
across them it's really popular in this
area but it's not popular at all in this
area the people in the area where it's
not popular they're going to say yeah
that's worth a nickel because it's not
we don't need it we're not gonna put the
people in area that think it's great
you're gonna say well it's worth $10 and
consensus will fall somewhere in the
middle and so the way this the way this
is envisioned for the payment system
basically is when you produce something
there's a material as an energy cost and
I really want to get away from having a
monetary assignment of value I think
this value should be materials based you
know a pound of aluminum is worth you
know four pounds of steel or whatever I
don't haven't come to conclusion on that
and actually I don't have the expertise
I think the system the participants in
the system are going to have to decide
this stuff so I
I think there's there is no fixed answer
in the beginning there are be some rough
guidelines and then I'll have to shake
itself out as to what things are worth
and then if if I bring a thousand pounds
of aluminum to us system then that
potentially buys me some credit if I put
a design in and its popular then I'm
given credit possibly an aluminum or
some other intrinsic material that the
system consumes consistently and
consumes a lot of so all of those I
haven't answered a question with any
definitive answer but I believe that
there's a way to work out a materials
based equivalent value for things and
then if I am inventor and I'm getting a
royalty off of a invention there's two
at least two layers to it so I put a
part in the repository it's a cube it's
just a chunk of material you know 200
centimeters on the side that's a basic
design that serves no real purpose but
then if I sawed it in half then I have
to new part numbers the original part
number and then a couple of derivative
part numbers that say if you pick this
part number you modify it in this way it
ends up being this and then the idea is
to take and put those part numbers on
essentially what is the equivalent to
github so github you have the original
part and then you have derivative parts
and the degree to which the derivative
part is modified determines if the
original part received a royalty of this
and you've made this modified version
the original parts I've received a small
percentage of the royalty that you can
collect for your derivative design so
again there would be an automatic
cascade a fifth order derivative part
would produce a royalty and the fourth
order derivative would receive a small
percentage of that royalty and the third
order derivative which receive a small
process it have to be how you explained
it was like well you have a cube and
then you put it into so now it's 2 but
that first needed you to make the first
cube
there's other derivatives that are like
okay so you come up with a new widget
and I
it doesn't quite make my needs and I'm
not quite the best engineer but there's
something I do to it that makes it way
better but not quite great so you
created the first iteration I create a
not-so-great second iteration that
nobody really uses but it spawns a dozen
amazing ones that are way better than
anything you did no one's using mine but
it was an intermediary step to all of
these ones do I get any yes a little bit
of pass through but the pass through
again would be is that part itself
actually used and if it's not then the
derivative would be a small percentage
but if that part is used widely then
there would be a larger percentage now
deciding what those percentages are is
going to have to be driven by driven by
criteria in the system to evaluate and
see I think everybody in the system has
a vote to everybody who interacts with
the system is gonna vote and say this is
the greatest prosthetic add-on since you
know there's light fingers the the but
intermediate steps where was I going
with it I got confused so this this part
is that a fantastic part is extremely
popular and therefore it gets a lion's
share of royalties that are collected
for that and upstream parts that aren't
used because they've been obsoleted they
would still get a tiny little percentage
because they were the derivative you
know the source of that innovation well
I was gonna go for a little deeper with
so royalties are collected as part of
the fee structure the foundation that
organizes releases for instance you
collect all the innovations that pertain
directly to the system because the
system can self modify I mean you can
start off with them you're gonna start
off with whatever system I come up with
that'll be iteration one but then people
smarter than me or that are more to have
more domain knowledge in a specific area
we're gonna look at the design and say I
need you do it that way and they're
gonna fix you know whatever they see you
are coming and extend it so all of that
together
accumulates in a system that becomes
more efficient over time and each
derivative design everything that it
pertains to modifications to the systems
gonna have to be organized into releases
because the continuous flood of upgrades
I mean anybody who's managed complex
software systems knows yeah you got 15
different vendors and they're all got
different patches and releases they
interact and completely unexpected ways
and bad things happen yeah it is and so
on and so on so the fee structure when
you produce something there's a royalty
for the inventor but then there's also a
marketing somebody has to do marketing
to get the system into new people's
hands because obviously adoption it's
not on a percent right out of the gate
you're gonna have five misses running
where to meet the needs of not having
shipping and so forth you actually need
five hundred so the other 490 system
somebody has to go out there and promote
the idea so that they get installed
sales and marketing those two things
selling work for the systems marketing
and I see that as freelancers who hook
up with the system and say hey I can
really so I'm so anything anybody they
will sell work to end-users who want
things produced a part of the feed
that's collected at the manufacturing
point for each item there's a collection
of fees and that fee how that's
dispersed is decided by a consensus
system where people vote they say well
the inventor should only get 10% because
most of the work occurs somewhere else
and there's gonna be millions of these
so it's not like they're gonna end up
you know impoverished sales marketing is
gonna take a cut a small percentage
should go back to the organization that
organizes taking all the innovations for
a particular period of time and
releasing it in a coherent way so there
are basically those five areas that that
the system will collect fees for so
there'll be one lumpy and there breaks
down into royalty sales and sales
commissions mark
and then the foundation that organizes
the whole thing so that that idea is to
have that embedded and blockchain base
and so forth so that the the collection
of fees is an intrinsic property and the
only thing that I would do to constrain
it or throttle it would be that it would
be opt-in when you get your system do
you want to participate in the sales
thing you want people to sell work for
your system in your area and if they
know well then that feat doesn't get
collected you can keep it yourself
because that was also one of it one of
the questions less so about the selling
to get make sure that the factory itself
has enough work assuming it has more
than enough work how do you decide is it
first come first serve basis I ordered
my piece but it takes a week to print
versus yours takes five minutes I get
this problem at Starbucks all the time
or whatever coffee shop I go into where
when it's a one person and they'll be
like okay I'll make your lot in they
come back and get the next person's
order and they go and make it I'm like
if you just got eight people's order and
then made it all together this would be
way faster like an algorithm decides who
decides the algorithm besides there's
queue management the other thing is the
fifth part I mentioned I said there's
five parts and then I mentioned for the
fifth part is in selecting of the part
of that feed is used to incentivize the
setup of new systems so in an
underserved area you got one system and
it's trying to serve too many people
it's gonna get saturated and you'll end
up with long queues stacking up so the
idea is to incentivize a system so that
a balances reach the demand and supply
are equal and that that means that the
fifth part of the fee collection is to
incentivize new systems so that the
system is proud self-propagating and
that way in your area you don't end up
waiting a week for your order because
the order the capacity of the system
should be balanced against the
requirements in that community and it'll
be pretty obvious after they're honored
systems installed you know that striking
that balance will become more refined as
time goes on I think that
you know this is a physical system it
has it has existing hardware that is
functioning so unlike a lot of the the
administrative approaches to migrating
us through the transition towards the
society that operates more in a more
game V fashion this is a tool that as
people adopt it sort of automatically
puts you at least on the game B
landscape
it doesn't necessarily create a game B
society but it certainly fulfills a lot
of the precursors where you can D
monetize you can distribute wealth more
evenly you can balance how people
interact with each other because there
are less incentives to pressure other
people to do things for you you can do
them yourself and if it distributes
automation across society so that people
don't have the burden of you know
carving each chess pieces themselves
they can commit it to an automatic
process there's also in regular current
manufacturing I have a factory set up to
manufacture you know ten thousand a
million of one item and then they might
redo their system to manufacture
something else but it's set up to do a
mass production of it is cube spawn is
there still a trade-off that like if I
if if 30 of us want widgets and we're
not in a ten-mile area we're in a
thousand-mile area does it makes sense
for one factory to do that and then to
ship you don't even shoot them out
further or does it make like is there a
cost to reorganizing the thing so it
makes the next item
there's the intent is that there it
should be no fixed tooling cost the idea
is to modular fixturing so that if you
have a part that's difficult to hold you
know there will be a set of blocks that
can be bolted to a plate to support that
part ball and operation is occurring to
it that aren't consumable you don't have
to make a fixture that is a committed
resource that you're gonna have to
recycle at the end yes so flexible
fixturing
flexible tooling
so that standardized tools and the other
thing is a dovetailing a feedback loop
between the design and manufacturing
process and fixture and standardized
tooling so that you avoid that situation
where I worked at a machine shop and I
made a out of stock part for a Boeing
727 one of the cable pulleys that went
in the wing the tooling for that thing
the supports necessary to hold this big
delicate piece of aluminum up while it
was being cut on by the machine the
fixture was five times the cost of the
part you know because of the nature of
the way the part was designed and the
nature of the machining process it was
extremely difficult part to make
accurately and and really high standards
so that that is something to attempt to
avoid I will not always avoid it because
there are certain things that just have
to be made a specific way there's no way
around it but the idea would be to to
constantly impart design control to end
up with the result that does not have
such special requirements so initially
this thing live a relatively limited
applicability there's only you know I
mean just like first computers and they
came out there was a nice offer at one
well same thing here when this first
comes out there will be very few designs
because the design process is probably
the more intricate portion on how to how
do I get these limited machines with
fixed capabilities to produce my thing
whatever my my tool art or product is
and then how do I design that product so
that it's recyclable because that's of
the greatest benefit and I'm sure that
initially some of the things that are
produced by this will have shortcomings
in that area
you know you'll produce something and
they'll be this plastic part in it
that's not particularly recyclable
because to get a strength you needed you
had to use a plastic what that it is
mm-hmm items are not particularly
conducive for recycling you know there's
there are potentials along the way for
all sorts of things that are
non-ideal but the goal is to especially
if this enters the commercial realm
which it probably will have to to get
enough funding to to expand and then
there will be some compromises in making
this into a specific vertical
application for manufacturers so that
they can make whatever it is that are
already making which is probably not
meeting any other design criteria that
just laid out so there's it's a phased
process it's gonna take quite a while to
to bring all of the necessary elements
together and if so I believe in the
comments section if we are I'm guessing
we're gonna post this although after we
stop going live but um if you can send
me your patreon information because I'll
also post that down in case somebody
wants to support your project they want
you know want you working on this it
sounds like the best place for you to be
working for all of humanity's sake I
don't believe that's true and I think
the more we everyone doing that the more
we can get without patreon because
that's the issue right we need people to
give you X amount of dollars as opposed
to us together figuring out how do we
implement a UVI or something that gets
us fed shelter clothing without needing
the government to install it without
needing it to be a taxed system right
like how do we feed ourselves how do we
house ourselves but that's more of like
a meta project to support all of the
individual projects what I was going to
talk about before is the triangle the
mint I think it's a manufacturing
triangle or something where there's like
that it's fast cheeping and quality
right and you can only have two of you
and for what I'm doing which is like the
technology cooperative like we need it's
funny because we all have all these can
be people who are like this piece is the
most important and I'm like concentrated
on technology yours is manufacturing
Ramses is like currency and and like
everyone has their own it's like this is
the central piece and I think they're
all the central piece it's just every
piece is your piece is what you're
supposed to be working on and how do we
kind of combine them so we can do them
all it kind of at the same time but so
in my what I'm creating I know no one's
coming on board until they have a better
product than what they get in the world
right I can't
at people to come use me instead of
Google there is no need to use insects
Google but like it has to be fast or two
for better they're not going to do it
right so I think that manufacturing
locally isn't necessarily going to be
fast or right because I can just go to
Walmart and buy the thing it won't in
the beginning be cheaper it's gonna be
like steak right like sorry the petri
dish steak which is like great I don't
want it you have to kill a cow a mistake
what a million dollars no thank you it
doesn't taste good but it has to go
through that stage to get to the cheese
stage to get to the wait the materials
are right here that it's being used and
I don't know what point is it is a good
cheaper to be bought from this source is
it as soon as when it's there it's
cheaper or you'll have to also keep it
binded these initial machines would be
somewhat limited there the prototype its
first cut machines so how old were they
perform probably adequately I think that
I can at least hit the adequate target
but adequate is not what you get after
you had a few years of refinement where
are you ironed out all the little bugs
then they'll be great you know they'll
be fantastic but first cut you're not
gonna hit fantastic it's not gonna be
there the other thing I remember is that
on the recycling side when I finished
these prototype machines there's no
recycling there is no resource to
recycle the materials to do the complex
and intricate process of sorting through
17 types of white plastic and
identifying which ones would each and
making certain that it's classified
properly so that you know contaminate
the good plastic you have was something
that doesn't match its chemistry so now
fortunately the control architecture for
this system is that it's gonna run a
bunch of little manufacturing machines
and do queue management and all this
other stuff a lot of that has been
worked out by people much smarter than
me there's a development project the
United States called the DMD III which
was funded by DARPA they put up 70
million dollars and it's the digital
manufacturing design initiative and then
they had another eye
Institute it's in Chicago and they've
renamed themselves twice so they're
called MXD now but they take they raise
300 million dollars between the city of
Chicago the university system
manufacturers and this is an initial
seven million dollar grant and what
they're working on is the history four
point over the United States
pardon me so the one thing going on for
about two weeks so the they have
produced some stuff for industry 4.0
it's just mind-blowing ly sophisticated
and it's all built they prototype out
their design they've actually built some
of software all this stuff is is done so
the design architecture for this system
largely comes from industry which has
already worked out all the details the
digital the digital templates there's a
thing called step NC and step NC is is
based on a bunch of research that was
done to move beyond G code G code is
what is used to control most 3d printers
and a large number of manufacturing
machines G code was developed in 1940s
and has evolved in all these strange
directions since then with no real
controlling standards bite so there's
fifty thousand different flavors the G
code all of which are mutually
incompatible and so this project started
in the late 80s to develop the successor
to GE code to control machines and
that's what stem NC ended up being and
step NC is I don't remember the acronym
but it's the standard for the exchange
of product specifications and that's not
verbatim to the acronym but that's what
it means more or less those technologies
are those open standards have all been
developed so it's not like I'm trying to
reinvent industry I'm actually just
packaging something the first flexible
manufacturing system was patented 1963
three years before I was born so it's
not like this
exactly new but it hasn't been
propagated to individuals it's always
been too expensive that's the only thing
that's really new about the system is
making it accessible to people so that a
hackerspace or a small community or an
intentional community could actually put
a meaningful factory yeah facility that
that I'll take credit for because I've
decided to you know commit to the
process of making these machines small
enough that you can port and that's not
a limitation because once they're up and
running there's a pass-through side that
can make larger components which means
that these machines can bootstrap
themselves up in size and more
interesting to me is they can bootstrap
down in size because I would like to see
this technology tunnel towards now scale
you can you know all is DIY bio stuff
you can build the tools to actually do
that and until intelligent way instead
of doing you know bulk conversion and
all the other old chemistry stuff the
actual actually able to look through
your instruments at the molecular scale
at the work you're doing and do it now
that that's those are kinds of tools
they're only available to big research
institutes now but they can be available
to everyone if we successively chain our
way down to micro factories ya know I
like I like bottom-up stuff that I like
I am getting to like decentralization
even if it was triggering for me a few
weeks ago right yes mainly because my
project does not decentralized like but
it also is I don't know it's it's all
and it's not about me it's not creating
a better world it's not necessarily
about my eco and me getting to play my
my place in it
but I'm me and you know I mean those
things all come in to come into play in
a very real way in the world like if
you've spent a lot of time on cube
spawned a lot of money and if someone
else came and created something
overnight that took over and now you
don't get it you know what I mean that
this yeah very similar it's
it sucks they exists in the world right
but like you're not part of it and your
ingenuity doesn't go into being part of
it and that that is ego killing like
that doesn't feel good to be like oh
well I'm all it's not Darwin nice I've
been at this for 13 years
oh it's not like I dreamed it wild sweat
last Wednesday it's and it came from the
RepRap 3d printer the RepRap 3d printer
the first open-source 3d printer the
community had formed around that I
thought 3d printing was really cool I
thought it was but I saw limitations in
it right away it was slow and there were
a limited range of materials and there
are certain things you just can't 3d
print you can now but the machines are
million bucks so it's there's still
enough barrier on affordability okay
bandits it's coming down 3d printers I
see it kids find the future will evolve
towards many of its processes will be 3d
printing processes that are specific to
a given material and as that becomes
more sophisticated there will be multi
material printers who will you know who
will take over significant chunks of how
its designed today but that's the whole
point
it's intended to evolve which means that
whatever we do today will not persist as
new innovation becomes available it'll
change somebody will come up with a
module to stick in it that replaces
these three modules with a 3d printer
that does what those three modules did
so nothing is nothingness cast in stone
everything will constantly be a fluid
state and that's one of the things I
like about what it sounds like you're
doing and also what I'm attempting to do
is it doesn't actually need to be better
than what's currently out there it has
to start somewhere and improve
incrementally right like in as long as
it's open to that improvement and open
to the transparency so there can be
trust in the system more trust than what
is currently out there we already know
we can't trust what's out there
but if that's where every project is
starting is like wait why would we trust
you
what are you doing this evil because
everyone's evil so like what are you
doing this evil hey it's like I'm nine
I'm really just trying to help
like I'm really I think like sometimes I
uncover it's an ego stuff and I have to
get rid of it but yeah overall
kind of doing it too that's revenge I
didn't have one more question about cube
spawn that has been typically not me for
a while and then we should probably go
cuz my my kid is still on Christmas
break and I need to comment you know but
it's been a great so with the
incentivization of the royalties and and
and such it sounds like people will be
more incentivized to work on designs for
stuff that is more popular right stuff
that is going to be in the millions or
tens of thousands and not things that
will be a one-off design and things like
the prosthetics although I'm sure
there's a base of 2 that prosthetic they
are kind of one-off designs that's why
prosthetics are so expensive they are so
my question is a lot of the one-off
designs that are needed are
life-changing like the impact they're
gonna have on people it's gonna be
bigger than the ones that are millions
and since a lot of what I deal with too
is like how do you incentivize the small
ones that aren't gonna have as much
demand for the good and therefore not
gonna have that as much royalty involved
in it well I didn't mention it but the
Institut part of it that's gonna roll
out the upgrades the the objective with
the Institute is to take those kinds of
problems because there are there's a
fairly limited range of core problems
that can be addressed some degree and so
prosthetics ethical meet you know meet
printers when do we get to that point
all of those problems are things that I
see as being priorities and if my hands
weren't tied up with building this
prototype which I've been at for five
years so it's not you know it's taken a
lot of time and it's been very more more
of that time has been spent raising
money or getting the materials and the
relationships together so that I have
the resources necessary to do it I spent
far more time on that than I have on
actually building anything and what I
would like to move forward to is look at
precious plastics that's Dave Hawkins
out of the Netherlands who's building a
little cheap recycling plastics
recycling machine as his effort to try
and get people to tackle the plastics
problem
boy I see that as my problem too and I
would like to give Dave Hawkins credit
and then fold his designs into something
that these machines could produce
because then he'd have small recycling
machines that are near processed plastic
and so that would be to me the purpose
of the kids mind of the Institute would
be to take that feed collection
mechanism and apply that to war solving
those problems that are at the edges of
commercial viability but do serve a
significant social purpose so I I don't
necessarily think that I'm gonna do all
that myself I'm I don't make any claims
about my own skill set I am capable and
I have done a lot of work towards this
but there are really brilliant people
out there and I've met quite a few of my
line who they know far more than I do
about a particular thing so
sighing prosthetics am I gonna meet a
guy no but I would like to be able to
guide funds towards that solution so and
that's what I see the Institute is
served its purpose beyond you know once
the system's up and running and releases
have been produced to get it past this
preliminary stage so there's a fairly
sophisticated manufacturing platform
well then what's the institute gonna do
with its time because most of those
fundamental problems they won't be
permanently solved but they'll be solved
sufficient to requirements and then what
does it do what does the Institute do it
it's time well solve all of those clean
water you know small-scale energy
production all of the necessary things
to make life on Earth a little more
pleasant and to bring habitability to
people who may not have it and to
address things that are a result of
climate change you know if your country
is no longer capable of producing
adequate food say the southern part of
Pakistan where in India there's already
killing temperatures in the summertime
people are conditioning their well
passive design at solar passes
and housing can address some of that and
make it so that at least you can be
comfortable without huge energy
expenditures of air conditioning and so
forth so all of those problems are in my
opinion core elements and if you're
either a literature on the project it
fairly quickly gets into green houses
passive solar systems water clean all
the core elements of what we mistakenly
call a civilization but isn't really
that civil yet this message so it sounds
like if there's a design in this system
anyone can work on improving it and
there isn't necessarily barriers to
using someone else's design the person
who is creating it doesn't necessarily
get to choose what royalty they get but
they get to put it in the system and
they'll probably get something out of it
they'll probably get something that is
going to sustain them if not we'll
figure out ubi together and you'll be
sustained anyway and then this is notice
like with your project chance with the
hold of projects that are going on
someone will figure out how to feed
clothe that hose us and we'll figure out
how to get good since Moses and my goal
is by having this system I can lose
everything I need so that's Universal
basic whatever universal basic materials
universally subsistence yeah
without money wealth without money to me
is that was a phrase that was attached
to that 3d printer in the RepRap the
original 3d open-source 3d printer
well that lucky the Adrian boy the guy
who founded that that's what he said
this is wealth without money because you
can produce the things you need and you
can do it from you know in this annual
plastic and I think that is a reflection
of exactly the ethnos that this system
is supposed to have wealth without money
because if you have materials you can
produce whatever many so it's kind of
ubi is kind of built into this it's just
there's no monetary component its
physical yeah which is more like ubi is
actually like the government tax a some
money and then distributes it I'm like
that doesn't actually like the money
there doesn't work
like you can't actually whereas if you
come up with a new design for something
and if you can figure out how to get our
food system even if it's 30 seconds less
time to create that meal and you figure
that out well then everyone gets to use
that you just created 30 seconds for
everybody like and those things for
exponential lines three billion minutes
a day of new time and so if you can
somehow figure out how that you get a
fraction of that you get one billionth
of a second for a second that you put
out there then yeah you just you just
manufactured yourself a whole day I do
that all right I'm gonna say goodbye to
YouTube thank you James for joining me
and like I said we'll put your patreon
accounts it's already the cubes fun URL
is already there but we'll put the
patreon account too for people you know
a little blocked by YouTube why