this is my video response to the podcast
the third episode of revolution Z
entitled vision meritocracy and income
and in it Michael Albert talks about how
it would be unfair to base your income
on things like your any talent the
situation you grew up in our genetics
our luck the tools available to you
because it's inherently unfair but then
he goes on to say that what we should
base income on is the duration of the
work you perform the intensity of the
work you perform and the owner√≠s
conditions in which you perform it and I
would say that's all able saf because we
all have very different abilities for to
be able to work for a length of time to
be able to work at a certain intensity
and what conditions are onerous for us
we are all unique individuals and so we
don't we can all run the same distance
we can all run for the same intensity we
can't the same conditions such as
temperature are going to affect us
differently I can't work under
fluorescent lights because it's near
torture for me for said that would be an
owner's condition to me but not for
society so you put me in that you would
need to pay me more but that's not
really what he's talking about he's
saying well fluorescent lights aren't
onerous so no no one's getting paid more
for that and so what would I say what
would I say in the new global
cooperative later on when we don't have
a currency and we don't have a monetary
system and we're not paying people
because that's what the point of not
having a monetary system is so how much
do people work they work the amount they
want to work you don't get to dictate
how much anybody else works so if the
amount that brings you joy and
fulfillment is ten hours a week you're
doing 10 hours a week if the amount that
brings you joy fulfilment is 80 hours a
week you're doing 80 hours but neither
of those people get a dictate that
everybody else does that the person only
doing 10 doesn't say everyone else has
to only do 10 because they're making me
look bad the person doing 80 you can't
say everyone else has to do 80 because I
can do it and it's easy think about how
much work we'd get accomplished if we
all did 80 and so tapping into what
brings you joy and
what fulfills you is how we get the
tasks accomplished because that is the
next question well how do we get
everything done because maybe we can't
get everything done with complete
enjoyment and so I will link to the
video called how do tasks get
accomplished that I just put up today
but this is basically the the one that
I'm talking about for a task to get
accomplished you need these three things
to coincide in the same individual they
have to be aware of the task needs to
get done they have to have the skills to
accomplish the task and they have to
have the desire to accomplish the task
and so we talked about income or talking
about paying people cuz they don't have
a desire to do it I'm saying let's tap
into their desire to do it let's create
the systems that tell people who aren't
to where this go the task needs to get
done but have both the desire and the
skill set what needs to get done and
making it available to them let's create
education systems that if people are
only lacking skill it is very easy to
train new people it is within their
learning style and when we still are
lacking when we truly lack desire
instead of paying people to work X
number of hours under a certain duration
and condition you ask what would
incentivize them if we know we have a
certain level of skilled people that are
aware a task needs to get done but they
still don't desire but we know what they
do desire hey if you all had there's
enough of you that like Adele if we give
you an adult concert would you do it
dela said she's willing to do it then
because that's her desire that's her
sweet spot right she has the desire to
say who she has the skill to sing and
she's aware those potholes need to get
filled but she's not filling them so
we'll do you fill them and she sings for
you that we tap into something else
that's an incentive and that is how
tasks get accomplished in the new
economy how now that being said that's
in the future that's utopian future when
we're creating the technological
cooperative we need to pay people
because people are putting in a lot of
time we need we need money in our
current economy and sort of paying
people a living wage beyond a living
wage because it's the tech industry and
they're gonna be able to get more than a
living wage somewhere else but we're
also continually asking not for let's
say the 1% of our members that are
employed by the co-operative but for a
hundred percent of our member
how do we deflate the economy how do we
keep your if your wage is $20,000 how do
we make sure you can get more and more
and more for your 20000 instead of less
and less and less so that you can work
less time and get the same level and
that's about creative non not-for-profit
systems that help you trade your labor
in trade time for food for clothing for
shelter that you don't have to but you
get to voluntarily choose that you get
to choose which food system you're a
part of and you're never gonna want to
be a part of it if you're gonna have to
put in more time and energy than you're
currently doing in the current economy
so as you can see the amount of time and
energy you have to put in and being less
and less and less the more you're gonna
want to opt in if you make a thousand
dollars an hour an iPad cost you one
hour of work in the current economy
you're not going to come and work with
us but if an iPad costs you a month's
worth of labor and we can give it to you
for 20 hours of labor then you're gonna
want to come to us for your I well
whatever our version of the iPad is cuz
that's clean trade work we can create a
system that all the tasks get
accomplished when we look at what needs
to and we just keep asking questions of
like what would get you to want to do it
who does want to do it how do we train
you to do it and at the same time tap
into people's sweetspot
tap into what they want to do help them
figure out what they want to do help
them gain skills in the area and help
them have the knowledge that a task
needs to get done when they have those
other two things and so that is my
response to Michael Albert of how we
dictate an income and it's basically we
don't we let people do what they want
when they want to do it for the duration
they want to do it and help them create
the conditions they would do it under
that aren't onerous and in that world
that's the world I want to create that's
the world I want to work in and I want
you'd help me create it for everyone
Thanks please like and subscribe