[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis last time we finished our
look at the axial revolution in India we
took a look at what was going on in the
buddha's state of enlightenment we took
a look at some of the cognitive science
in such awakening experiences and then
we moved to interpret following the sage
advice of Bachelor some of the Buddha's
pronouncements trying to get beyond
interpreting his pronouncements as
propositions to be believed and instead
understand them as provocations so that
we may enact enlightenment and that
means enacting the threat that we are
facing and then enacting the psycho
technologies that can respond to it we
took a look at this in terms of ideas of
parasitic processing reciprocal
narrowing addiction and the opposite of
an agogic acceleration as opposed to
reciprocal narrowing and creating a
counter active dynamical system the
counter active system of the Eightfold
Path for successfully dealing with
parasitic processing so we saw that
these higher states of consciousness
these awakening experiences can bring
about transformations that alleviate
modal confusion parasitic processing
reciprocal narrowing all many of the
ways in which we fundamentally lose our
agency in the world in a self deceptive
and self-destructive manner I'd now like
to return back to what's happening after
the axial revolution and the West so
Socrates was fortunate he had a great
disciple in Plato Plato was fortunate
and that he had a great disciple in
Aristotle
Aristotle had a great disciple but he
was not so fortunate Aristotle's great
disciple is not himself a great
philosopher he is another kind of great
he is Alexander the Great and Alexander
the Great
is an example of the kind of thing that
predates the axial revolution the world
conqueror alexander creates an empire
and takes the greek way of thinking
throughout most of the known world in a
way that reestablishes and perhaps a
dangerous manner the pre axial world
Alexander is so glorious that the line
between being a human being and being a
god is blurred he creates a personal
mythology in which he is a God man very
much like the Pharaohs of ancient Egypt
which might perhaps explain why
Alexander was so readily welcomed into
the courts of Egypt either way what
happens is a twisting of the world
because not only does Eris not only does
Alexander represent they return to a pre
axial way of being he also represents a
fundamental disruption to the world in
which people that found themselves let's
compare the world of Aristotle to the
world of Alexander now in order to do
that we have to understand that
Alexander himself does not live very
long he dies in Babylon that most
ancient of cities it's not clear what he
dies of as a young age of 33 he has a
child but the child of course is too
young and is therefore quickly killed
and his major generals fight amongst
themselves and they carve his empire up
into four smaller empires that are
perpetually at war with each other for
about 300 years so this period is known
as the Hellenistic Iraq so if you're
alive at the time of Aristotle
chances are you live if you're Greek
part of the Greek culture you live in a
polis this is where we get cosmopolitan
from
it doesn't mean City it means a
city-state
right like for example Athens and its
surrounding agricultural supporting
environment or Sparta now you know many
of the other citizens
you know them face to face we mentioned
the idea that you know Athens is
developing democracy
remember when we discuss the sophist and
at least for the adult males and that's
a significant defect in this society but
I've already gone into that but you're
participating in your government in a
direct manner you live close to it's
accessible to you the seat of that
government you often know personally
people involved in the government
sometimes even the leaders themselves
everybody around you speaks your
language everybody around you has
ancestors like you yourself do
stretching back beyond memory who have
lived in this place everybody around you
has the same religion as you everybody
has basically the same allegiances to
this place see your polis just isn't
just where you lived your polis is like
such a tight relationship between agents
and arena that one of the greatest
punishments you could suffer in this
world the world of Socrates Plato and
Aristotle is to be ostracized which is
just you're not killed
you're not imprisoned you're not
punished in any way you're just told to
leave the polis and for many people they
would rather die or face imprisonment
than be ostracized because the polis was
such an embedded existence for them
their identity was so immersed in it so
see look how deeply connected you are to
yourself to your environment to the
people around you to your government to
your culture to your history Alexander
comes and smashes all of that Greek
culture is now distributed into Africa
the Levant
into Asia Asia Minor Asia property right
down to that out to the borders
of India you have Greek kingdoms Bactria
that are integrating Greek culture with
Buddhist philosophy and religion in what
is modern-day Afghanistan now what does
this mean well this means in the
Hellenistic Europe people are being
moved around and shuffled around and
there belong they belong to far-flung
empires you are now probably thousands
of miles away from the seat of
government you do not participate in
that government nor do you know
personally most of the people or any of
the people in it the people around you
might not have lived where you're living
very long you might not be living where
you've been living very long your
ancestors might have been from Athens
and here you are dwelling in Asia Minor
the people around you speak different
languages worship different gods notice
how all the connections are being lost
you don't have a connection to a polis
you don't have a connection to a
linguistic group of any great extent
shared history shared ancestry shared
religion you're experiencing a Porteous
and Smith and Brian Walsh called domme
aside we'll come back to this later when
we talk about the meaning crisis today
homicide is the destruction of home now
there's two ways in which dama side can
occur one of course is physical
destruction of your house and that's
important but there's also cultural dama
side in which you have a house you have
a dwelling but it is not very much your
home now we'll come back to this being
unhold
again when we talk about our current
situation but notice how often we will
use the language of loss of home to
describe our current situation where we
often talk talk about how we now feel on
in the cosmos so people are experiencing
this radical sense of Dom aside they
don't have deep connections to
themselves to each other to their
environment to their history to their
cultural surroundings they have very
little very little political
participation they feel insignificant
you can go to sleep in your part of the
Ptolemaic Empire and your wake up and
you're part of the solution Empire so
this is known as an age of anxiety the
Hellenistic period the art changes it
becomes much more frenetic it becomes
much more realistic it becomes much more
organized around sort of extremes and
tragedy the confidence that we saw in
the earlier periods the period of
Socrates Plato and Aristotle is gone
Greece itself has suffered I titanic's
of a war the Peloponnesian War Sparta
defeats Athens the home of Socrates and
Plato one of the places where Aristotle
did most of his work Sparta is that very
quickly itself defeated by thieves
thieves are very quickly loses its
hegemony so the Greek world loses losses
and losses until of course it's
overwhelmed by Macedonia and Alexander
so whereas the Greek culture is spread
throughout the world it's also thinned
it loses its depth
so there's a change that starts to
happen you can see as I said in the art
the the expression of this you can see
it in what starts to happen in religions
there's a lot of syncretism people are
trying to create religions that
integrate different cultural deities
together a Greek deity for example in an
Egyptian deity are integrated together
and props into Serapis or something like
that you also see the elevation of
mother goddesses to pan cultural
importance like the mother goddess Isis
because of course when you feel dama
side when you feel a loss of home there
is nothing that means home more to you
than mother and if you don't have that
with your physical mother what you want
is some right divine mother that can
make you feel at home no matter where
you are in this fractured homicide Laden
world but philosophy also responds the
axial age has left a powerful legacy
with Socrates Plato and Aristotle and
that project has not come to an end but
it does undergo transformation in the
face of the Hellenistic meaning crisis
up until now the main thing that wisdom
was trying to deal with was foolishness
and that's not abandoned but that's now
seen as insufficient so one of the great
philosophers of the Hellenistic period
is Epicurus and Epicurus famously said
call no man a philosopher who has not
alleviated the suffering of others so
there's now a therapeutic aspect to
wisdom wisdom is now importantly
about dealing with the anxiety and
suffering that people are experiencing
in the Hellenistic era so a new model is
created so we've seen the idea right of
the sage as somebody like Socrates who
provokes the axial revolution we eat you
out of the cave all of these wonderful
and powerful images and figures but a
new metaphor emerges the philosopher is
the physician of the soul a philosopher
is somebody who can cure you of
existential suffering this becomes
crucial now many of these new
philosophical schools the Epicureans for
example and the Stoics take it upon
themselves to try to exemplify Socrates
they try to exemplify Socrates
the Epicureans do this in a very unique
way they do this and a useful way of and
now analyzing their position is to take
them up on their own metaphor what is
their diagnosis of the disease that is
afflicting people and what is their
prognosis for the Cure now the
Epicureans are very relevant to us
because they in some ways represent a
very secular alternative in the midst of
what was still a very religious world
and that is pertinent to us so the
Epicureans diagnosed that our main
problem is fear now that's interesting
and there's something right about that
but we have to slow down first and
here's in order to get closer about how
we should try and appropriate what
they're saying the work of Paul Tillich
here is especially useful especially the
work he does does in his masterpiece the
courage to be although he does not talk
about the Epicureans very much he
concentrates on the Stoics as we will as
well he nevertheless brings up important
distinctions this is the distinction
between fear and a word you heard me use
more often which is anxiety now these
terms are often used interchangeably and
we often and we also mix up the word
anxiety with eagerness
we'll say I'm so anxious to see you
tonight
that's horrible you shouldn't be anxious
to see somebody that's means you're
distressed right and you're suffering a
loss of agency and you have a nebulous
sense of threat that's that person's
terrifying
what you mean is you're eager to see
them so first of all give up that
meaning of anxious secondly we use these
terms interchangeably
and you know in everyday discourse
that's probably alright because they do
overlap in some ways but they're
important it's important to at least
talk about the polar differences between
them fear is when you have an observable
direct threat the tiger comes into this
room I experience fear because I have an
observable threat in a very important
sense I know what to do I may fail in
doing it but I know what to do okay
anxiety is different anxiety is when the
threat is nebulous you're not quite sure
what the threat is and you're not sure
what to do you don't know what to do so
very often when you're suffering
existential issues you experience
anxiety this is why this is the
preferred term used by coca gardener
Heidegger although the regard does use
fear in one of his books but that has
more to do with something else so the
Epicureans are often translated I think
correctly I'm not talking about an
autonomic and silastic point as talking
about how we are suffering because we
can't manage fear I think a better way
of understanding it given this
distinction and following on telic is we
suffer because we can't manage our
anxiety because they think the fears
they talk about are not really things
that are a clear threat where we clearly
know what to do okay
so according to Epicureans basically we
don't control our imagination or in our
thinking and so we suffer from anxieties
that cripple our ability to get a grip
on the world so let me give you one
many people are anxious about death in
fact sort of prototypically people will
often say well they'll often use the
existence of death as a way of talking
about how their how their life is
ultimately meaningless I'm gonna die
anyway so it doesn't matter I'm gonna
die and it's terrifying I don't think
it's gonna add I'm just afraid of death
we know that if you expose people to
triggers about their own mortality they
become cognitively rigid they go into
something very much like this parasitic
processing they get locked down right
now there's there's a couple things you
can do you can pursue immortality and of
course the religions of the ancient
world and some versions of the modern
world offer this I have very little to
say for this other than as a cognitive
scientists I think that is an utterly
doomed strategy the evidence that your
mind and your consciousness are
completely dependent and emergent from
your brain is overwhelming and one thing
is indisputable your brain dies and when
your brain dies your consciousness your
character yourself died with it I know
that's even I suppose antithetical to
what many Buddhists believe but that's
that's irrelevant so I think the
strategy of pursuing immortality is not
going to work
it makes a fundamental confusion it
confuses somebody something that's
phenomenologically in like mysterious to
you with making a conclusion
look I can't experience my own death I
can't imagine it because whenever I'm
trying to imagine being dead I'm still
consciously aware and so death is like
uh-huh and therefore I conclude well
this must be something about me that's
right immortal because it's
inconceivable that I can't be at some
level but of course that's false and
that points to what the Epicureans
talked about right they talked about
there's another strategy instead of
trying to achieve immortality can you
radically accept your mortality because
it's indisputable that you're going to
die now how do you do that well first of
all realize that you can't possibly be
anxious about your death and you say yes
I am okay well give the Epicureans a
chance
first of all if what you mean by this
your non-existence and you say I just I
can't conceive of my non-existant well
okay this is this is a standard move by
Epicurus well what about all of the
world before you were born
do you have trouble conceiving of that
no does it terrify you that you didn't
exist then no so your non existence
isn't itself terrifying and you say ah
but it's it's the loss well the problem
with that the Epicureans would say
that's equivocal do you mean write
reduction or you do me do you mean the
absence and you mean well death is total
loss and then they say - ah but you
can't ever experience total loss they
famously said the following where I am
death is not where death is I am NOT
what that means is if I'm aware that I'm
losing I'm still alive and if I've lost
everything I've lost awareness and I
can't be aware that I've lost anything
so that can't be what it means okay so
it means partial loss ah so what you're
actually afraid of is losing some of
your agency you're afraid of some of the
reduction in your capacities as you're
dying but of course you're doing that
all the time so what is it you're
actually afraid of
well the Epicureans say you're afraid of
losing what's good okay well what does
that mean here's where the Epicureans
they are sort of very very modern right
they say well good is ultimately you
know something like pleasure and they
got associated with hedonism and that's
not quite right but they don't mean
pleasure in terms of bodily sensation
they mean pay attention to those things
that actually give you the most meaning
okay now what is it that really gives
you meaning now the things that we are
locked where most liable to lose as we
age or as we're sick we're liable to
lose our fame we're liable to lose our
fortune right we're liable to lose our
wealth and that's scary but then they
say quite rightly but those aren't the
things that give you the most meaning in
life what is it that gives you the most
meaning in life and here's where the
Epicureans have a beautiful
sort of beautiful answer and they pick
it up from Socrates the thing that gives
you meaning is friendship and they mean
that very broadly so they were unique in
their community they included women in
their community not primarily for sexual
relations but they considered that the
ability to obtain meaningful
relationships was crucial and with those
and okay meaningful relationships not
just the relationships but being able to
exercise philosophy ah the pursuit of
wisdom and self transcendence and the
point is that as long as you are that is
always available to you and that any of
the pain you're suffering from the loss
of any of the any of these things is
ultimately manageable by you you can
learn to manage it now whether or not
you ultimately agree with the Epicureans
right do you see what they're doing here
they're refusing to accept I'm afraid of
death they're saying wait wait wait wait
are you do you really want immortality
what you're actually afraid of is losing
your agency which you've identified with
these things but that's not actually
where your ultimate happiness lies that
as long as you have cognitive agency you
can cultivate philosophical friendships
and Epicurus did this right to his very
last moment even though suffering from
some horrible stomach illness so he
exemplified what he's talking about
such that when you die it doesn't matter
to you
so his disciples practical they would
and Epicurus had other ways he tried to
get us to not be anxious about the gods
right famously crafting some of the
first arguments that are used by
modern-day atheists
against you know being concerned about
the gods I know I wouldn't say Epicurus
was an atheist he's a non-theist he
basically argues that the gods are
irrelevant and therefore paying
attention to them or being overtly
concerned with them being anxious about
them and their nebulous threat is not
something you should rationally do so
Epicurus his disciples would practice
internalizing Epicurus they would write
his sentences on their household walls
on their household utensils they would
practice they would form communities
together where they would reinforce all
of these practices where you constantly
train in being able to accept your
mortality now I think this is valuable
to us and I think one of the things that
any wisdom tradition should do is give
us a way of responding to our mortality
I would recommend that that project
hasn't stopped I recommend Tillich's
book the courage to be as a discussion
about that from a more modern context
and as I said to you we are not caught
by the usual framing right either you
believe in an afterlife or your life
your current life is meaningless
instead the Epicureans say there's an
alternative strategy there's an
alternative therapy for dealing with the
anxiety and that is by learning how not
just learning beliefs but learning how
to live in the acceptance of your
mortality now well I think this is
relevant I don't think that their
diagnosis is sufficient I do not think
that the meaning crisis of the
Hellenistic period was driven primarily
or solely by a fear of more
why because mortality has always been
with us and always will be with us I
think they're right that periods of
chaos and Dom aside exacerbate we know
this from mortality salience research
right things that are making us feel
more vulnerable tend to make our
mortality and our terror around it more
salient to us but I think there's
another school that gets a better
understanding of what was going on in
the Hellenistic period and gives a more
comprehensive answer and this is the
stoic school now stoicism is very
relevant because stoicism is a direct
and explicit ancestor to some of our
current forms of psychotherapy the
current forms of psychotherapy that are
the most evidence-based for being
effective
the cognitive therapies like cognitive
therapy cognitive behavioral therapy
rational emotive therapy etc directly
come out of stoicism you read Aaron
Beck's book for example on cognitive
therapy he repeatedly states this and
cites epictetus Marcus Aurelius and
others so the way we are trying to deal
with issues of anxiety and if you
probably notice we have an anxiety
depression crisis in our culture is we
are very much putting into practice
things that are resonated with the
Stoics not as much from the Epicureans
so that means the Stoics have a
different diagnosis of the problem and a
different prognosis for the answer so
what's their issue they also believe
we're suffering from a kind of anxiety
a kind of suffering of a loss of agency
and a distress around that because
that's of course what's shared by all of
these schools confronting the
hellenistic crisis meaning crisis the
crisis of dama side but they have a
different interpretation of it now we
have to do a bit of history there's a
look there's quite a bit more history
that comes out of out directly out of
Socrates and flows into stoicism I want
to go over this a little bit carefully
with you so they have Socrates and we
know one of his greatest disciples is
Plato but he has another one and
ticinese Plato wrote dialogues because
he was trying to get us to emulate and
eventually internalized Socratic and
Linkous that question and answer process
that Socrates made famous when intestine
is was asked what he had learned from
Socrates he argued he didn't argue he
just simply stated he didn't make an
argument he just simply stated that he
learned how to converse with himself now
that sounds like well I talk to myself
all day long okay so that's exactly the
thing
this doesn't mean right
your internal just talking to yourself
it doesn't really and the problem with
that is that talking to yourself is
often what goes seriously awry in
anxiety and depression this is what
psycho psychologists and
psychotherapists mean by rumination when
that talking to yourself gets caught up
in those parasitic processing spirals
and it just spins out of control and
destinies means something else he means
he learned to do with himself what
Socrates was able to do with
he really learned how to internalize
Socrates
so although the Epicureans right pattern
themselves on Socrates there they come
out of Socrates right
the stoicism is really something close
to being a religion that's trying to
internalize Socrates so that Socrates is
basically and I don't mean this
disrespectfully because the stoic
certainly wouldn't Socrates is turned
into a systematic set of psycho
technologies that you internalize into
your meta cognition so what became
crucial for Plato as we saw was
argumentation but Francis tonie's the
actual confrontation with Socrates was
more important both Plato and
anticipated in the transformation that
Socrates is affording Plato sees this
Hopf eating through argumentation and
this thing he sees it as happening
through confrontation because and you
can see how they're both right because
in Socratic and lanka's Socrates comes
up and he argues with you but of course
he's also confronting you we talked
about how he sort of slamming the actual
revolution into your face so
anticipation is and Diogenes epitomizes
this this confrontation and by looking
at the kinds of confrontation we can
start to see what the followers are
Antasari
so Diogenes basically does something
analogous to provocative performance art
he gets in your face in a way that tries
to provoke you
two realizations those kinds of insights
that will challenge you he tries to
basically create aporia in you that
shocked experience that you had when
confronting Socrates that challenges you
to radically transform your life but
instead of using argumentation and
discussion as Socrates did and Plato
picked up on they were really trying to
hone in on how to try to be as
provocative as possible right so
famously you know about one of these
it became a card in the Tarot and it
became a album cover for Led Zeppelin
you have the man right with with the
lamp walking wandering about the Hermit
with the lamp well this is Diogenes he
walked into the marketplace carrying
around a lamp and looking and looking
and looking and looking and everybody
said well what are you looking for and
then he just kept looking and looking
what are you looking for what do you
what is it what is it
and then he said I'm looking for one
honest man and then everybody gets got
pissed off at him because they are so
intrigued by all this looking and
questing and then when it comes
something that right and they're pissed
off because they know he's right because
they're in the marketplace and
everybody's lying and cheating and
stealing right but they don't want to
know that they don't want to pay
attention to that right now that sounds
sort of yeah that's kind of cool and
creatives yeah but there are journeys
does other things that you might not
find so cool or courageous well they're
courageous at least but they're not you
don't find them cool
Diogenes also famously came into the
center of the marketplace and
masturbated in public and most raw we're
all going like ooh ooh all right how are
these two things possibly related well
here's how they're related right
the group of people that start to take
shape in this tradition are called the
cynics it's not our modern meaning of
the word so I'm gonna use a capital C
because this just means you know being
suspicious that everybody has an
ulterior motive or a secret agenda
that's not what is meant here this means
actually living like a dog because
Diogenes also famously lived outside of
Athens in a barrel so let me tell you
one more stories and we'll try to
connect all of them so Alexander the
future emperor of the world on his
ascendance into godhood comes to visit
Diogenes so you can imagine here's the
whole like all of this entourage and
error and here comes Alexander to visit
Diogenes and he comes up to Dodge and
easy says um I can give you like half of
the world what do you want
and all Diogenes says is could you move
a little to the left you're blocking my
sunlight so why is he living in a barrel
why is that it that his answer to
Alexander why does he look for one
honest man why does he masturbate in
like what is going on well the cynics
had a particular understanding of the
Hellenistic homicide they had the idea
that what causes us to suffer isn't what
we set up is what we set our heart on
it's not just a particular that we set
our heart on our life and we're afraid
of losing it in death we can set our
heart on all kinds of things that
ultimately will cause us to suffer why
well their idea is when we set our
hearts on the wrong things those things
will fail us and that's how we suffer
you can see some similarities to some
aspects of Buddhism and to some of the
asceticism that the Buddha first
practiced himself
so the cynics came to the conclusion
that what the Hellenistic period was
showing is that many of the things that
we take for granted and think about what
that mean where it means we take them as
being part of the structure of reality
are actually not fundamentally real they
don't have staying power they're not
permanent they're actually man-made they
are historically culturally dependent
and they are temporary and when we set
ourselves on these things
the current of events can easily and
readily wash them away and then we are
left bereft our hearts are torn from us
and that is how we experience Thomas I'd
okay so what should we do then
well you should learn not just acquire a
set of beliefs progenies isn't just
believing things he's living in a
certain place in a certain way right you
should learn how to set your heart on
the kinds of things that are not
man-made are not contingent that will
not be swept away by events what are
those kinds of things well one it are
the laws of the natural world so this is
why this dodging Eve's lives in a barrel
he wants to live as much as he can like
an animal in one sense in another sense
he doesn't want to live like an animal
at all but he wants to live as much by
natural law as opposed to man-made law
he doesn't want to be invested in
man-made cultural institutions or
practices cultural political value
systems because those will end and then
if we have set our heart upon them our
hearts will be broken so you want to as
much as you can live according to the
patterns of nature because those are not
man-made and those will not disappear
with the change in history or culture
now if it was just that then of course
dodging ease would just live like an
animal but the cynics also said in
addition to natural law there are moral
laws there are moral laws as to what is
a proper way to be a good human being
now and you may say but isn't that all
culturally relative and of course that's
a big dispute but one of the things that
the cynics did was to try and make a
distinction between moral principles
that are culturally based sorry moral
principles that are not culturally based
and purity codes that are culturally
historically based and they are similar
to each other in ways such that we can
often confuse them together
so a good way of understanding this is
in terms of more modern language of
guilt versus shame now again we use
these terms interchangeably and we
shouldn't because having a distinction
between them is useful guilt is your
distress at having realized you've both
broken a moral principle shame is your
distress at having violated a purity
code let me give you an example if as I
was delivering this video there was some
sort of malfunction in my clothing and
my clothing suddenly fell down I would
be deeply embarrassed I would experience
shame why because I violated a code a
cultural code which is I'm supposed to
be fully clothed in a public discourse
and I am alright but if that happened
have I done anything immoral well so you
would say no you didn't do anything
immoral you didn't do anything wrong so
I don't feel guilt I feel shame right
sometimes they can be against each other
right you may be made to feel ashamed
even though you're doing something that
you believe let's say in a justified way
is morally right many people who
supported blacks during the civil rights
movement were subjected to terrific
amounts of shaming even though they
didn't experience any guilt in what they
were doing
see purity codes are designed to keep
the categorical boundaries that make a
culture in a particular historical
period run the way it's running
they are highly tied up with the
invested power structures who are
usually highly invested in keeping
things running the way they're running
so we have lots of important boundaries
that are protected by purity codes so
for example just to give you one more
example
just to make it clear none of you I hope
would be distressed my me doing the
following here's some water okay imagine
if I do the following I collect lots of
saliva in my mouth lots of it just tons
and tons of saliva and then I spit it
into the glass yeah until there's gobs
and gobs of saliva in my glass and now
that I swirl it around just imagine it
come on and then I drink it and now
you're going air now notice if I mix the
water inside my mouth and swallow you're
fine with that but if the saliva comes
outside of my mouth into the glass you
find it repellent okay that's because
there's an important purity code here
the purity code is this is the boundary
of John and things inside this are John
and pieces of John should not come out
into the world John should not spit John
should not fart John should not burp
John should not cut his fingernails off
and leave them in front of you John
should even not leave his bed unmade
because he's leaving his impression
behind and that's yucky okay that's a
purity code now very often we confuse
purity codes with moral codes we confuse
purity codes because we confuse our
disgust reaction that's often purity
code based with a moral judgment that
should be based on reasoning and
evidence please listen to me very
carefully with what I want to say first
I'll give you something
non-controversial both of my parents are
dead but suppose they were alive I don't
want to see them having sex I don't I
would go ooh is that a moral argument of
course not
there's nothing immoral with them having
sex that's why I'm here in a similar way
and please hear what I'm saying I might
not want
see two men having sex that doesn't mean
that that is anyway a moral judgment on
my part
a lot of the waves we have persecuted
gay people is because we have confused a
purity code disgust reaction with a
legitimate moral argument the people who
started the process and we're still
pulling them apart today right now right
here right now were the cynics what
Diogenes was trying to do was get you to
pull apart the moral code from the
purity code he did nothing immoral by
masturbating in public but although lots
of people were doing stuff that was
culturally acceptable in the marketplace
most of it was immoral do you see
alexander comes to him and offers him
power and fame but those are all the
things the stoic say are no good because
sorry the cynics they're no good because
if you set your hearts on them those are
man-made human defined and therefore
your heart will eventually be broken set
your heart on what won't get broken
so the cynics developed this very
powerful provocative way of enacting
Socrates and trying to get us the cynics
are trying to get us to realize what
we're setting our heart on and to pull
apart our automatic disgust reactions
from moral reflection on what we're
doing
now a Dodge eni's has a disciple cradies
and then creatives has a disciple Zeno
this is not the Zeno of Zeno's paradoxes
this is a difference you know now
whereas the cynics tended to be sort of
hostile to Plato because of his emphasis
on argumentation Zeno was deeply
influenced by the cynics but he also
really liked Plato he saw that there was
value in the argumentation and he
realized that there's deep connections
between your ability to rationally
reflect and your ability to use your
reason so what he wanted to do was
integrate the rational argumentation and
reasoning of Plato with right the
provocative aspects of the cynics so he
crafted a way of life that put the two
together and then he would walk up and
down a stoah this is a covered colonnade
in Athens teaching this new integration
that's what we get the name stoic from
stoic doesn't mean being you know stiff
upper lip and tolerating the decline of
the British Empire or stuff like that
means something much more sophisticated
so Xena's insight was there's something
deeply right about the cynics but
they're getting something wrong right
they're concentrating too much on the
product and not enough on the process
right they're concentrating too much on
what we're attaching our heart to rather
than the very process of attachment
itself because the stoic said yes
particular cultures in history are
variable but being social isn't human
beings are inherently social yes
particular political cultural and
historical institutions and traditions
are variable but it is part of
our humanity to be social we shouldn't
be leaving the polis because notice that
Diogenes and Socrates have to actually
enter the polis to practice their
philosophy so Xena said it's not what
you set your heart on it's how you set
your heart and this is always a hallmark
of rationality one of the crucial and
this is good like even recent work on
rationality Keith Stanovich and the
hallmark of rationality is learning not
to focus just on the products of your
cognition but find valuable and pay
attention to the processes what process
what is this process of setting your
heart on right well it's something
they've already talked about it's this
process of Ko identification it's the
process by which the agent arena
relationship is set up it's the process
by which you're simultaneously assuming
an identity and assigning an identity
and you're doing that all the time
unconsciously now the Stoics say ah that
process of CO identification is where
your identity is being formed that's
where your agency is taking shape but if
you mindlessly Co identify if you do it
automatically and reactively you will if
you'll allow me the acronym you'll Mar
that whole process it'll be open to all
kinds of distortion self-deception
self-destruction you can see here again
the axial age ideas so what do we need
to do well we need to pay attention to
this process we need to pay attention to
how we're assuming and assigning
identities we need to do it in such a
way
that we can strengthen our agency in the
face of the threat of dama side so what
I want to explore with you next time is
what the disto acts actually advocate as
practices and how are these currently
being taken up in our own
psychotherapeutic endeavors to deal with
our own version of dama side and the
meaning crisis thank you very much for
your time and attention
[Music]
you
you