[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis last time we took a look
at the work of Stanovich and sort of
culminating ideas coming out of the
rationality debate tried to expel and
the notion for you of need for cognition
talked a little bit more about problem
finding and the generation of a problem
Nexus and then also the the affective
component of that wonder and curiosity
and sort of balancing them off together
and then more specifically looked at
Stanovich his theory of foolishness
which he calls disruption Aelia and we
looked at the idea of dual processing s1
and s2 and the idea that what makes you
foolish is s one's functioning that
makes you leap to conclusions interferes
with the inferential processing of s2
you leap to conclusions inappropriately
and that's what causes you to be biased
in your processing self-deceptive
foolish etc and then what active
open-mindedness does is it for grounds
s2 and protects it from undue
interference from s1 and that's all very
good in a theoretical context but we
took a look at work at the work of
jacobs and Teasdale and said but in a
medic sari in a therapeutic context the
opposite is the case
what you need is you need that machinery
of leaping to work well and we took a
look at the work of baker senate and
cece showing that that ability to leap
cognitive leaping is actually very
powerfully predictive of insight and
that's what you need in therapy you need
insight
powerful kinds of insight to break you
out of the ways in which you're
confronting you know existential
entrapment and inertia ignorance and you
cannot infer your way through
transformative qualitative change
so I proposed and Teasdale also has
independently proposed this that we need
a cognitive style of that four grams s1
puts us into a state for triggering
insight tends to background and
constrain as to processing that in
faretta t'v processing and that's
mindfulness we know we have evidence
that mindfulness facilitates insight and
mindfulness is also increasingly being
incorporated into therapeutic settings
precisely for its capacity to generate
cognitive flexibility and afford insight
so we're noticing that what we're
needing is right right because the
relationship between s 1 and s 2 is
opponent and not adversarial we're going
to need some higher-order way of
coordinating these two cognitive styles
active open mindedness and mindfulness
so that we can optimize the enhancement
in rationality of the relevance
realization that is at the core of our
intelligence and then took time before
we passed to explicit theories
psychological theories of wisdoms to
note this idea right that how you are
relating to your intelligence and
applying your intelligence to itself the
degree to which you problematize your
own intelligence and try and improve it
we can see that as rationality and then
I suggested to you I propose to you the
possibility that when I do this when I
recursively and reflectively use my
rationality to enhance and optimize my
rationality is by enhancing perhaps the
relationship between the component
styles of mindfulness and active open
mindedness then I'm moving towards
wisdom we took a look at that and in
connection with this we took a look at
the work of Dweck and again making the
argument that the relay the way you
relate to your higher cognitive
processes your meaning making
problem-solving capacity is not just the
intellectual or information processing
deeply existential and we saw saw the
work on mine setting and that write the
way you identify with your intelligence
the way you're framing how you're
identifying with your intelligence has a
tremendous impact on your need for
cognition your problem-solving your
behavior your proclivity towards
deception self-deception etc okay so
we've learned a lot along the way that I
think has given us a good framework with
which we can critically and
constructively engage with some of the I
think representative theories of wisdom
let's remember earlier on that we have
already take a look at a central review
of some of those theories the work of
McGee and Barber showing us that one of
they were not trying to give a
comprehensive theory of wisdom they were
just trying to find a central feature
and the central feature was seeing
through a lesion and into reality and
then we took that up as how does one get
comprehensively reliably systematically
better at dealing with self-deception
and that's how we got into the
rationality debate that's how we're here
so we we've done a lot to unpack that
intuition well it's more than an
intuition it's a conclusion of the
argument the very careful argument made
by McGee and barber that at the core of
wisdom is what I would argue is with
rationality the systematic and reliable
ability to overcome self-deception now
let's take all of this and as I said
let's put it into dialogue with some
existing theories the first theory I
want to take a look at isn't a
comprehensive theory of wisdom but
nevertheless it's instructive because it
brings up some core components of the
theory of wisdom and it does something
that's exemplary something we need to
consider it discusses the relationship
between wisdom and virtue which is an
idea that's taken up explicitly by one
of the core theories of wisdom which is
the work of bolts and starting they're
known as the Berlin paradigm but before
we do that in order to
examine the connection between wisdom
and virtue I want to take a look at the
work of Schwartz and Sharpe
and fortune sharp and it's 2006 is the
main article later on there was a book
written I think 2010 called practical
wisdom which is much more extensive but
I'm relying on this article because I
think that was a sort of clear and
concise presentation of the argument the
art the article is called practical
wisdom
Aristotle meets positive psychology or
Aristotle you know about and he's been
invoked and discussed repeatedly the
positive psychology remember we talked
about this when we're talking about for
a cognitive science remember what
positive psychology is about positive
psychology is the idea that we should
study the mind not only how it breaks
down into its parts
we should also study it in terms of how
it excels as an integrated system as a
whole because that excellence that
excelling beyond can often reveal powers
and principles that work within our mind
that normal cognition and pathological
cognition do not reveal so positive
psychology studies states that are
considered excellent
now what Schwartz and sharp are
interested in is they're interested in
some work done by Peterson not Jordan
Peterson and other Peterson Peterson and
Zelig men where they're discussing
virtue and they're discussing virtue of
course as a form of human excellence and
so they study they lists a bunch of
virtues and Schwartz and Sharpe sort of
stand aside from that and they note some
difficulties with this idea this list of
virtues you know you should be honest
you should be courageous right things
like that notice what we have here the
the presentation of the virtues carries
with it the strong implication that
they're logically independent from each
other or to use language you're familiar
with what we're given is a feature list
of virtues we're given a feature list of
virtues without any indicator
of how they relate to each other and see
in fact there seems to be the assumption
that they're logically independent from
each other a very questionable
assumption right and instead what we
should be looking for is a feature
schema we should be looking for a
structural functional organization that
helps to explicate and explain how
virtues relate to each other so it's
important to note that the feature list
carries with it the implication that
what you should simply do is maximize
each virtue and occur and right away
that tells you an inadequacy of the
feature list I mean if I maximize
honesty if I'm always as honest as I can
possibly be I will at times be cruel I
will have given up on kindness right if
I meet people and say oh I need to tell
you you're looking uglier than you did
yesterday I need to tell you that
because it's being honest maximally
honest right we don't think of that
person as being excellent we think of
that person as being an asshole
right and so that's important that's
important right away to notice that
we're not trying to maximize the virtues
we're trying to get some optimal
relationship between them and the
ancients had at least these the ancient
Greeks had a very stronger version of
this they had the idea that the virtues
were actually significantly
interdependent with each other and
there's two ways in which they could be
interdependent they could form an
interdependent system or they could all
be different different versions of some
core ability I I might come back to that
if I have time but I want to get into
the core argument so the core argument
is right we should talk about the
relationship between the virtues and as
soon as we do that we can see some
important issues coming to bear so what
they do is they they talk about a couple
of situations
in which we can see virtues in conflict
with each other so one example they give
is well an example that relates to
something I just said they give the
example of your bridesmaid and right
time is running out and you're with the
the bride or at least the intended bride
what's the metaphysical status before
the wedding are you bright like your
potential bride I don't know
anyways there with that person and right
there trying on wedding dresses and time
is running out and right they're asking
you well how do I look
and if you it like so--you you're caught
between you know being honest being kind
and being helpful right you could just
be totally kind it you look wonderful
oh it's beautiful that might not but
that's maybe not the right thing to do
right you could be honest you look ugly
it's hideous right that such a mistake
or you could try to be helpful like we
should we're running out of time um but
then what do you say and how do you
balance them all do you just give up
honesty's you just lie no do you give up
Cana Ste kindness you just brutal no do
you forget that you're trying to be
helpful and you're undercut time
constraints no what do you do all right
the another example they give is right
there's the one that's put into me
you're grading an assignment for a
student right now this is the student
has you know they they've made terrific
progress they've really overcome some
barriers they've gone from like you know
a low C and they've been improving and
they're getting into a high B now if I
grade this if I try to grade this paper
as completely objectively as I possibly
can
there's a good chance that that feedback
will stop that arc will stop that growth
and the person will remain a B student
but if I if I just give them a little
bit of encouragement if I if I extend it
and is this
lying because what I'm what am I doing
with marking am i marking what they've
done or if I'm on am I also
simultaneously indicating what they can
do so if I give them a little bit more
if I push them into the a range that
might actually like in a self-fulfilling
prophecy lift them into an a-student
and what's my moral obligation here is
my moral obligation to give them
brutally objective truth or as my boodle
is my moral obligation to make them and
afford them to be the best student they
can possibly be what do i do what do i
do okay what these dilemmas make clear
is that the virtues are not independent
from each other and we're not trying to
maximize between them we're trying to
optimize between them in an important
way now this brings up some very
important issues right so what it brings
up is it brings up some when we take a
look at the dilemmas we start to see
some important these issues of conflict
we start to see some important things
about our relationship to the virtues
let me read a quote from you real-life
situations do not come labeled with the
needed virtues or strength attached
notice notice how this is the
categorization the demonstrative
reference and and right all the stuff we
talked about and notice how they zero
right in on it because notice what they
say next there is thus the problem of
here it is and the this word is
emphasized in the original there's the
problem of relevance which is the
relevant virtue to bring to bear and
then of course not only is that so that
you see that do I bring honest is
honesty the relevant virtue in these
examples is mentorship they're relevant
virtue
guidance good guidance is kindness is
being helpful like what's the what are
the relevant virtues and of course
what's also shown is the virtues can
conflict with each other they often pull
you into different kinds of behavior
different kinds of behavior now let's
bring another thing back we often and
this is something that Schwartz and
sharp are going to make a lot out of we
often represent virtues with rules and
we've talked about this when we talked
about rules remember and I write
remember this rule and it's this is a a
virtue rule be kind do you remember the
problem with that right that rule
doesn't specify its conditions it
doesn't specify this is the problem
specification it doesn't specify its
conditions of application being kind to
my son is not the same thing as being
kind to my partner it's not the same
thing as being kind to my students it's
not the same thing as being kind to my
friends not the same thing as being kind
to a stranger that's the same thing as
being kind of a stranger on the street
and being kind to a stranger somebody
just met at a Funeral
these are all different remember that
that's why you can't capture relevance
your cognitive commitment in a rule
because you just have you'd have to just
get an ever expanding penumbra of rules
for how to apply and specify that rule
rule application specification depends
on relevance realization in fact unlike
Schwartz and sharp I think all the
problems they list right the problem of
relevance is clearly a problem of
relevance realization the problem of
conflict is a problem of determining
which is more important right and the
problem as i've just argued of
specification is also a problem of
determining relevance
I would add so they specify these three
interconnected problems as I've argued
relevance conflict and specificity I
would add a fourth that they don't talk
about and this has to do with the fact
that sometimes the best response to a
situation is to realize that I need to
develop a virtue that I do not have
it's an aspirational response rather
than a select which of my virtues should
I apply or there come how do i specified
its might be oh jeez I'm lacking a
virtue that I need I need to cultivate a
virtue that I do not have so I would add
in right there in addition to the
problem of relevance conflict and
specificity there's the problem of
development the need to aspire to
acquire virtues you do not have and I've
already shown you how much the
developmental process is dependent on
capacity for insight and qualitative
transformative experience etc all right
so what are they proposing they're
proposing that we need a higher order so
here's the virtues right we need a
higher order ability that deals with
relevance they look put it as a list but
I've tried to show you how they're
related right conflict specificity
specification sorry
development well what would that be well
they argue that's wisdom they argue that
that's wisdom wisdom is what you need
notice what the argument they're making
here given the fact that they are not
logically independent given that in very
many situations right all of these
issues are brought to bear and I'm
arguing and I think it's fair that this
is it's it's centers on ability to
determine relevance right you need
wisdom in order to be wise in fact one
of the interpretations of the Greek the
ancient Greek idea of the
interdependence of the virtues it's not
that the virtues are all constraining on
each other but that each virtue is just
a particular way in which you're wise in
a situation right so to be kind is how
to be most wise in this situation to be
honest is how to be most wise in that
situation so that version of the
interdependence of the virtues really
really tightly ties the virtues to
wisdom either way there is a deep
connection between the cultivation and
the pursuit of a virtuous way of life
and the cultivation of wisdom now this
is where Schwartz and sharp and this is
why their book is entitled practical
wisdom and that's why the title of the
article is practical wisdom because they
call back to Aristotle's distinction
right
this is the distinction between Sophia
which is in philosophy ax and phronesis
right both of these words can be
translated as wisdom this is often
translated as theoretical wisdom and
this and then that becomes problematic
because that's often assimilated to our
idea of theoretical knowledge and then
we lose a lot of what Sophia is right
and then phronesis is often translated
as practical wisdom
so what Schwarz and sharp want to argue
is that phronesis is what you need for
virtue phronesis is the ability to be
very contextually sensitive to exercise
good judgment to know what to do in this
situation so it overlaps very
considerably with you know the
relationship between preach procedural
knowledge knowing how to do various
things knowing how to be honest knowing
how to be kind and prospective or
knowing a situational awareness of what
is best fitted here what is most
appropriate for here right and so you
can see clearly why phronesis is
relevant and and one of the things they
arm they argue which is very interesting
is they really resist and I think
appropriately trying to understand
phronesis
as having rules so here they're very
sort of critical of a Content idea of
being virtue being virtuous as sort of
specifying as your baby whether or not
this is cons for you I it's not
something I'm going to get into this is
certainly a view that many people have
that the point the way in which you are
virtuous is to have a set of rules moral
Commandments and that you follow those
rules as best you can and then what and
what that can lead to and the Schwartz
has been critical of this elsewhere in
some talks you can find on YouTube for
example this has been this
then sort of right this can lead to the
attempt to try and legislate everything
to try and specify everything in terms
of how we should behave in terms of
rules and they're critical of that
because first of all it's impossible
notice the example of be kind if I try
to make a log that we should be kind and
I have to make laws about all these
different ways in which I specified
being kind I'd have to make laws that
tell me when I should give preference to
kindness over honesty across all
possible like it's just it's impossible
right but you can get into an illusion
this is part of Schwartz's that you can
somehow replace people becoming wise
with people having laws now obviously i
am not proposing anarchy like that we
shouldn't have laws or etc like that
that's not Schwartz's point he's not
proposing that that's absurd what he's
proposing is to step back and realize
that we should have right this balance
between proposing legislation and and
requiring from people that they
cultivate wisdom okay so he's making
that argument and I think that's
something that we should take into
account we should ask ourselves right
not just will this legislation reduce
harm that's a really important question
okay for sure but we should also and I
think this is also an important question
will this legislation tend to make
people less likely to pursue the
cultivation of wisdom and virtue okay so
you have to have to think about that
issue short his argument I think that's
an argument that should be taken
seriously and that's why of course he
keeps making it anything he's getting a
considerable audience around it okay
let's go back to the main point they
tend to leave this out because they tend
to associate Sophia I think unfairly
with the having of having rules they
assimilated I think too much
you theoretical knowledge and the
possession of propositions of course
rules are propositions you're proposing
what people should do proposing very
strongly right and they see Sophia as
theoretical knowledge largely
propositional i I think that's an unfair
representation of Sophia and other
people have pointed that this out and so
whereas I think look this is about being
very contextually sensitive and that's
very important because that allows me to
generate the process needed in this
situation I need to start behaving you
know in this sort of balance between
being kind and honest right
but I also need this and I instead of
thinking of this as rules and the
possession of propositions are sort of
analogous to the content model let's
think of this instead as right the
awareness of principles so for me this
is about getting you right into a
process the contextual sensitivity that
the the prospective of situational
awareness activating the right
procedures in the appropriate way so
that I fit the situation right that's
great but I also need across contextual
sensitivity I need to pick up on things
that are generalizable across different
contexts
right and of course that is partially
what we're trying to do with our laws
hence that hence the connection but to
reduce this to just the ability to
generate propositional knowledge I think
is a mistake that's not what Sophia is
Sophia is something like a deep kind of
ontological depth perception it's to be
able to see deep underlying principles
because what I need to know really and
this was Aristotle's point right I need
both of them I need to know how to put
principles into processes and I need to
know how to regulate processes with
principles that's what it is to put a
principle into practice and to practice
in a principled manner so I would argue
against Schwartz and Sharpe
that you need both sofia and from you
sis you need something that is trying to
pick up on cross contextual invariance
and you need something that is designing
helping you - and of course this is in
line with the relevance realization
model I have argued something that is
the aspect of wisdom that is about
contextual sensitivity what's different
here what's special here how do I fit
myself to this specific situation as
opposed to how do I generalize across
these many situations and what I want is
an opponent relationship between them so
that I can discover powerful principles
and put them into effective practice and
so that I can regulate my practices with
well justified principles so I think
that that's a very crucial issue there's
one other issue about Schwartz and sharp
that I want to come back to I think
they're right in saying that phronesis
is a kind of know-how a procedural
knowledge I think it's more it's also
perspectival and potentially
participatory but at least perspectival
and one of the things they do is they
they talk about this in terms of the
language of expertise of being an expert
which is different and then what they're
trying to do with that contract is write
an expert doesn't necessarily possess
the best theory they write they don't
have the knowledge that the expert has
the best know-how expertise is a kind of
excellence in know-how
I think because they've sort of not
because they've focused in on from nice
is separate from Sofia and they've
thought of know-how without thinking
also of the prospective all-knowing I
think this is a mistake
here's why I I think that expert eat
well I'm trying to be careful here
there's a way in which this we can be we
can equivocate with this word we can
just mean that we can what we sometimes
use this to me just good like you know
excellent you know that's what expertise
is and that's a very loose way of
talking but if you're trying to use it
within psychologically in a more precise
manner expertise is a domain-specific
thing and we've talked about this before
right so I can become a tennis expert
like my know-how can rise to a level of
authority and notice that my being an
expert in tennis you've done this before
but let's do it again maybe being an
expert in tennis doesn't give me any
special authority over squash in fact my
expertise in tennis can dramatically
interfere with my playing squash so
typically what happens in expertise is
it tends to be very domain-specific
which is precisely why you can get very
focused training on it and become very
good like tennis here's my my problem
with understanding from Mises and
therefore also the relationship with
virtue on the model of expertise the
domain specificity of expertise if we're
using the current term carefully is not
what I need here right it's not what I
need and you're saying ah but phronesis
is context-sensitive yes it is and and
perhaps that's the source of the
confusion being context-sensitive isn't
the same thing as being having expertise
and you say but that sounds similar well
let's pull it apart right what from
nieces is and so let's do this very
carefully Vinicius is not like expertise
in tennis which I can only apply here
and in fact if I try to transfer it to
something even similar it will interfere
I would argue that what phronesis is is
my ability to be
sensitive in this context and sensitive
in this context and sensitive in this
context and that is very very different
that is very very different from
expertise right so what we need is a
domain general ability now this is not a
contradiction your ability to be
contextually sensitive is itself a
domain general ability I have to be able
to be contextually sensitive in many
different domains and so I'm arguing
that there's a bit of confusion here and
if you pull it apart what we need is an
ability right to be contextually
sensitive but in a domain general way
across many domains so you know I think
things like well intelligence and
rationality or I would argue the ability
to realize relevance which always has a
contextually sensitive component to it
are much better ways of understanding
phronesis then expertise because this
those ways of talking are domain general
they have each one of them has an aspect
that is the domain general ability to be
contextually sensitive here and here and
here
and that's important because you know
what you're not foolish generally in a
domain specific way specific domains may
make you more foolish but we all
wonderfully have the ability to be
foolish in almost every domain of our
life often many domains simultaneously
in a disastrous chaos so I would argue
that we shouldn't confuse that phronesis
is about context sensitivity with
expertise which is locked to a
particular domain we should think of
something much more like intelligence
rationality relevance realization which
can apply across multiple domains make
you a general problem solver and deal
with the domain generality of your
capacity for foolish
and so I think my two main response I so
let's draw this together the argument
for the connection between wisdom and
virtue I think is very powerful solid
argument the argument that that should
make us more hesitant to trying to
capture wisdom just with rule so like
virtue just with rules I think that's
that's an argument I'm sympathetic wick
I think that's going in the right
direction the argument that phronesis is
all we need for virtue when I question I
think of following Aristotle's that
phronesis and Sophia should be in a very
powerful opponent relationship you know
trying to get principles into processes
and process is regulated by principles
etc and the idea of trying to capture
the procedure allottee phronesis with
the notion of expertise I think is as a
confusion as I've argued and we should
put that aside okay I now want to pick
up on one of the I mean I think this is
a fair way of saying it one of the
seminal theories psychological theories
of wisdom in many ways this theory
turned the investigation of the
psychological investigation of wisdom
into an experimental empirical process
and so this is the important work of
bolts and starting er
it's called the Berlin wisdom paradigm
they're both working in Berlin obviously
they're German and so what I want to do
is go to there it's you know it's always
hard to to tell you what to refer to
because they ship their work shows up in
multiple articles multiple handbooks on
wisdom but the article I think that many
people regard as sort of the seminal one
is an article entitled with them as a
meta heuristic yielding sorry I'm
getting the wrong quote here sorry here
I just want to get into it wisdom a
metahuman to orchestrate mind and virtue
towards excellence
okay so sorry for that little delay
wisdom a metahuman in brackets pragmatic
to orchestrate mind and virtue towards
excellence
so notice right here the title tells you
that they've accepted deeply accepted
the point by made by Schwartz and sharp
that there's a deep connection between
wisdom and virtue orchestrating mind and
virtue towards excellence there's
already the deep connection to positive
psychology but also notice something the
invocation of the term am at a heuristic
and the notion of pragmatics tells us
that relevance realization is playing a
very significant role in this theory at
least I will argue that okay
so let's first of all deal with this
notion that they put in brackets of
pragmatics because they're sort of
picking up on a couple different related
but not identical meanings associated
with that term one is having to do with
I think like the pragmatic aspects of
language pragmatics
so there's syntax semantics semantics
and pragmatics then we talked about this
when we talked about grace and
conversational implicature right that
you always are conveying much more than
you're saying and that how that depends
on capacity for relevance realization
and you can see and so there's that
sense of that dealing with how much our
communication and more broadly our
cognition goes beyond what we can
directly propositional II represent
that's definitely there there's another
meaning of pragmatics and that has to do
with pragmatism which I haven't talked
about I'm going to talk about it later I
want to talk briefly about James and so
the idea behind pragmatism is so sorry I
like I said there's a there's so much
there but the idea about pragmatism I
would argue a way of understanding it at
least the way of understanding James
James is one of my heroes James was both
a great psychologist and a great
philosopher and he was interested so
he's kind of a protocol goon of
scientist and he but he isn't interested
just in cognition he's interested in
much very much and you know what it is
to live a good life he he starts some of
the earliest work on you know that the
study of mystical experiences and
religion psychological investigation so
he's he's just a really pivotal figure
for me and for many people but one way I
would argue is what Brooke what James
was on about is that you should evaluate
your knowledge claims ultimately in
terms of their efficaciousness how much
they can be viably used in your life in
order to adapt you to the world and so
one one way of thinking about this is
your propositional claims ultimately
have to be grounded in your procedural
abilities I could James doesn't use this
language but I could find passages in
James that clearly point to it I would
argue that your you know your your your
propositional knowing has to be grounded
in your procedural abilities which have
to be grounded in your perspectival
which have to be grounded ultimately and
your your participatory James was very
interested in the phenomena of
conversion when people go through these
massive identity changes and how that
changes the world that they can live in
now I think that's deeply right but
there are also some problems with
pragmatism I'll come back to this so
I'll just mention it now I think there
is a confusion at least a potential
confusion between truth and relevance
and and that can be problematic now why
does all of that matter well because as
I just tried to show you pragmatism
tries to situate your what James would
call sort of your intellectual claims
right into this deeper lived experienced
viable ability to fit your world to
develop your connectedness to develop
yourself both of those I think can
plausibly be brought back together in
the notion that you know what we're
talking about and then and then then
this just goes so well with the
invocation of the term meta heuristic
our heuristic for managing your
heuristics we can draw this together and
this term together meta heuristic right
we can draw this right all together with
well having to deal with realizing
relevance
this is in vote not not an in terms of
the theoretical account I've given but
the idea that zeroing in on relevant
information is crucial to wisdom this is
invoked throughout the article by bolts
and onager let's be clear I don't think
they are explicitly making a case the
way I am what I'm saying is they're
invoking ideas and making use of them
that ultimately deeply presuppose the
villa the ability for relevance
realization now they have an account of
the five criteria you need in order to
be wise and the point about this is to
try and specify what these medical
inspection of mind and virtue together
so that we become excellent human beings
excellent persons they try to specify
this in terms of five criteria the point
of the criteria are these are these are
the features that are needed to judge
someone wise and also these are features
that can be empirically investigated
okay so what are these criteria so rich
factual knowledge about the fundamental
pragmatics of life right so this is this
is in some sense like Sophia this person
has a deep grasp of the facts they're
the principles of the practice under
mental pragmatics of life they also need
rich procedural knowledge about the
fundamental pragmatics of life and this
goes back to the mcgee and barbara point
right that wisdom is not so much what
you know but how you know it's very much
about knowing how to put these
principles into practice into process
now they they of course have now done
propositional and procedural knowledge I
think they should have gone deeper they
obviously are going to need
participatory knowledge because they
have to explain how we go through
traumatic developmental change because
presumably qualitative changed is what's
needed for wisdom hence the term
excellence all right and of course they
are missing the perspective of knowing
that connects the procedural knowing to
you know specific contexts situational
awareness okay so that I think is
important I think they're pointing
towards this prospective all-knowing and
how it ultimately plugs into
participatory when they invoke the next
criteria they call it lifespan
contextualism lifespan contextualism
like I say this is a kind of respectable
knowing this is the way in which you're
you know you're taking the big picture
your ability to zoom out and then from
that big picture zoom in as needed right
so it's this perspective all-knowing and
that I think is very crucial I think it
has a lot to do with our capacities for
self-regulation and we've talked about
that now the next one I want I want to
state it then I want to challenge it
this is they call it relativism of
values and priorities right I find that
a hard criterion to be be beats or to
tethered to I if they're using this term
carefully I don't think that many of the
people that I would regard as
quintessentially wise were moral
relativists I do not think Socrates or
Plato were moral relativist I think
they're clearly the opposite I I think
it's unlikely that the Buddha
morale was a moral relativists or jesus
of nazareth was a moral relativist i
think we are falling prey to thinking
that our liberal democratic values are
constitutive of wisdom I'm not arguing
against these values that is not what I
am doing here I'm arguing against tying
the notion of wisdom to those values I
think what might be on offer here what
they're actually talking about is a
capacity for tolerance and perhaps the
way we could understand that then is
instead of a kind of relativism we can
understand it in terms that we can apply
to Socrates of a fallibilism which is a
claim that you should never assert
certainty right we can we can easily
attribute that to Socrates and things
analogous Jesus is regular condemnation
of self-righteousness seems to be
appropriate here so a kind of
fallibilism and then link to something
that you've heard me mention multiple
times humility humility a recognition an
appreciation of your status your limits
etc so if we bring in fallibilism and
humility rather than requiring wise
people to demonstrate moral relativism I
think we can plausibly apply this
criteria to many exemplars of wisdom
from the past the fifth one and I think
this is very crucial is recognition and
management of uncertainty recognition
and management of uncertainty so this is
to say right we are in the finitary
predicament most of the time we can't do
algorithmic processing we
cannot pursue certainty we have to act
as best we can with you with within
unavoidable contexts of uncertainty so
you can see why I see why I think this
theory is sort of dripping in the
machinery of relevance realization I
think the term meta heuristic is very
good I think the meta meta heuristic is
something that coordinates between
heuristics it might be something like an
optimization within a dynamical system
like I argued you know trade-off between
compression and particularization things
like that they at times though
tend to talk about this meta heuristic
as a form of expertise and I've already
made the criticism I think that's a
mistake I think that understanding
wisdom as expertise is to mislead us
again it causes us to over focus on the
important procedural knowledge to the
exclusion of the perspective of another
participatory it also confuses you know
the context sensitivity with you know
being being domain-specific and we
shouldn't do that and I've made that
argument I'm not going to make it again
instead I want to point out that what
they tend to be arguing for is a very
very comprehensive kind of cognitive
flexibility and that that and
adaptability that your cognition is
flexible enough that it can adapt itself
to different situations in a very
efficacious manner what's important is
that they started to generate semi
empirical work well how do you do this
well you you basically train independent
judges to be able to evaluate these
criteria in people's behavior their
spoken behavior things like that
and then what you do is you put people
into various situations often situations
that might involve moral dilemmas
other more practical challenges and you
get those people to relate on how they
would deal with those difficult
situations you try to find some
situations that we would prototypically
do do this for we would say for somebody
who handled them well in that situation
in that situation we would be quite
happy with with attributing wisdom to
them they'd say yeah if somebody man
into this situation really well that
would be good evidence for me
for calling them wise now what you do is
reverse engineer that take those
situations that if solves successfully
would generally lead to the attribution
of wisdom give them to a bunch of people
evaluate how in the answers that people
are giving not just sort of vaguely how
well the they answer it
but do they answer it in a way that
exemplifies these five criteria and then
you can judge how well people are doing
in solving these problems and so what
you got was some of the first attempts
to start to empirically measure wisdom
by putting people see what they're doing
this is analogous on how we test
intelligence and rationality we give
people a bunch of tests across
situations and we try to see how they do
and that's and then we start to generate
from that a measure of how wise they are
I think this is as I said this is just
quintessentially important so one of the
things I want to bring out they talked
about the cognitive styles that are
important for being wise and that's that
is important sort of a judicial style
somebody who's good at making judgments
the reason why I'm not going into that
detail is that relying on sort of
notions from Sternberg and others about
particular kinds of styles and I don't
really have time to go into that in
depth at that would be a large chunk on
itself
what what what it shows
what it shows is how important that the
the capacity for good judgment is for
wisdom and we sort of knew that but as
I'm trying to as I'm trying to argue
we're getting a sense of how like in
terms of relevance realization right and
[Music]
the ability to zero in on relevant
information we're getting a sense of
what that good judgment means now one of
the things I want to draw from bolts
installing er or one of the experimental
results because this points to more
recent and important work by Igor
Grossman is they gave people this
experimental task in which they have to
try and solve these problems and they
put them into three conditions in one
condition they could discuss the problem
with a significant other before
responding in another condition they
could imagine a virtual or internal
dialogue notice that Matt imagine a
virtual and internal dialogue remember
the Stoics and internalizing Socrates
right third condition they were just
given more time to think about it and
what they found is that the first and
second group clearly outperformed group
three you're wiser if you talk to other
people and that's sort of like duh yeah
but if it's duh why do we carry around
this bullshit mythology of complete
individualism so that's one interesting
finding this has goes back to the
platonic dialogue that in discussion
with others we get to a level of wisdom
that we cannot get to on our own now
what was interesting that's all in
itself an interesting what was
interesting is also there was no
important difference between Group one
and group two talking to another person
and imagining simulating in your mind
talking to another person but just that
was just as good if you can internalize
other people they can give you the
metacognitive ability to overcome your
biases now why
this I think is important as I think
this points to more recent work done by
a colleague of mine
Igor Grossman and I thought mentioned
his work already the Solomon effect
Solomon of course the biblical figure of
wisdom which is if you have some what's
going on with that talking with other
people well part of it I think is the
Solomon effect right if I describe a
problem to you from the first-person
perspective which I'm liable to do
especially in an individualistic culture
like ours right
I will tend to be very locked in because
again remember remember the whole thing
about internalization when I'm in a
perspective it's biasing me and one of
the things I can't see be my framing is
often transparent to me I can't see it
I'm seeing through it that's when I'm in
the first-person perspective I'm sort of
locked here in my perspective because it
is my problem
ah if you get people to do we describe
the same problem from the third-person
perspective and notice the word I'm
gonna have they often have an insight
they often notice something they hadn't
noticed before they pick up and make
something salient irrelevant that wasn't
salient or relevant from within their
first-person perspective so moving to
moving outside and looking back through
somebody's eyes from a third-person
perspective on your cognition can
enhance your capacity for these wisdom
tests this is what I mean why balton
starting there although they're not
invoking it or theoretically discussing
it right they are relying on
perspectival knowing in their
experimental work so we're starting to
make our way through these theories of
wisdom we've taken a look at Schwartz
and sharp we've seen how the the
connection between wisdom and virtue is
being established bolts and starting are
picking up on that and they're starting
to get us into some of the fundamental
machinery of what it is to be a wise
person I want to continue that next time
and also bring up some important
criticisms of the work of bolt and
sawing there you see me already make one
I don't think
this ability should be understood as
expertise make some other ones and those
criticisms will take us into the
important seminal work on wisdom by
Monica are dealt and then we'll also
take a look at the work of Sternberg and
then I will return and propose or at
least explain to you an account a
proposal made by myself and Leo Ferraro
in 2013 about how to try and draw this
together in terms of this machinery that
I've been advocating and then I want to
subject that theory my own theory to I
think some pretty significant criticisms
and then point and I hope that will
point us towards how we can then
reintegrate the account of wisdom with
the encounter with the account of
enlightenment and ultimately we situate
us back with awakening from the meaning
crisis thank you very much for your time
and attention
[Music]
you
[Music]
you