[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis last time we were talking
more about mindfulness and trying to get
an account of how mindfulness can bring
about an insight not just a single
insight but into a single problem but a
modal insight a systemic insight that is
fully transformative of the agent and
arena relationship and bring about the
alleviation of existential distress and
the affordance of enhanced meaning and
we took a look at that by getting into
the machinery of attention and seeing
that attention involves two kinds of
attentional scaling attention and evolve
zan ability to engage in a transparency
opacity shift and also breaking up
gestalt into features scaling down the
kind of thing we can enhance the
meditation but it also involves an
ability to scale up to move from
featural to Gestalt and to go from
looking at something to looking more
deeply into reality and that in
mindfulness and meditation we're
practicing the scaling down to break
inappropriate framing and scaling up to
Train making better framing and that if
we can optimize by learning how to
fluently flow between the two bringing
in an aspect of fluency and flow that
we've already talked about then we could
optimize our capacity for much more
comprehensive insight and we could take
it if we could take it to the depths of
our self like we do in the pure
consciousness event and adapts of
reality and the resonant at one minute
and we could integrate those optimize
between them we could bring about Praja
a kind of non-duality that would be
potentially transformative of the whole
agent arena relationship dissipate modal
confusion enhance meaning in life by
bringing about one of the most powerful
kinds of mystical experience give people
a sense of enhanced
realness that will challenge and courage
and empower them to transform all of
their existence and bring about a
tremendous increase in meaning in life
talked about some recent cognitive
science including some of my own
theoretical and experimental work that
seems to be supporting the claim that
these higher states of consciousness can
bring about these quantum changes these
radical kinds of transformative
experience so today I want to talk about
that I want to talk about transformative
experience and the pivotal and really
brilliant work of La Paul on the notion
of transformative experience but before
I do that we have to step back and talk
a little bit about altered states of
consciousness
by an altered state of consciousness
what we mean by this kind of
transformation and that I mean that gets
us into one of the most difficult
problems David Chalmers famously called
it the hard problem of consciousness
Arthur Schopenhauer called it the world
not trying to explain consciousness is
like trying to explain God right it is
one of the hardest problems
I'm not going to endeavor to do all of
that although I'm going to try and make
use of some of the work that myself and
Anderson Todd and Richard Wu have put
into trying to understand at least some
of the important functions and
properties of consciousness and why
altered states of consciousness can be
so a40 of radical transformative
experience so one way to do this is to
look at two sort of questions we can ask
ourselves one is what is consciousness
how does something like consciousness
emerges Hort of the nature of
consciousness and a lot of people are
doing a lot of work on that and then we
can also ask questions about what's the
function of consciousness what does
consciousness do those aren't the same
question because you may be surprised to
hear that we don't have a consensus
on what consciousness does most people
know that consciousness is a mystery but
most people don't realize that what
consciousness does is also a mystery I
mean think about it this way you love
your consciousness and you identify with
it you don't just and you don't know
your consciousness the way you know
other things you know your consciousness
by being conscious like if I ask you if
you're conscious right now you are how
did you do that you just are conscious
and you know that you're conscious
knowing and being remember Aristotle
conformity and I are the same you
participate in your consciousness but
and what would you what would you give
it up but what have I said to you you
could have unlimited power and wealth
all you have to sacrifice is any
consciousness of it would you take the
deal of course not but what does it do
well you say well well it's uh no it's
not obvious because you can do and you
do most of your things without
consciousness I have no understanding no
conscious awareness I should say at some
scientific understanding I have no
conscious awareness of what my brain is
doing that is allowing me to generate
speech do you you don't this complex
sophisticated thing that we still can't
get artificial intelligence to do well
it's happening almost completely
unconsciously what's my consciousness
for what does it - so two really
important questions how does something
as mysterious and strange arise out of
matter that's the nature question and
what does it do again I am NOT going to
presume or dare to try and answer these
comprehensively I don't need that for
what we're doing here because I'm not
trying to solve the hard problem of
consciousness I'm trying to solve the
hard problem of meaning one hard problem
at a time please but what I want to do
is show you how a convergence of work
that some of the best work that's being
done on consciousness points towards
something that will tell us why altered
states of consciousness can be so
valuable to us
so what about one of the best accounts
for the function of consciousness is
called the global workspace theory so
the idea is that your consciousness
functions very much like that desktop of
your computer so here's the idea you
have your desktop and then you have all
your files right and what you can do is
you can activate a file you can bring
that information into the desktop and
you can activate this file and bring it
into the desktop and then these pieces
of information can interact with each
other and then you can broadcast back to
any or all or just one file the changes
you brought about that's how your
desktop works that's how you use it well
what's the analogy the analogy is here's
all of your unconscious processing in
your brain and what you do is you
retrieve it bring it into a space
something like working memory you
activate it so that the pieces of
information can interact with each other
and then you broadcast it back right to
any and all of the existing files why do
you want to do that why do you do it on
your computer
well you don't want all of your files
active at the same time because that's a
disaster you want to be able and notice
what's going on here you want to be able
to select certain pieces of information
that are relevant bring them together
transform them in a way that's relevant
and then broadcasts that changes back
that are needed so the global workspace
theory says this is and it's gaining a
lot of empirical evidence to support it
says this is what consciousness is
functioning to do now this is very
general so more specifically and so this
theory is associated with bars and then
there was a paper by bars shanahan and
bars
that more specifically trying to answer
the question about yeah but what what
why this machinery bars also published
an attempt to answer that question more
specifically in the Cambridge handbook
of consciousness what it comes down to
is the idea that what what what this
architecture is helping to do is to
solve a problem that's called the frame
problem now I'm going to talk much later
in specifically what the frame problem
is to put a pin in it we're going to
come back to it but the basic idea here
is right what this is doing is helping
you to zero in on relevant information
and that's very very important because
there are wait there I mean there are
sort of three areas in which this is a
huge issue one is all of the information
that's available to me right now we have
to talk about this later
but technically mathematically the
amount of information is available in
this room is astronomically vast and I
can't I can't make use of all of it I
get overwhelmed by it so part of what I
have to do is select out of all of that
information what information I'm going
to make use of I also have a huge amount
of information in my memory overwhelming
its vast and the possible ways it could
be connected I have to select from some
of that and then I have to put those
pieces of information together in all
the ways I can put together the
information and from out there and the
information about here also vast and
overwhelming later on I'm going to give
you mathematical arguments about this
right now I just need you to get it
intuitively
so what consciousness is doing right is
it's helping these problems it's helping
you zero in on the relevant information
the relevant of information from out
there the relevant information from in
here and the relevant information that
will help put those pieces of
information together for you in the way
that it's needed just like you do
that you do that with your computer you
search through your memory you select
what's relevant you bring it on to the
desktop you put it together in a
relevant manner right and then you use
it in a relevant way but we can't use a
homunculus planation there's no little
man running inside what's doing all of
that in a self-organizing fashion is
your consciousness this helps to explain
why consciousness is so tightly
associated with working memory and
working memory is so tightly associated
with intelligence okay so the core
function of consciousness seems to be to
help you realize become aware of
actualize put into action relevance
relevant information we're going to come
back to this in more depth there's a
more neuro scientific and psychological
account by people like Bohr and Seth
that say when we measure when people are
conscious it seems to correlate with
certain kinds of brain activity what
kind of brain the brain activity that
seems to be involved when people are
chunking information or when they are
restructuring it like an insight I've
already shown you this this ability to
manipulate attention to afford insight
that's that they're arguing that that's
one of the key functions of conscious
but what does what is all of that doing
the same thing right the Bohr and Saif
model is basically saying the function
of consciousness is to give you a
dynamic improvement in your ability to
zero in on relevant information one of
the most prominent theories of the
nature of consciousness right now is to
Nonis integrated information theory
integrated information theory now his
theory is not about the function of
consciousness it's about the nature of
consciousness but of course he's going
to give a derived account of the
function what is consciousness according
to him it's how powerfully integrated in
pieces of information are how much one
piece of information in your brain is
causally dependent on interacting and
affecting other pieces of information in
your brain the more tightly the
integration the more powerful right the
processing and what he would say is the
more likely that complex as he calls it
because it's actually complexification
of information is going to be a
reporting consciousness but then when
you ask him or why is consciousness why
that might be what consciousness is I
think there's much more to consciousness
but for the sake of argument that might
be what consciousness is but why is
consciousness doing this massive
complexification of information so he
actually proposes something like a
Turing test for consciousness he says
you can test to see how conscious a
system is by giving it anomalous
pictures and figuring out if the
pictures don't make good sense here's
look here's the idea when I'm complexify
Anan doing this this very dynamic
integration of information what what
that's tracking is how much I'm actually
picking up on right the patterns in the
world making sense of the world the
reason why I'm doing this is precisely
because I'm trying to as best I can
track the complexity of the world so
what's the main function or the main
function of the integrated information
is to allow you to determine if pieces
of information are relevant to each
other and relevant to you so
what consciousness seems to be now let's
be careful what I'm not saying I'm not
saying that every instance of relevance
realization is consciousness what I'm
seeing what I'm arguing is that what
consciousness seems to do is the
following it seems to be a way in which
you can coordinate attention and other
related abilities of awareness so as to
optimize how insightfully you can make
sense of your world so that's why you
need consciousness for complex
situations that require insight for
situations and problems that have a high
degree of novelty or challenge in them
it's way you can reduce consciousness
when the problem has become very
well-defined for you that doesn't have a
high degree of novelty it doesn't
require insight I don't know if this is
a complete account of the function of
consciousness but it explains something
we've already noted that when you have
an insight what do you have you have a
flash it's like you get a sudden
brightening of consciousness it explains
why you might want to alter your state
of consciousness because if I alter my
state of consciousness I'm going to
alter what I'm finding relevant and how
it is standing out for me how it is
salient for me
let's put a lot of this stuff together
the machinery we had about attention
stuff we've talked about about fluency
stuff we talked about salience and
notice a phenomena that mates in called
sizing up right part of what's happening
part of what consciousness is doing is
it's creating a salience landscape for
me and what does that mean for me well
first of all I'm picking out of all of
the things all of the things I could
pick out and when I say I I don't mean
me I mean my consciousness I'm picking
out some features you are not paying
attention to every piece of information
in this room you can't it's
overwhelmingly vast but you pick out on
some and then what you do also is you
begin so you've already selected and you
start to prioritize it and you
foreground some of it so for example
presumably I'm for grounded and what's
around me is back rounded and of course
we've already seen it's going both ways
remember that right and notice again
what I'm looking at what I'm looking
through and then taking the features and
I'm starting to foreground them and then
I'm going to ghost all those features
I'm gonna figure I'm going to create a
figure we use this language of figuring
out figuring out and making something
new and making it stand out even more
more salient to me and I'm also
configuring configuring it together so
all the features and then for grounded
and then this is getting configured
right
right and this also is feeding back and
then of course
and framing problems and framing
problems we've been talking about that
all through this series so you've got a
very complex dynamical system at work so
what's happening right now is your
consciousness is creating a salience
landscape some things are rising up
right out of unintelligibility as
features that are getting foregrounded
and configured and then you're framing
problems around them and then things are
shifting and and your attention is
shifting around other things are
becoming more Senya you've got this
highly textured highly flowing salience
landscape that's what it's like to be
here right now
now there's more going on of course
right so part of what I'm doing I get
this salience landscape and my problem
is around the cup but I'm not quite sure
so I move around it I try to get into an
optimal position if I get too close
I lose too much of the dish don't if I
get too too far away right I may see the
whole thing but I'm losing the details I
need to get to the right place where I
can metaphorically and also literally in
this sense get what Marlo party calls an
optimal grip on it so what I'm trying to
do is I'm trying to get I'm trying to
get an optimizing between Gestalt and
feature between looking through and
looking at I'm optimizing within this
whole sizing up so I'm taking my
salience landscape and I'm using it to
get a optimal grip on things not maximal
and grip is meant here as a metaphor
it's meant for my contact my
interactional contact how can we
understand what this optimal grip is
doing look when I when I get the
salience landscape and I adjust an
affordance opens up okay what's an
affordance this is goes back to Gibson
the idea of visual perception is this
active process of landscaping the cup is
graspable to me it's not a property of
the cup per se because it's not
graspable by a praying mantis it's not a
property just of my hand because right I
can't my hand alone can't grasp an
affordance is right setting up a
relationship of coordination between the
constraints and the thing and the
constraints in my hand so that I can
engage in an interaction so it's a
way of Ko identifying the cup is perfect
this thing is it's been min salient to
me I've got now an optimal grip on it
such that I can create affordances so it
is presenting itself to me and I am
configuring myself to it it is graspable
by me and what and gives us Gibson's
point you don't really you don't see
like colors and shapes what you see our
affordances I see that this is walkable
that this is where I can place things
that this is movable so what you see you
get the basics the salient landscape
sort of gets you in contact then you
start the optimal gripping and the
optimal gripping gets you into the
creation of affordances where basically
the agent and the arena are being Co
identified I'm a grasper and this is
graspable I am presenting myself to it
and it is presenting itself to me so you
have consciousness is setting up a
salience landscape but within this
you're doing this process of sizing up
and that produces a presence landscape
you get a whole bunch of a whole
affordance network is laid out for you
but that's not enough remember we talked
about with flow you need to be able to
track the differences between
correlational patterns and cause causal
patterns as you interact with things
your brain is figuring out the causal
patterns as opposed to the merely
correlational
this is the depth landscape this is your
ability to figure out you see kids doing
this right you got that you got the the
two-year-old and they got the spoon and
right and what do they pick up the spoon
they drop it before you pick it up they
pick up and they and they do this over
and over again why are they doing that
because they're trying to use their
salience landscape to generate
affordances the spoon is graspable it's
throwable it's droppable but why are
they doing why do they repeatedly grasp
and throw and drop because they're
trying to figure out the causal patterns
around the spoon they're transforming
the salience landscape into a presence
landscape and that into a depth
landscape they're getting a deep kind of
understanding not in words but
interaction aliy of the spoon this is
what consciousness is doing for you it's
doing it right now it's laying out right
it's it's all of this is a way in which
consciousness is helping you zero in on
relevant information it's creating this
textured salience landscape so that
certain things stand up stand out for
you and other things don't as much and
it's constantly shifting dynamically and
then within that it's creating a
presence landscape of how you and what
salient are being Co identified right
coupled together into an array a agent
and arena relationship and then it's
also affording you and that's dynamic
because the affordances are constantly
shifting and then that's affording you
tracking the causal patterns getting
into deeper contact with the guts of the
world
that's what consciousness is doing
so if I were to transform my
consciousness I'm gonna be transforming
all of this machinery I'm gonna
transforming my salience landscape my
presence landscape my depth landscape
the patterns I'm going to track the kind
of agent I can be the kind of arena I
can be in are going to be radically
transformed and I won't have just a
flash of insight like I do with a nine
dot problem I will have a systematic
look on an altered state of
consciousness is not it's not an insight
in consciousness it's an insight of
consciousness it's a it's a radical
transformation of all of your landscapes
not just this particular problem look
I'll try it and show you what I mean by
this by a systematic insight so this
goes back to childhood development
pivotal work of Piaget in psychology and
this is picking up again on one of the
metaphors we were using we use wisdom is
like enlightenment or wisdom is like
waking up and there's another one wisdom
like as the child is to the adult the
adult is to the sage wisdom is like
growing up okay so you take a
four-year-old and you do this you count
up five candies one two three four five
you need a four-year-old because they
can count they understand that five is
more than four it's less than six you
count it out right and then you count up
five more candies one two three four
five you show them that like this and
you say which which row do you want
and they reliably and you've counted
they know there's five here they knows
what there's five here but they
confidently pick this row and here's the
thing all the kids do it and that
mistake is related to a whole bunch of
other kinds of mistakes they're making
they're not making just a single error
look this is what made Piaget a great
great scientist why he's a pivotal
figure in trying to understand
development and think about Aristotle
and development see there'd been lots of
IQ testing way before Piaget people have
been testing kids our IQ for a while and
they had been throwing away the errors
as garbage because what you paid
attention to was that what the kid got
right yeah success and Protestant work
ethic yeah yeah Piazza had this insight
it is it but wait wait wait
what if there's a pattern in the errors
if the errors are systematic and not
random then that would mean that there
are constraints
remember constraints there are
constraints operating in the child's
cognition and maybe we could understand
think about Aristotle again and biology
cars Piaget was guess what a biologist
maybe we could understand development in
terms of how those constraints are
shifting and how they're how they're
shaping the kids sensory motor
interaction with the world and what he
found was in fact that the errors are
systematic the kids are all of the kids
are making this kind of error and
they're making a whole bunch of related
errors there's a whole system of errors
and so that points to some underlying
set of constraints now what's going on
what's going on here why is the kid
picking the the lower row because it
takes up more space think about
everything we've talked about here this
variable is super salient to them
their salience landscape is only picking
up on that
now you I hope don't fall prey to this
because you're also picking up on
another variable at the same time you
also make salient that the extra space
is non candy space and therefore is what
not relevant but the kid doesn't pick up
on that their salience landscape is not
sizing that up and so they don't have
the same affordance as you now notice
this you see through this illusion
because your salience landscape has been
trained to pay attention to these
multiple variables at the same time the
way you size things up integrate them in
attention means you don't fall prey to
this part of the way in which you become
wiser than the child you don't fall prey
to self-deceptive illusion is because
you've trained your salience landscape
to zero in on the relative and
information in the relevant way now
think about this remember we talked
about salience and how when things are
super salient to you that triggers
bullshitting and self-deception if I
could change my salience landscape I
don't fall prey to this I don't fall
prey to the illusion and I wouldn't act
foolishly now what I would need you to
understand is here's a whole bunch of
these errors that the kid is making they
form a system and they all have to do
with the fact that the salience
landscape has not been sufficiently
cultivated so the kid might have an
insight here but it doesn't really
matter because they're still going to be
blocked in this problem in this problem
in this problem they're still going to
be locked into a particular stage of
development but what if and this is an
idea that
working out in conjunction with Jensen
Kim what if you didn't have a single
insight what have you had a systemic in
insight an insight that changed the
whole system
it wasn't an insight in your
consciousness it was an insight of your
consciousness in which you're changing
your salience landscaping as opposed to
just changing how you're framing a
particular problem that's what the child
does when it develops it actually
changes its salience landscaping so that
this whole system of errors falls away
and it starts to see through an illusion
and into reality here's the thing you
need to now think you've heard me say it
you have trained your salience landscape
so that you do not fall prey to the
systemic illusions of the four-year-old
yes yes but you know what you are
falling prey to a lot of systemic
illusions you're not aware of because
you can only become aware of them if you
can transform your salience landscape
your presence landscape and your depth
landscape to get in at what is actually
most relevant systematically not here
and here all of us can have an insight
here and here but what it is what is it
to have a systemic improvement in
insight that's to be wise when you have
salience systematically tracking
presence in depth so that you can wisely
zero in on the relevant information and
make your life more meaningful that's
your significance landscape
it protects you from bullshitting it
allows you to see through illusion and
into reality and it affords you having
things more present to you it would
afford you to have a more comprehensive
flowing relationship with reality
altered states of consciousness have
this potential to create a insight of
consciousness now they also have the
potential to do the opposite right they
have the potential to screw up your
salience landscaping and make yourself
more prone to more prone to
self-deception that's why most altered
states of consciousness are rejected as
being illusory and the losery but why is
it then why is it then that certain
altered states of consciousness have the
opposite why is it that certain altered
states of consciousness feel like this
like wait it all makes sense now I'm
seeing through illusion into reality in
a way I have before why is that altered
state more real the really real as Plato
is fond of saying and this this every
day is less real why do I feel like I
woke up that I became right an adult to
my previous form that seemed to me like
a child what's going on so
let's set up the problem because getting
clear about the problem is half the
battle formulating a problem well is
much much of the important work at
trying to bring a solution to it so we
know that many people experience as I
mentioned these higher states of
consciousness and what reliably we'll
talk about the phenomenological profile
in a bit but reliably what is
characteristic of these states is that
people find them to be really real and
in - and in both directions arena and
agent they say wow that's the way the
world really is and they also say this
is who I really am so much so that I'm
going to transform my everyday
experience so that it comes more
consonant with that realness that
enhanced realness so there's a mutual
more Ness a mutual more realness that
happens in these higher states and
consciousness and it's prescriptive it
demands change it challenges people to
change it taps into those platonic meta
drives of getting your fullness of being
your real self and getting the fullness
of contact reality it twitches those on
and you go I need to have that I've got
a tramp I'm willing to transform
everything in order to get back to that
really real world and that really real
self so I call this so we have the
higher states of consciousness I call
this the problem of the Anto normativity
remember that ontology has to do with
the structure of reality normative is
when things are placing a demand on you
to be better to improve so these higher
states of consciousness are precisely
experienced as higher because they're
challenging you to change
because they're presenting you more
realness and they're triggering those
platonic meta drives now as I mentioned
these states are historically important
and they're pervasive so you can read
Taylor's book waking from sleep he has
about 150 interviews you can read many
of the he prevents a lot of first-person
narratives of these people in these
experience you can take a look at
Newberg's book how enlightenment changes
your brain he did a online survey of
1,500 people in 2016 as I mentioned
there's just larger general surveys of
how often people have these kinds of
experiences and they range in intensity
but it's around 30 to 40 percent of the
population so we have to take these
experiences seriously we know that from
the work at the Griffis lab that what's
happening in some a subset of
psychedelic experiences so here's all
the psychedelic experiences you have a
subset in which people have a mystical
experience and some of those people the
mystical experience is deeply
transformative it triggers that kind of
quantum change okay so why is the entre
normativity of higher states of
consciousness problematic well here's
why the transformative experience that
people undergo and the the radical
transformations they're willing to make
seems to be driven and justified by this
they still do why are you doing this I'm
doing this because I had this experience
and it was more real and I've got to
stay in touch with more real they
justify this transfer make I mean sorry
I don't mean to be reductive and I'm not
being disrespectful but you know
Buddhism and Taoism and Vedanta and the
core of you know aspects of Judaism and
the mystical traditions in
gianna tea and Islam come down to this
claim I had this and it justifies what
I'm telling you
it explains and motivates the changes
that I would underwent but why is that
problematic look because it's like I
said it's it's in contrast to how we
treat most of our altered states of
consciousness we go into dreaming we
come back and we say that's not real we
go into these we come back and say that
was more real and this is less real now
let me try and explicate this problem
further look why do you you reject your
dreaming as unreal why because when
you're in the dream it seems real
because when you come out that pattern
those things that happen in your dream
don't come here with the rest of your
life
you've got this overall coherent picture
of your life intelligibility remember
Plato this overall picture makes the
most sense of the most of your
experience and at Plato's right the more
intelligible something is the more real
it is this picture is more intelligible
it's more real the dream is bizarre it
doesn't fit in there ago less real so
realness is something like the pattern
of intelligibility with the widest scope
wide and rich coherence of content it
makes the most sense of the most of your
experience puts together your beliefs
and your memories etc but look what's
happening in a higher state of
consciousness it's exact reverse you
have this single experience it doesn't
go here with the rest of your life
because that's why it challenges the
rest of your life it doesn't go here
with the rest of their life it tells you
that the rest of this is illusory and
you need to change
in fact the difference is so great that
instead of rejecting it you reject your
everyday experience if you so the thing
that you use to reject the drink so look
at the picture I use all of this and I
reject the dream and then I have the
higher state of consciousness again a
single thing and I use this to reject
all of this what's going on
the higher state of consciousness is a
temporary experience it does not go here
with the rest of our experience that's
how and why it can challenge and demand
such radical transformation of our
everyday life our everyday self and
here's here's what's even more I don't
know
perplexing it does this without
providing any new intelligible content
these experiences are traditionally
ineffable you can't put it into words
they're traditionally trans rational you
can't give any argument or explanation
or justification how is it that this
temporary experience that you cut why
what was it describe the experience I
can't I can't describe it well can you
explain to me what I know I can't I
can't explain it
so there's no content it's temporary and
yet somehow it goes the exact opposite
of most altered states of consciousness
these states these so-called higher
States should be the ones we most reject
they're temporary they challenge all of
our intelligibility coherence they don't
produce any viable explanation any
viable content and yet we promote them
as they're really real and use them to
reject our everyday experience and
that's the core of the axial revolution
this problem of the Anto normativity of
higher states of consciousness goes to
the heart of the axial revolution and
the way it is still informing our very
cognitive grammar and our existential
ways of being right here right now
that's the problem of the auto
normativity of higher states of
consciousness now we know that there's a
possibility that altered states of
consciousness can bring about a
developmental improvement but but how
how how do we tie this to this
can we give an adequate enough
explanation of these higher states of
consciousness and we need to do one that
will help to explain why triggering them
can be so transformative because here's
the thing
Jayden's work shows people's lives do
get better they're not making it up
after they've had these these higher
states of consciousness the discount
encountered with the really real their
lives get better by all kinds of
important measures measures of meaning
relationship probably they get better
okay so what do we need we need we have
to solve this problem we have to make
some progress on it now we need actually
two explanations that need to be
integrated together first of all I need
a descriptive explanation I need an
account of the underlying processes
cognitive brain processes we'll talk
about this that explained the
phenomenological the experiential nature
of these states why do people like when
people describe what's happening in
these states why do why does it have the
features it has it has to explain why
people feel that being more real why it
feels that it justifies empowers and
motivates them to undergo transformative
experience
but in it in addition to something
that's a descriptive account I need a
prescriptive account I mean the first
account is going to be largely
psychological this is what's happening
and this is why people are experiencing
the way they're experiencing it
that's descriptively adequate but
prescriptively adequate has to be show
me this is it actually a legitimate
thing do these states actually provide a
rational justification and a guide for
the transformations that people are
claiming on their behalf are these
states actually philosophically
justifiable or is their claim to Anto
normativity all just an illusion is it
rationally justifiable
now this prescriptive account must
integrate with the mechanisms and
processes of the descriptive account in
order to be overall coherent in order to
give us the best explanation of how and
why these states are operating so the
descriptive account the best way to do
this is to do a cognitive scientific
approach now at some point I'm going to
teach you in this series how to do good
cognitive science but one of what we're
doing in good cognitive science is we're
plausibly trying to integrate different
levels in our descriptive analysis my
descriptive account should give me a
good account of the cognitive processes
that are at work in the mind it should
give me a good account and that's gonna
rely largely on psychology it should
also give me a good account of the
information processes that are at work
that's gonna rely on ideas drawn from
artificial intelligence and machine
learning because that's the project when
we're trying to most understand and
optimize information processing it
should also draw on neuroscientific
accounts
of what's happening in the brain I need
an account that simultaneously
elucidates each one of these the
cognitive mechanisms the machine
learning mechanisms and the neurological
mechanisms but Minh does that in an
integrative mutually informative fashion
I want a plausible integration that's
what I need for the good descriptive
account that's what I'm gonna give I'm
gonna try and argue how we can
understand why these higher states of
consciousness are the way they are in
terms of both cognitive in terms of all
of those the cognitive the machine
learning and the neuroscientific level
after I'm doing that I'm going to then
endeavor to try and show you how those
processes the cognitive processes the
information processing processes the
neurological processes actually provide
a rational justification for the
transformation that the people undertake
it's not the kind of justification you
might be expecting what I'm going to
argue for is that it is not that these
states provide us with any special
knowledge because these states are not
about changing evidence acquiring new
evidence the way science and we should
not use these higher states of
consciousness as a way of challenging
our scientific claims and many people
will do this but the mistake is to then
think well that's it that's the sum
total we've shown that these higher
states of consciousness don't generate
reliable kinds of knowledge so we should
reject them is irrational no because
that's again to think that the whole
point of your cognition and your
rationality is to get better beliefs and
I've already been showing you through
this series that there's much more to it
when the child no longer falls prey to
the illusion Newton no new facts have
been discovered the child knew that
there were five candies on top and below
no new facts it's not like there's been
a new scientific discoveries about space
or candies what changed what changed is
not knowledge what changed was wisdom
the child has learned to see through
illusion and into reality and what I
want to pursue with you is this idea
that higher states of concentration 'el
not because they provide us with new
knowledge look look people go into these
states and they come out with exactly
opposite conclusions you can reread so
many of these reports people go in and
they have this higher state of
consciousness and they said oh and I
knew God people go and they have this
higher state of conscience and I knew
there was no God exactly the opposite
the content is diametrically opposite
people will say ferried metaphysical
claims
what's changing is not the content not
this or that piece of knowledge what's
changing is you're functioning you're
not gaining knowledge you're gaining
wisdom you're gaining skills and
sensibilities and sensitivities of
significance landscaping that radically
transform your existential mode that is
why for example that the Buddha famously
refused to answer metaphysical questions
about Nirvana about enlightenment
because that's not the point that's not
what this is about
this is not about getting supra
scientific knowledge this is about
getting extraordinary wisdom and
transformation we're going to take a
look more at trying to answer the
problem of higher states of
consciousness next time and we'll return
also back to discovery
that's discussing more how the Buddha
integrated that into trying to deal with
some of the deepest problems that we
face as entities that have to realize
relevance pursue salience deal with
existential anxiety cultivate
significance and meaning trying overcome
our illusions and delusions and find a
fullness of being and an optimal grip on
the world thank you very much for your
time
[Music]
you
you