hi guys I'm Rachel Brooke Smith and I'm
so excited and because I have the
creator and founder of qualia which is
one of my favorite supplements that you
guys have probably heard me talking
about like crazy and as you know I only
talk about things that I actually use
love and really believe in and I got to
meet Daniel here at the bulletproof
conference recently and we had such a
powerful conversation and so I wanted to
get him on to share with you guys what a
little bit of background about qualia
and neuro hacker
and himself it's amazing story so you
know thank you so much for being here
with us and I just would love for you to
share a little bit with with viewers
about you kind of who you are and also
why you created oh yeah yeah sure
thank you Rachel it's fun to be talking
with the end okay so neuro hacker
collective is our company that's focused
right now on a complex systems approach
to mind brain health way of saying it
when we say complex systems what we mean
is rather than try to identify
individual parts of this profoundly
complex regulatory system and say we're
gonna change your dopamine levels we're
going to use one synthetic molecule
right wellbutrin and adderall with
ethanol whatever to change this or to
change your serotonin or how does the
body naturally produce and regulate
those molecules on its own and if it's
off is it off because of a genomic issue
is it off because of functional medicine
dynamics that are going on in the
person's body like pathogens toxins you
know is it off because nutrient
deficiency is it off because of head
trauma like how do we understand how the
regulatory system works and support it
to regulate better make sure it has all
the raw ingredients it needs and the
right regulatory dynamics so basically
rather than try to reduce health to what
is one chemical that will override one
pathway and produce one was old which is
why modern medicine is really great at
acute illness I'm really not good at
chronic or complex things right so acute
injury medicine medicine is awesome in
the human toxicity or an acute infection
it's awesome but when we look at cancer
or neurodegenerative disease
autoimmune disease or psychiatric
illnesses we actually didn't have any
cures for any of those we have
treatments not cures
we don't have cures or even folk
Prevention's is because the methodology
that is currently utilized and it's
evolving but the methodology that's
currently utilized now public medicine
doesn't know how to identify things that
have very complex causal dynamics so I
believe that's why I love talking to you
so much is because of your background
studying complex sciences and how
everything really does affects
everything and I've talked this before
with my audience and with you about how
I grew up with a really first of all
girth that little girl second of all you
know pretty but which led into a pretty
big gut health issue which led into a
lot of different you know both emotional
ups and downs and you know weight gain
and I mean a ton of different things
that I know a lot of people today and
suffer from especially you know that
help that they don't even know that they
have and they're just getting these
sounds like weight gain or mood swings
or you know a ton of other things by
that's why I'm so grateful you on here
so I mean what you said is a classic
example of what you know medicine is
moving into this but what has been a
limit is we we take something that's as
complex as the human body which is
profoundly complex right like 70
trillion cells give or take and less
times more than that of bacteria yeast
virus protozoa and they're all doing
about a trillion metabolic functions per
second and the communications across and
it's like so we try and divide it into
systems like gastroenterology
Rheumatology oncology right to
understand those separately separate
system so you were just describing a gut
brain access dynamic or something that's
happening in the gut can affect what's
happening in your nervous system and as
we are diving deeper and deeper we
recognize inflammation and the gut can
lead to inflammation in the blood that
crosses the blood-brain barrier that
creates neuro inflammation that can
create depression anxiety neuro
degeneration
we find that of course nutrient uptake
in the gut whether it's absorbing
nutrients or not those are the
precursors to make neurotransmitters
that if they type junk
in the gut are damaged so toxins get to
come in that shouldn't from food then
that can go into the brain the enteric
nervous system the nerves that are in
the gut are actually giving feedback to
the brain neurologically the inteiro
endocrine system is affecting the
hormone regulating system says there's
pretty much every one of the systems are
interconnected very profoundly and so
you have to take a more comprehensive
approach to support the regulatory
system rather than try and override it
and that's kind of the key the key
concept is rather than say oh something
is out of range like for instance
somebody's blood pressure's high so
let's give them a blood pressure meds
that lowers it well this may get to
where their body's own ability to
regulate blood pressure gets even worse
because in the process of overriding it
we're actually overwriting the
regulatory mechanisms blood pressure if
instead you had the person exercise
what's happening is their blood pressure
is actually spiking higher and the
exercise which is triggering in a
regulatory response to lower the blood
pressure which is why when people
exercise mother blood pressure goes down
and so rather than say how do we just
the body's out of range how do we put it
back in range we say no what's
insufficient in the body's regulatory
dynamics how and how can we support
those so itself regulates better and so
in your chemistry I don't want someone
to have the same level of dopamine all
the time at the same level of serotonin
because sometimes you want to be hyper
motivated sometimes you want to relax
and your body should actually be able to
generate those chemicals yeah and what I
would love to you know really go into
you and I don't think enough people
really realize is how powerful and how
connected the gut your gut health is to
your brain health you know and so many
lasting all the time you know how many
sit-ups should I do every day or how do
I lose weight or how do I get you know a
six-pack like you have or whatever that
you know whatever the question may be
and I always say it's so much more
complex than just you know doing 100
zips every day like that's just not
going to get you to your goal and I you
know one of the first questions that
that I've learned to ask myself and
other people is like what's your stress
levels what's your sleep levels because
so much of that and also
which you know sugar are you eating as
well it's your diet like because all of
those things have such a massive impact
on either weight gain or mental health
mental clarity and so how would you say
that like if somebody is well first
let's get let's get into quality into
the actual supplement and what makes it
different then overs well it's a no
hacker right is the overall company and
the collective and and so what's
different explain this between qualia
and also not reflected sure you're
starting to ask question about what are
the foundations of health and well-being
and gut do you want to get into that
because it's a let's get into that first
all right there's a very brief part
medicine gets very complex in a hurry
when you really start to study in a
complex way which is that the total
amount of genetic differences the single
nucleotide polymorphism differences and
me versus you is hundreds of thousands
and to be able to do precision medicine
and treat that that's a long and was the
person exposed to mold and if so what
species of mold and you know where is it
lodged in the body and what kind of
toxins have they been exposed to in
pathogens that gives complex and a hurry
yes it's important to deal with that
when people are dealing with chronic
illness or have any kind of issue that
hasn't been well addressed this is what
good functional medicine doctors before
and people should go find and see them
but there are foundations of health that
address like most of the stuff for most
people if you don't have a really
complex illness this will be almost all
of it and if you do have a complex
almost this will still be the foundation
and so everybody knows what they are
sleep stress management movement and the
nutrition someone gets in and to really
just say it very basically all the
repair that happens in any system of the
body pretty much all of it like 90 plus
percent is happening during sleep and
mostly during Delta sleep so if someone
is not sleeping in gym and you're you
know creating micro tears in the muscles
quickly those the anabolic processes
that are going to generate new tissue
are gonna happen when you're sleeping
in taking nutrients those nutrients are
going to actually get to be integrated
into new tissue tissues when you're
sleeping and if your immune system is
fighting you know infection that's
what's gonna happen so sleeping enough
and getting good quality sleep is
foundational would you agree that most
people are overtraining and under
sleeping and then causing or would you
disagree with that well I mean your
audience is going to be quite different
than a general audience most people
aren't exercising anywhere near enough
and I don't think there are that many
people that are overtraining I think
there are people who are not taking care
of their body well in the training
process meaning they're not getting the
right reparative nutrients they're
eating inflammatory foods that make it
to where they can't actually heal the
micro inflammation they're not getting
any sleep but the amount that someone
can train if they're taking care of
their body well is a lot so I think it's
less about overtraining and more about
under regeneration and you know making
sure their biomechanics are right that
they are supporting the lubricity of
their joints and warming up
appropriately and all that good stuff
now I love that you said that and I
guess in I guess in in the fitness world
I say you aren't you know I just heard
I've heard some people say you know I'm
gonna get up at 5 a.m. and get it like
and get a killer workout the gym even if
I'm only getting 3 hours of sleep and I
haven't slept at all and I'm super
stressed out if you were talking to
somebody who was in that mindset would
you recommends would you say oh yeah
go workout before sleep or sleep before
sleep more before workout or workout
more before sleep I guess is my question
if the goal is weight loss so I would go
back further and say there's a person
who's only sleeping 3 hours a night
mm-hmm
their whole life is and their
priorities are probably in the wrong
place and we would want to probably
comprehensively change their life and
that's again why you know guys I think
it's so cool that you're on earth
your way of looking at things is so much
more slides than most and so you you
have a you study complex sciences right
let's talk a little about your
background and what led to the the
creation of qualia and nirakar it was
always interested in I mean all things
that support quality of life and so
second therapeutic side and the
physiotherapy decides that wasn't really
the primary area of my work but I din
across many different disciplines of
science and then working across
disciplines of science it's kind of like
neurology gastroenterology that those
divisions are talking about how do we
actually understand what's happening
across them the the same is like the the
best insights usually come at the
intersection of a field like biology and
physics where you're taking pretty
different perspectives on the world and
being able to see what is true at the
intersection of those right so I study
basically meta methods with
epistemologies methods of knowing for
being able to understand complex things
that require many different methods of
knowing so complexity science is an
example you take complex systems like a
cell or like a brain or like a ecosystem
and say well there's physics happening
here and there's chemistry happening
here there's all these layers of
organization and we can't separate out
one variable and study it in isolation
and think we know what the system does
because the system dynamics are a result
of the synergy between all these
variables interacting in the way they
are so they're normal how do we isolate
for a variable just doesn't work and so
complexity science is a type of it's a
methodology for understanding very
complex systems when you can't do
variable isolation so I had a background
in in how to go about studying complex
things I ended up getting diagnosed with
autoimmune and neurological disease and
it was neither treatable treatable but
not curable in the allopathic world or
the innovative world and it was rapid
onset and so I just said about studying
and said well let's see if we can find
some solutions because I'm
I I'm used to studying how complex
systems regulate so there's something
off in my regulatory process and really
you didn't know that yeah I was actually
exercising heavily and started to get
noticed
joints hurting joint injuries and then
all of a sudden within about a week had
immobility and when did the Rheumatology
sub autoimmune antibodies and those
rapid onset so what happened was if you
take a disease like rheumatoid arthritis
or MS or some complex almost like that
it's not it doesn't have one cause and
it doesn't have the same set of causes
for different people what we're saying
when we call it rheumatoid arthritis or
whatever we're calling it Alzheimer's
autism Indian post is that there are
certain tissues or certain systems that
aren't working properly they're being
damaged in certain characteristic ways
that have markers it doesn't tell us
anything about the cause which is why we
don't have a cure and so what we'll see
is different things that statistically
correlate so in some percentage of
people more than random this infection
correlates but not in everybody so we
can't say that infection is the cause
but the fact that it statistically
correlates more than random is like
interesting and in other people it's
this thing right new there's a whole
bunch of things so I started looking for
what is everything that statistically
correlates with the conditions that I
have it could be part of a complex
causal set meaning that each of those
things decrease the body's ability to
regulate itself what we call the homeo
dynamics of the body and then that makes
us more susceptible to the next ones
because we're already less well
regulated and when enough dysregulation
occurs now certain tissues start to
break down or certain systems start to
break down that means there's some set
of things that are going on that is not
just one thing they might be that they
might have happened in time right the
food poisoning that happened where there
was some lingering infection from
international travel and then the
pesticide exposure when farming and then
the head trauma and the cumulative
effect becomes disease twenty years
later so I looked at what are all the
things that could be involved
I went did Barry
strange obscure Diagnostics around all
that found the set of things going on
for me figured out how to treat those
and reversed those pathologies all
autoimmune antibodies everything changed
and the process started to get insight
into how to think about complex illness
and ended up being able to work with a
number of other friends and people that
had complex illness and see things shift
for them and start to model different
way of thinking about medicine as how do
we identify the health of all the
regulatory systems and increase the
regulatory capacity of those systems
when we were doing it we started to
focus on neuropsych a lot because pretty
much everyone doing with complex
illnesses one had a certain amount of
depression and anxiety around it and
they had a hard time with the motivation
to do all the stuff they needed to do to
get well and they had brain fog between
a hard for them to learn and so actually
being able to have them think clearly
and have the capacity to do stuff was
kind of important early in the process
especially I mean I can't tell how many
people I hear myself included that's
just like I can't think clearly or I
can't I don't have that ability to focus
the way that I feel like I want you
especially in the world of distractions
that we live in like there's so much
going on all the time and and grant it
to you some people like Oh we'll just
make a choice and just decide but I
think there really are obviously there
are certain things that systems are out
of whack due to either stress or a diet
or not getting the nutrients they need
and so in a product that you that you
created that ice alone and if known as
such a difference in my life from taking
and then I keep raving about sequel what
makes this product so different than I
guess anything else that is out there so
qualia is broadly and not robic which
means chemistry that's designed to
enhance cognitive function and to do it
without any kind of meaningful downside
your side effects that's in distinction
to smart drugs so smart drugs typically
we think of pharmaceuticals like
adderall modafinil by bands wellbutrin
etc they're usually either a TD drugs or
or sometimes narcolepsy drugs or
neurodegeneration drugs and they
definitely will increase some aspect of
cognitive function like focus but with
some pretty meaningful side effects and
so I'm not going to talk about their
medical use but a lot of people use them
off-label right they just the black
market on those is very high and they're
used for midterms and finals and you
know whatever is very high and and the
other option is Red Bull which is just
you know tremendous amounts of central
nervous system stimulation but actually
not supporting neurotransmission
happening better and we wanted to
develop better solutions for people
because so so many people do want to
focus and be productive more than they
feel like they're capable of there's a
lot of factors that are involved but no
chemistry is one of the factors and you
know if you think about like adderall or
most most of the smart drugs that people
take not all of them but most of them
are affecting the dopamine system
what they're doing is they're at some
point usually presynaptic dopamine
agonists but they're they're increasing
dopamine in one part of the system by
kind of overriding the way the body
naturally produces dopamine which is why
if you stay on it for a while your
system down regulates and then you feel
like sure when you get off which is and
that's right and so we wanted to do
something that was the opposite of
dependence creating rather than override
the body's natural capacity to regulate
those neurotransmitters could we
actually look at how it regulates them
support each step in the regulatory
process so that the regulatory system
itself got better so if someone was on
it for a while and got off they asked
you at a lasting benefit rather than at
dependence and downside and so that was
one of our design goals
so rather than you know just override
the dopamine system create dependence
would want to actually support the
body's ability to regulate dopamine and
you know for those who don't know
dopamine is one of the primary
neurotransmitters that is involved in
motivation focus mood pattern
recognition lots of things so you're
happy you're in your internal peppy drug
along with serotonin and you know and
even I mean I would guess use oxytocin
to you know of like all those things
that make you feel good and a lot of
people you know that if you have low
dopamine or serotonin levels like you're
you're not gonna feel as good as if you
do and I thought explain where I can I
can literally feel if I'm like I can
feel if I'm like oh my dopamine is lower
than my serotonin is really low today
and even if I'm deficient in B vitamins
like I've gotten to know myself so well
from different you know blood tests as
well as just
self-experimentation it like I can feel
that and I just my main message I really
want to help people understand is you
know you there might not be something
necessarily wrong with you or you might
not be just did not give up you know it
could be as simple as if you got more B
vitamins in your system not just taking
them but also just knowing that you're
actually absorbing them and that you
weren't be deficient or D deficient it
could completely change the way you feel
not only about not only your energy
levels also do what you feel about
yourself and the world around you and
your ability to handle stress and your
body's ability to just feel lighter
rather than like heavy and you know I I
felt that before on both ends and I just
want to give hope to anybody out there
that feels those feelings of either
depression or anxiety or complete over
exhaustion or inflammation in the body
that there is absolutely hope I think
one of the best things I ever did is
actually get a blood test that showed me
hey your be deficient hey your Z
deficient hey your glutathione is really
low like it's really it's a lot easier
here will that help solve those problems
as opposed to just feeling like you're
you know there's something wrong with
you or your just have depression and
there's no answers and you just have to
live in a you know in a not great place
like that is so not true and I love that
as you have navigated your own journey
and found solutions the things that you
were suffering with and didn't been able
to have you know have create success and
things were meaningful to you that you
share this with people
oh sorry my favorite things I I think
that is such a so much about Who I am
you know
like anytime I find something that helps
me I just want to share it you know and
share knowledge and information and not
from a place of this is the only way to
do it because I do know that every
single person is so different normative
ism or our body is a difference of
complex like you said that what might
work for me might not work for you
however I that I really feel like trying
things you know what I mean I I will try
or test out and I think if I trust
somebody and they're giving the
information to try you know like I'm
probably gonna oh yeah I dry it most the
time I'm really grateful I did because
it can drastically helps my life this is
why you read the bio hacker summit is
that's the whole ethos is if we do a
clinical trial on a very large number of
people to see does does this drug or the
therapy have some effect beyond placebo
if that's a valuable piece of info but
it's far from complete info because
we're gonna have a bell curve
distribution of effects where the people
over here had amazing effects than
people over here had pretty shitty
effects from the same thing if overall
the effects are you know have some
significance we'll put that drug out but
to really be able to optimize for
yourself what works well for you is
going to be quite different than what
works well for someone else as you
mentioned because deficiencies might be
specific right or traumas might be
specific or which is what being able to
do some self experimentation is super
valuable and being able to find people
that can help you both do the
foundations that are true for everybody
and do the deeper testing as to what
specifically is going on
because living with background anxiety
and depression and anhedonia and
meaninglessness is actually not natural
to the human condition
just maybe just something that's worth
taking a moment on is that if you go
live with an indigenous people there are
not many left but if you go deep into
the Amazon find the RR or whatever they
don't have mental illness right they
don't have low-grade even looking at
that or even talking about that you know
it's like that's not that's not what we
were the ubud species was meant to have
been there you know and well as we've
had all these technologies that have
helped us become you know evolved as a
species yeah also there's the book can
be blessings and also some really
negative side effects to it and I love
that you're bringing that how can we use
all these amazing innovations and
science to help counterbalance those
things think about it this way when we
develop a drug that is designed to
affect one part of the physiology it
oftentimes the side-effects are because
it's affecting other things as well and
in ways that aren't positive and it
wasn't actually dealing with the
underlying cause so will the statin old
cholesterol yes is it also toxic to the
liver in the brain and etc yes
so this is the problem this is why
complexity science matters is how do you
understand what's actually causing
what's going on when the cause is
complex and how do you do things that
are comprehensively positive not just
positive for one thing negative
somewhere else in general this has been
the issue with tech is not just in drugs
we develop technology that is good for
something and externalizes harm
somewhere else and then the results as a
civilization that has a lot of things
wrong with it
and so like the paint on the wall behind
me it's cool to have paint and we didn't
want mold to grow in our houses so we
started putting fungicides in our paint
and then the net results of course ended
up being fun Josiah's it resistant molds
that are kind of like the mersa the
antibiotic resistant you know mold
species that are why so many people have
multiplicity today they never did before
is because we actually may be mold and
the paint paint is putting out all the
tile organic compounds things like
formaldehyde etc that are neurotoxic and
endocrine disruptors and could we make
painted
have those things yes but the key is the
paint is affecting a lot more things
than we thought it was so we built it
for one purpose well it was affecting a
lot of things and was affecting a lot of
the other ones negatively so when you
look at people's life today their time
on Facebook is the same thing did
Facebook connect the world in some
meaningful ways yes it also make people
who started creating click optimised
personas that are not who they really
are where the more persona the more that
persona gets liked the more of a fraud
and a phony they feel the lonelier they
get in the more they need a dopamine
head from a blue 2d screen like this is
there's a lot of places where our world
is really a world that humans didn't
evolve in and we're not adapting to and
has actually not good for us and so one
of the foundations for people to start
thinking about is a lot of anxiety a lot
of depression has psychological and
physiological components that come from
living in a world direction on adaptogen
world and that's honestly why what a
life before likes because I literally
felt so well depressed like I did not
like the way that I felt because
especially as an actress I had my my
management team and agent she meant that
at the time was like up your numbers up
your numbers and all I could think about
was I out of the obsession I'm like what
am I gonna post next are people gonna
like it and what if they don't like it
and let me check in see if they did you
know what I mean and I couldn't ever
find myself to be present in the moment
that I was and I started just kidding so
I found myself constantly checking
either Instagram or Facebook to see what
other people were doing or what if
people were like and I just hated it and
I hated hearing about all these amazing
beautiful women that I linked up to that
we're using body morphing apps and like
you know it was just it made me so sick
to my stomach and so finally one day I
was like I
I just can't take it anymore I'm just
gonna go on a social media fast and I
picked like this one Sunday to just not
touch social media and I had done that
since I can even remember and it was one
of the best decisions I ever made where
I actually felt like I had this
connection to the people I was with
again and I were looking at a sunset
being like
is there crying and on this massive
stress which is lifted off and I had
done nothing different but then just
make a decision that like I just wasn't
gonna touch that that world today and
obviously like I love you know I think
that it plays such an amazing piece in
our world today of being able to connect
people to be able to share messages to
be able to create community I mean
there's so many great positive benefits
but I I saw such a massive upgrade in my
life when I have made a commitment to it
when not not touch not look at my social
media or even look at my phone for at
least the first couple hours of my day
as well as at least once a week take
like a whole most of the day if not all
of the day just awesome it completely
and I hope and I challenge everybody
that listens to really just try that out
because I have so many people I feel
like are dying for real human
connections we're so lost in this the
dopamine hits that come from you know
the likes and the the hearts and stuff
like that I want to explain some
principle that I think will be valuable
there's a principle called hyper normal
stimuli meaning you're getting a stimuli
that is beyond anything that would
normally occur and in doing so it
desensitizes you to normal stimuli and
so this is why you know cocaine is a
hyper normal stimuli there's really no
way to get that much dopamine in a
natural environment which is why you
feel amazing when you get it cuz you get
this flood of experience but it's also
why then you need cocaine again and
coming down from cocaine sunsets aren't
interesting people aren't interesting
like nothing else because the normal
stimuli can't compete with the hyper
normal stimuli and the same thing is
true when you're if you get you know if
you're skydiving that's not a normal
experience and you can become an
adrenaline junkie to the hyper normal
stimuli adrenaline junkie in a real
sense meaning the rest of life is
actually not interesting anymore and
sugar is actually a hyper normal stimuli
from an evolutionary perspective because
if you think about it in our whole
evolutionary environment the closest we
got to sugar was fruit yeah even the up
like the fruit we have now where you can
just go eat a handful of
to pick the berries and they were thorny
and they were small and bright
hybridized for their sugar content and
so because sugar was pretty rare because
salt was right because fat was rare in
our evolutionary environment we devolve
de dopamine hit whenever we got it
because it was evolutionary to try and
get all of it we could for survival now
that we can produce as much sugar fat
and salt as we want we still we still
predict huge dopamine hits when we get
it even that were not in deficiency
anymore we're in excess we're
maladaptive now but the other food
doesn't taste good compared to donuts or
whatever one you had the hi programs
today right when you go to social media
if you go to a dating app and you're
swiping left and right and everybody's
pictures are prettier than they actually
are right like they've got makeup on and
lighting maybe Photoshop and that's
what's being selected for real people
just aren't interesting anymore gosh I
love that we touched on this I mean it's
so puzzling that's why it is causing so
much you know either anxiety or
depression or major self-esteem
self-confidence issues in people because
we are constantly they're comparing on
so many different levels to things that
aren't really what is you know it's like
I love these to the heart hyper normal
and I felt that in my life so much it
even Nina when I go talk to schools in
talking to so many kids who have and
just people who have so much subs teams
of Commons issues because of social
media and I've told them I've heard
speaking I was full of her like thousand
girls the other day and it all said a
hundred percent of them said we asked a
poll like have you ever felt bad after
looking on your social media and they
are or or wanted to look different and
every one hundred percent said yes in
like a private poll and I got up there
and told them all I was like hey you
know I'm you probably see my photos I'm
an actress but like just so you know
those photos there it takes about
probably two hours to get ready I have a
team of 10 people that are getting me
ready it's it's light and but you know
what I mean like that cost thousands of
dollars to produce it is not real life
you know I think there's there's a place
for it
it's fun it's cool like it can be still
celebrated but you know in a knowing
that like oh that's not really that face
for it the place for it is the same
place as skydiving or cocaine hmm
which is coke cocaine is not gonna hurt
you if you use it very rarely mmm
adderall is not gonna hurt someone
meaningful if they use it very rarely
and someone's not gonna become an
adrenaline junkie if rarely they have an
experience like skydiving but these are
things that will desensitize you to
normal stimuli use them regularly and so
with powerful tools there's a
responsibility for how to use that tool
so that you're that it's not creating
unintended consequence yeah and now the
thing for anyone who doesn't know the
work of Tristan Harris go google him and
he was the part philosopher at Google he
left Google and said whoa all of my
friends in Silicon Valley and Facebook
and Google etc were like we're ruining
your brains because your life will be
better if you're offline in nature
interacting with humans etc and we're
trying to keep you online as much as
possible because the marketers pay us
more based on time on site and so we
have to figure out what is the most
addictive possible to keep you
online as much as possible and get you
to click as much it as possible cuz
that's how the pay phone works so crazy
well I celebrate him for doing that you
know Damien for speaking I solar anybody
that's obviously causing positive
destruction and saying look like this
these patterns and habits that we have
that we've fallen into like are they
actually helping you be a better person
you know I just think we fall into these
both like thoughts patterns and habits
that that we forget to ask the question
like is this helping me anymore like
maybe it did help me at one point but
like am I still getting something from
this and if not realizing that you can
change it no you couldn't this is
responsible use look like because you
might be getting something but you might
be paying more than it's worth
yeah one of the key things is to notice
difference between addiction and
something that's actually healthy for
you and whether we're talking about
because this is true social medium it's
true with drugs with food it's also true
that your size in terms of how one
approaches it right in general in
addiction is gonna give you a momentary
spike and then because it's likes you
whether it's spiking your blood sugar
because it's chocolate cake or your
dopamine because it's cocaine or your
dopamine endorphins because it's
exercise whatever you get a spike but
then you also get a crash and then you
feel shitty for you craving something
else that's gonna spike you so you need
more of that thing and so you actually
get more destabilization of baseline
rather than a more stable baseline and
you get an erosion of your baseline over
time rather than an elevation of your
baseline so with this and you notice
when the person is coming down off
heroin they're coming down off cocaine
nothing other than that drug that will
make them happy and so in that moment
like love is not interesting meaning is
not interesting only that drugging
because it's desensitize them to
everything else and so anything that is
actually healthy for you that makes you
a healthier more adaptive person makes
you more sensitive to be able to get
pleasure and happiness from more
different things in life and elevate
your baseline over time rather than in
roads it and so this this is just
something that people should pay
attention to is if I need this things
their happiness and this thing might be
a person that you're addicted to
understanding that even in you know
falling in love with someone all of
those chemicals going off and yeah had
so many different even when I you know
with 101 clients or coaching clients
even myself my personal experiences of
like you understandably just know that
when you see a person that you're in
love with and perfect him wrong but like
those chemicals are going off so you're
literally getting dopamine serotonin hid
from just seeing a person that you you
don't have feelings from and so they
will go through withdrawals if you don't
have that around anymore well so there's
a way of having risk
we'll use their there's a way of
actually addressing that with just a
couple things most of what people call
love is actually just addiction meaning
I like how I feel when they're around
I like how I feel when I'm on the drug
those two I really know who they are and
I respect and admire and value and care
for them one for them and so I like how
I feel in their around is it actually
yeah and ultimately then you end up
desensitizing and other areas of life
become less meaningful so harmful even
harmful relationships because it's
exactly and so the first thing is is
this relationship am I exploring the
relationship without needing it from a
place of wholeness because we can create
even more beauty together and the basis
of my draw to them is actually seeing
them not not projecting fantasies on
them because they're hot but actually
really seeing who they are and wanting
for them and we create together that way
if it's anything other than that it'll
end up being addiction and even if it is
that if save save to the poem and they
start spending a lot of time together
and they start associating happiness
with you they have happiness and they
have this experience to the other person
but as a result of them falling into
this love bubble they stop doing things
on their own all of their happiness is
associated with this person they're not
experiencing happiness with their
friends who they aren't hanging out with
anymore or by themselves which then on
doing now they start to create this
Pavlovian association of happiness being
one-for-one wired with them meaning I
need them to be happy one of the key
things is to be is to keep nourishing
your individuality well-being in the
relationship so that you don't actually
fall into it
Jim at that alone I'm like they did talk
for probably an hour just about I think
it's so just powerful of people to
understand you know that everything you
know I think if you can get anything
from this this session is that so many
things are so complex or everything is
so complex you know and it's not just
one one way answer and taking an account
into all aspects of life and how you're
living in and we're so the intention
behind what you're doing I think it
sounds like you know from what you've
said makes the biggest difference you
have the mindset behind that and that's
what I talk about so much you know and
all the difference that that I do is you
know what is what's the ultimate goal
like what knowing why you're doing what
you're doing and having an answer that
you're happy with from from asking that
question it can be a life changing you
know um yeah so
exercise can be a kind of bulimia mmm
where rather than eat the food and then
puke weed and then go work out real hard
with self-disgust driving the whole
thing yeah or it can be a way of
acknowledging that all the experiences I
have in life are going to happen through
a body and I want to take care of this
body as a vessel for me to be able to
create and enjoy and love so it can
either be an active self level or
self-hate exercise can be either and you
know for so long I was the first you
know is more like it may be a mixture of
the two you know but I just I remember
being so exhausted already from you know
being at hours of dance class or hours
at gymnastic or adjustment hours at you
know just competitive dancing on this
growing up for axiom class and then and
then feeling like I was sitting in my
car and just like using food as a
distraction and I would sit there before
I went to the gym and just like eating
you know just like snacking on things I
mean like just trying to get myself to
get into the this gym that I thought I
had to go to after spending hours and
hours and hours doing physical activity
you know but is more of a place of like
I have to do this in order to feel good
about myself as opposed to the opposite
of like I feel so good about myself and
I love my body so much and I love my
this life experience like I want to be
able to live it an optimum level and I
know that if I go move then I'll feel
more energized and let me know I'll be
able to experience like better better at
a higher rate and I think that
understanding I mean literally changed
my life and and being able to take that
into anything that you do you know am I
doing this from a place of self-love or
from a place of your or hatred you know
or disgust I think it's just is so so
powerful I didn't like life saving
honestly
self-love is a tricky topic just to
speak one part to it for someone who is
a hundred pounds overweight and they say
I love my body someone exercised loving
their body does not mean that they think
that it's aesthetic is exactly what they
would like it to be or that how it feels
is exactly they like or even that they
feel totally empowered it might not be
those things at all it might be you know
there might be all kinds of wishing
something was different that's fine to
still say okay my body like I really
wouldn't be here having any experience
having the capacity to create or to
perceive or to love without having a
body so that's that's a big deal and
nobody's actually working like crazy all
of the time to make me exist and it I do
have these 70 trillion cells during a
trillion metabolic functions a second
and it would be healthier if I supported
it better right and so there's just a
gratitude for it and a recognition of
the service that it is and then saying
okay I actually love the thing I love
that there is this thing that gives me
the opportunity to have choice at all
and I want to take care of it
day and that is just groundbreaking you
know just even that mindset and all in
this shift and you know talked about so
much before even when I what I call like
what you just did is basically
disruptive gratitude what giving people
a step process of not just thinking what
am i grateful for but also like why am i
grateful for and what would it be like
without it there and how different would
it be like if I didn't have this thing
you know um which can totally reframe
and
and shift your whole perception on
something so I just love that you
touched on that and everybody was
listening like rewatch that part again
because it was so powerful um well then
oh thank you so much for being here with
us and I know I know people attempted to
go CERN but if you could leave the
audience with just you know one more
thing you know - one more like wisdom
knowledge drop and what would what would
you want to leave them with well I'll
say one that's relevant to the threat of
all we've been discussing so far in just
a kind of underline the problem of hyper
normal stimulus in the process of
addiction we become less and less
sensitized to the beauty of the rest of
the world and more and more focused
hyper focused on the whatever it is
redic t'do and where if that person is
not calling us nothing else really is
gonna get our attention right
it's just all about are they calling or
texting or am i giving the likes on this
thing or can I get my drug in the
process of the evolution into more
health and wholeness as a being we
actually increase our capacity to enjoy
the beauty of everything to get to have
a sense of connectedness and to be able
to derive pleasure from everything our
sensitivity to all of it increases so a
sunset is beautiful the flowers are
beautiful being able to listen to anyone
there's there's a increased
sensitization to the beauty of existence
and so if you notice that you are
getting very hyper focused on a very
small amount of stimuli and pretty numb
to a lot of other stimuli that's a good
sign of being on the wrong track and if
you notice that most of life is doesn't
do that much for you that's a sign of
kind of being on the wrong track and if
you can start increasing the sensitivity
of your perception to all that is and
decrease the dependence on those areas
that you have had hyper focus you'll end
up having more net pleasure in life
no it seems otherwise at first and more
happiness and more I couldn't agree more
you know and from a very deep personal
experience of the exact same thing on
both sides and and why you know again
why I love the supplements that you
created because it helps with all the
different ingredients that you have in
there are I mean guys that he created
this from from this whole perspective
into one one thing that helps you I mean
the whole the whole company's name
itself is to enhance like the life
experience that's what qualia means
right to enhance the overall life
experience which I love we you know we
didn't really talk about calling that
much detail but the gist is we people
who were seeking more motivation more
focus more cognitive capacity and not
just a cognitive capacity but the
associated energy and emotional dynamics
it would allow them to be creative we
wanted options other than going and
finding psychostimulants and lots of
caffeine that were supporting the
physiology side there's a lot of
psychology and it's involved but the
physiology makes a huge difference I
mean your body is able to actually
produce neurotransmitters it functions
the way that it's supposed to function
and so know that that it's a part of a
whole process it's not gonna work if
you're not sleeping and it's gonna work
a lot less well if you're eating crappy
food versus eating better food but it is
designed to support people to have a
certain aspect of neurologic health
better battlin when i you know like from
my personal experience on it like i do
when people know like i have always been
somewhere to be on a constant quest for
better health or to just how to live at
my highest level like you know like I
get this one life is one body you know I
want to be able to know that I'm
experiencing it the best that I possibly
can and sometimes I know we've talked
about this before you know even even in
that in that freezing of like the
the Bessie press the canter hoist them
you have to be better than can can add a
sense of pressure to oneself and
something that I'm constantly working on
just being able to be you know shift
from I always got to be better I was
gonna be the best to just be like I just
like we talked about disrupting that was
a lot more just gratitude for being and
that is made a big shift but I do know
one of the when I'm so grateful for is
that when I've taken this when I started
taking this product I was able to have
this this feeling of just a peaceful
powerful focused energy like never
before and the things that I was
experience just seemed enhanced as
opposed to I heard I felt this empathy
and this this love for life again that I
hadn't really felt in a while and
probably because I had tried so many
different pre workouts and like you know
like you said over stimuli that were
there were me maybe messing up my
dopamine serotonin levels and especially
people who have got health I know that a
lot of times that is affecting my
dopamine and serotonin and all my you
know neurotransmitters so having
something that helps counterbalance that
it's just been so so so so helpful for
me like that's why I rave about it
everybody what you just described was
what we had in mind when we made it so
[Music]
if the people who are listening to this
have questions I'm happy to come back on
and dialogue again so I'm sure I'm sure
we'll get lots and I would love to do
another one that would be wonderful and
thank you again and everybody that's our
just make sure you like click links
below I check out Nora hacker and qualia
and and Daniel and all the research and
science behind it you know I see all the
time you know please don't believe me or
my experience but like read and research
for yourself all the different things
and why I wanted to have Daniel enter so
much is because I have had such powerful
conversations with him and I was like hi
you just I you know it is with my life's
mission to to live this life experience
to the fullest to be able to help other
people also do the same
so elevate human consciousness
but you know as much as I possibly can
from doing my very best to live the very
best that I can you know and um I really
see that in your and just thank you for
sharing all your amazing knowledge and
wisdom investing if a chunk of your
audience are educated hackers and they
want to deep dive into the chemistry I'm
happy to do that sometime yes let's
definitely do I think we should do a
whole series together maybe we should
even do a course together you know
people can just take our little take a
whole course I think that'd be really
powerful
don't fun okay cool oh thank you again
and yeah make sure close links below and
we will see you can resume plan thank
you
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]