[Music]
Hey I'm here with Elizabeth Nolan brown
at reason she is an associate editor at
reason calm right here on Connecticut
Avenue just north of Dupont Circle in
Washington DC thank you so much for
having me and taking the time today
thank you for having me on so what it
what exactly is an associate editor well
I don't know in the magazine world sort
of everyone's an editor kind of uh it's
like a print magazine convention still
so reason is still also print magazine
so our titles are kind of like that I
saw I saw some amazing covers downstairs
I mean how long they're up on the wall
like from the 70s like from the 80s even
like the DEA the real enemy of the drug
war like how long has reason been around
reason actually is just celebrating its
50th anniversary this year no kid yeah
so it's very exciting we had a big like
gala in LA and awesome there's like the
guy who founded it is still involved he
does transportation policy he's got this
whole like transportation policy
groupies I think you know it's oh
there's groupies yeah there's people for
every subject that is definitely true I
just found out today though that the
libertarian party is only 47 years old
they just tweeted like happy birthday to
us 47th and I was I was shocked I
thought it was older and also I'm like
wow reason is older than the libertarian
party well reason reason might have
kicked that off officially in some way
then back then who knows and how long
have you been a reason I've been here
almost five years now that's awesome
what were you doing before that and what
was I are you a card-carrying
libertarian or are you just a writer for
a libertarian newspaper I mean we I like
to say and a lot of people here at
Reason say the same thing that we're
small-l libertarians which means you
know we believe in the libertarian
philosophy and but we aren't necessarily
members at the libertarian party we're
not like angling for Libertarian Party
candidates not the work opposed that
night here but you know that's kind of
just um our editor always likes to say
politics is downstream of culture and
who said that quote pretty sure was
Andrew Breitbart was it really yeah oh
did he
I don't know well that would be funny
though would it that's funny
okay yeah well I mean call it politics
is definitely downstream from culture
and I would argue that like college
campuses are upstream from culture and
that's why I like
spend a lot of time on college and think
about that place quite a bit but tell me
how did you how did you come to reason
what were you doing before that I like
to just you know give a little bit of
background for people because you know
these interviews are not just about the
subject matter but about the people
behind the work and so I'm interested to
hear what what brought you to riding for
a reason calm yeah I think it's kind of
good to you'll appreciate this having
taken a sort of roundabout way to
writing and path to getting involved in
things like that
um because I mean I've been a writer and
a journalist for my whole career pretty
much but I've been all over the place
sort of within that sphere yeah I
started at a legal newspaper at Ohio
right after Columbus Ohio right after
college and then I I came here to a
seminar for the Institute for Humane
studies and it was about libertarian
classical liberalism and this was I in
DC and it was funded by the Koch
brothers so I like to say that you know
I went to like Koch brainwashing camp
nice have you been able to shake that
yeah I didn't really know much about
libertarianism or classical liberalism
but it wasn't like they you know
convinced me of things that I didn't
believe it was like oh my gosh this is
what I believe and there's a there's a
word for it cuz I used to think that I
was too liberal for the Democrats in
some ways but then also not an iota so
you know I just knew it wasn't a
Republican but um so finally was like oh
this is what I would I am so I am and I
also discovered that there's this whole
weird world in DC of like think tanks
and nonprofits and things where people
just get paid to like write and think
it's like you know college professor
without the students office students and
I was like I want to do that or or I
want to you know do PR for one of those
because I also learned the PR gets paid
a lot better than journalism oh yeah
because the pr's job is to withhold
information restrict information and
journalism job exactly it's more
lucrative it's worth more to people yes
oh I am I applied to a grad school and I
came here to American University it was
just a one year program in strategic
communications which was like kind of
communication theory but also very
practical we had like people from all
these you know working in DC you come
and talk to us and so I did that and it
was great and was very
because it got me out of Ohio and it got
me to DC yet I started hanging out at
Reason magazine and with libertarian
groups in DC at that time this was a
long time ago um this was 2006 and but I
learned that I didn't want to go into PR
at all so that was also I guess right
learning learn out you don't want it
even more value I gotta like pare it
down pare it down we're in like some
really cool offices you know it's this
is not like a super fancy massive
think-tank kind of place it's not real
glossy it's just kind of like pretty
cool upstairs in Dupont Circle and
they've got a TV studio in here in a
podcast studio and stuff there's
actually some really funny lizard headed
policemen in here I don't I don't know
what's going on in the reason offices
but it looks like fun it looks like a
lot of fun actually
that's cool so alright so we did what
did you work on like your school
newspaper did you always want to be a
writer
did you know that when you're growing up
I mean I did I didn't know what kind of
writer I was like you know like
dictating in short stories to my
babysitter's and stuff like I did I
created a newspaper for my family where
the news was like it's someone's
birthday so yeah so the answered yes yes
but I also I did all sorts of writing I
studied my major in undergrad was
playwriting so I was at the inter major
with a playwriting and interacting
emphasis so I thought I was gonna do
more creative writing yeah but I didn't
I also like didn't you realize I have to
feed myself
yeah and I didn't I mean I still have
friends who are doing theatre and they
are still working second jobs in order
to fund you know they're passionate and
that's amazing but I was like I'm not I
don't want to do that I don't want to
like do some crap job all day and then
try to find time to write in my spare
time right so I just interviewed art
sivanna and he told me he he had a
similar experience of working in PR and
then he came to this realization he's
like well I can either be the writer I
want to be or I can make money but he's
actually continued to do his sort of
passion work all at the same time and I
have this other friend his name is
delicious tacos and he just released he
just released a another fiction novel
and he's just a tremendous writer but
he's also finding the same same
difficulty which is you know following
your passion and creative writing is
often not necessarily the most lucrative
way to go
I mean I I love doing journalism too so
it's not like this was like oh suck it
like it was just like how do I make
money from writing I was like oh I've
actually loved this so yeah just just a
long-winded just to finish off my how
did I get here
right after I got an internship in and
while I was in grad school because I was
I was assistant to a baby-boomer scholar
like he wrote about baby boomers oh fast
so through that I got an internship at
the AARP magazine in their publications
Department wound up launching their
first Twitter account I helped them
migrate from pretty much just doing
print stuff to doing web stuff so I was
then at the AARP they let me actually
move I moved to Brooklyn they let me
work from home so I work for the AARP
for five years I'm doing social media
for senior citizens do you mean doing
web production and yeah stuff like that
and and some writing and editing and all
sorts of you know journalism but yeah
you're the reason everybody's grandma's
on Facebook now don't blame me for that
you know it's over with all the grandmas
gone on Facebook okay that's all that's
left now and then i am i went to then
for a few years to doing some health
writing for like women's blogs and some
kind of weird lifestyle blogging and
things like that um yeah i saw a tweet
of yours the other day that said
something about remembering what it was
like to be a daily lifestyle blogger now
you're like a deep dive investigative
journalists on one hand and at the same
time you're also doing daily roundups of
news and political stuff so why don't
you just talk a little bit about well
you know what you do generally and then
we've got a whole list of issues that
i'd like to dig into um yeah a reason i
do well i doubt do a morning newsletter
for us which is just sort of focused on
the big stories of the day from a little
bit of a libertarian perspective it's
sort of a work in progress because we're
trying to figure out what that it's kind
of hard to know exactly what that looks
like how much we should this is and this
is kind of an ongoing thing with
libertarians in general and reason I
think it's just like how much we should
be paying attention to the to the main
story of the day and or you know stories
of the day and reacting to it and how
much we should be sort of not buying
into these other like frames and someone
else is sitting there right I try to
draw stuff just draw attention to our
own stories and things so it's always
kind of a balance right so you guys just
so everybody knows you guys are
a non-profit yes and so your
mission-driven
yes yeah what's the mission uh to spread
free minds and free markets free minds
and free markets that's good who can
argue with that
yeah so so there is there is a
motivational tent to the work that you
guys do yeah and I mean I love it
because and actually in AARP was a
non-profit too so I you know I've worked
at a lot of nonprofit journalism outlets
and I find that I mean at least I both
of reason it they are paying is even um
they don't they don't mess with your
sort of as long as you're within a sort
of realm and you're not gonna be working
here if you're not within this general
realm of ideas you know they don't mess
with you you know there's not a pressure
there's not a political pressure we
don't have them telling us our donors
want this you know they keep us very
separate from the that side of things
from the fundraising and development
side of things so that it's not sort of
affecting our reporting when I did work
for sort of the women's blogs and it was
in a corporate atmosphere we've got so
much pressure from advertisers there was
this one time where the advertisers got
mad that we had the word rape and
headlines and they were just like you
can't say rape in headlines like I got
that order we're like she's all the time
it was like oh oh and like ten women
raped us you know whatever you can even
say that yeah you couldn't even say it
like at all it was just like cuz they're
like they don't like having their
products like show up next to the word
rape so I mean I feel like it's yeah I'm
really I really like work you're not a
non-profit and it's really nice to be we
are obviously looking to get you know
traffic and you know we are obviously
looking people to read and see our work
we also do videos because you know we
want to spread our ideas but it's not so
much driven on just like you need to get
clicks and that's at the bottom line
right and every publication has its own
bias right and it's just you guys are
honest and open about it right yeah well
I think that's admirable and we're never
through I mean every human being has
their own bias season so when they're
just out front and and spoken then
that's legit it's just when they're
hidden and that's the issue so can you
do you mind talking a little bit about
the debate that you guys have between
following the story of the day in the or
versus like setting your own agenda
because I think that's a really
interesting question you know we live in
a world of narratives narratives or will
control our minds and if you can control
the narrative you can basically control
people's mind so being proactive or
is reactive how I've been playing out in
your discussions I mean so and this is
the thing that's maybe changed a little
bit in the past few years but so when I
started everything was 2014 and it was
it was the the very brief libertarian
moment as deemed by the New York Times
there was all this talk about Rand Paul
being a front-runner and all this stuff
and there was leaking all this attention
and then when it didn't pan out
everyone's like haha how's that
libertarian moment but well yeah so one
of the things I mean none of us that was
everyone else's way that was sort of the
mainstream media and the people who
wanted to taunt us his way of framing it
was that it was all about getting a
libertarians elected to politics or
having more Republicans and Democrats
that were elected adopt libertarian
ideas and whatever and that's not what
we were I mean that's clearly not
happening but the world is getting more
libertarian despite the fact that
there's so many examples you can point
to that aren't there's also so many so
many that are I mean I don't know about
the whole world I think I'm sorry I'm
talking about the United States but if
you look around us I mean just things
like with you know with same-sex
relationships or with marijuana
legalization I mean these are just two
of the major ones but there's all sorts
of things where people are so much less
conformist so much more you know into
individual liberties than ever before
and so like on a cultural level I think
that people are or at least until very
recently we're getting more and more
libertarian there's some weird stuff
going on the past few years well I think
all the cool kids are definitely leaning
libertarian that's for sure and I think
that that's sort of like the unifying
theme of people that I find that I've
relate to are people that believe in
individual liberties you know I always
said that my platform before I even
understood with libertarianism was I
always said my platform was gays guns
and drugs right like do whatever you
want as long as you're not hurting
anybody else or yourself in some
terrible way and then basically just you
know leave everybody alone and I think
that that's if there's sort of like a
unifying Center these days you know the
from the extreme right to the extreme
left like in the middle I think we're
finding is like libertarian minded
Liberty is libertarian is that a mod
that's like a moderate middle ground now
I know it's weird I kind of think of us
as that which is weird cuz I mean yeah
we're try think of any individual
position it's
but I think that a lot of people out
there just regular people who aren't
necessarily paying attention to politics
who aren't necessarily very tribal about
it or just very clued into the daily I
think of it I mean I think most people
are very kind of have this it's a very
American you throw start this sort of
like live and let live and I don't know
I mean well I'd like to maintain it as
being an American yeah right it seems to
it seems to be you know the narratives
and some of our politicians are
definitely moving away from that sort of
in a more authoritarian direction and
definitely coercion in terms of what you
see think feel act do it cetera but you
know I I didn't even know what
libertarianism was and then I ended up
at George Mason for act for economics
and so I just sort of like fell
backwards into the most libertarian well
second most libertarian economics and
public policy school in the country
after University of Chicago and bet
that's where I learned about the sort of
like real ideological libertarianism
which I think taken in its own way to
extremes can be problematic you know in
and of itself but at the same time it
definitely introduced me to the idea
that you know a market market-based
solutions for things seem to work out
better than government based solutions
so at least the common strand of the
people that I've been interviewing and
maybe maybe that's a reflection of me
you know from jeffrey miller he's
definitely libertarian and then speaking
with art davana he's definitely he calls
himself a libertarian conservative and
definitely talking to you and i'm
excited about it because it seems to me
that there's like an intellectual
honesty in that space that that's not
exactly found in the other other
extremes right or left well and there's
also a there's a path forward maybe that
we don't see in a lot of our stuff today
with the right and the left who are very
sort of all-or-nothing about the way
they approach things on I mean we get a
lot sort of within the libertarian
movement and within among conservatives
or some people who think of Reason as
being this crazy left-leaning libertine
you know think and then on the Left
there's or you know amongst Democrats
there's look there's this idea that
we're very conservative and rightly
always here the right leaning or the
conservative Reason magazine and I think
it's because I mean there is room for
people with all of those views within
libertarianism like libertarianism
doesn't have a position
on whether or not you should be like in
a polyamorous commune
not eating gluten and like you know
making like performance I for a living
or whether you should be like
homeschooling your children out on the
Prairie of you know Colorado and you
know going to church every day and you
know not having dinner with people of
the opposite sex or whatever I mean it's
about it's about it's about creating a
system where the government can't harm
people whichever one of those things
they gonna do or the government so
minimal in your life that there's room
for all people to sort of find their
version of the good without being
prevented from it right and so many
people today though are just like so
offended by the very concept that other
people might be living in a way that
they don't approve of and being allowed
to do it without without you know
government intrusion maybe or maybe if
not to that extreme at least without
shame you know right it seems like just
as like we need to comment on your
lifestyle and and this is very much a
new thing on the left that we're seeing
a ton of but it's always been a kind of
thing but certain subsets of the right
to and so it's like it's just so much
more right right from right Emily I've
been watching this woman DC McCallister
from the Federalist on Twitter lately
she's been going bonkers oh yeah she's
got a pretty solid following and she
writes with the Federalist and she's
definitely right way but but she
believes this is where things get
confusing she believes a quote-unquote
don't meddle as her sort of policy
positions but she's been on this sort of
rampage about anti-prostitution anti sex
work
she's even like taking taken to like a
whole campaign against this one woman
who like on her patreon a sends nudes to
her followers like you know whatever
like what do whatever you want yeah oh I
do know you're talking about now because
I've seen Bridget yes I'm talking about
this woman going off right totally going
off on her because this woman Bridget
just elects to have a private business
and other private individuals elect to
be patrons of hers and she's not even
like actually being a prostitute which
would be fine with me she's just sending
pictures of her breasts and like this
woman is freaking out and moralizing all
about it and so like there's moralizing
coming for
the place and what I'm looking for are
people that are just going to sort of
live and let live that's my general
philosophy but I'm talking about the sex
work and stuff sort of brings me into
like one of the things that I have on my
list that I want to talk to you about
and you've been doing just a ton of work
on this and it's sort of a it's sort of
like a really hot button issue and that
and that's an issue around human
trafficking sex trafficking sex workers
individual liberties the right for
people to engage in kind of whatever
work that they want to engage in and
it's a real sensitive button because
people who are I think uninformed or
even ill informed on the matter hear the
word sex trafficking and immediately
think about just little kids getting
pushed into slavery and sex slavery and
then they immediately it seems to me
lose all sense of rational thought and
reasonable reasonable thinking on the
matter and then I'm and just are like
okay like whatever you want to do we got
to save the children save the children
and so it's it's actually much more
complicated and complex than that what
do you know imagine that and so um
that's something that you've been
working on quite a bit and and the thing
that I love about this podcast is I'm
interested in what you're interested in
and what your work has been about so I
want to give you a chance to really sort
of talk about how how you got into
working on this subject what the key
issues are and sort of what your take on
on all this is because it's it's really
important one today yeah so I you know
yeah I guess I kind of say my main beat
my main coverage area is sort of the
intersection of sex speech and civil
liberties I started you know I'd always
been interested just in sex worker
rights and things like that and so when
I started yet reason I was you know
gonna write about I'd written
you know before about dumb taxes sin
taxes on strip clubs and things like
that and you know just sort of different
sex worker rights movements and it was
just kind of focusing on that the very
libertarian thing like people should be
able to do what they want you know with
you know with their bodies consenting
adults as long as they're not harming
anyone and between adults they should be
you know allowed consent is the key
consent of course but as I was you know
starting to write about that it was just
you couldn't write about that you
couldn't write about any of that stuff
without coming across sex trafficking
because suddenly it's become and this
has been a thing that's been brewing for
like 15 or more years now but suddenly
it really really picked up in the around
2010 you know after that so um by 2014
when I started no reason it was just
like anything that had to do with sex
there was people talking about sex
trafficking saying that it was gonna
lead to sex trafficking and proposing
why we need to shut down any and
anything like having to relate with
adults and sex because of sex
trafficking right and so yeah so I
started sort of you know trying to dig
into things first starting with I mean
the numbers behind it and you know it
turns out that there has just been so
much crazy inflation and made up things
with statistics when it comes to this
stuff and if you actually look at you
know what real numbers we do have it's
it's it's ridiculously smaller than the
picture and all the data that they do
have is very unlike just for one example
there's a statistic that goes all around
all the time about how three hundred
thousand kids a year are or being sex
trafficking in the United States or at
risk of being sex trafficked and it
turns out it's from this one study that
wasn't peer-reviewed in like 2001 and
the author counted anybody who lived in
public housing anybody who had a
divorced parent anybody who'd like all
these different things as at-risk for
sex trafficking if they had more than
one factor he counted them twice or
three times and then added all them up
and then that's where they came from
this number and that both him and he's
like national children's groups have
been like please don't use a statistic
it's wrong it doesn't come from anywhere
Oh even the guy that made him gay guy
disavowed it he's just like no this is
not this was a bad study like so um you
know we see that quite a bit right like
even with the the rape on campus numbers
oh yeah even like some of those original
studies the authors have come out and
said like this is not represented
nationally representative it was just a
survey like please don't take its
numbers seriously and even even the
implicit association test guide the
biased guy he's even so that his test
doesn't like accurately predict bias but
yet somehow all these statistics get
used they it's like it's like telephone
right it gets said once and then it gets
mutated again and then
never never it never dies it's like
zombie stats and then it makes its way
into government policy but but before we
get into that can you can you just give
like a working definition of what sex
trafficking is oh sorry yeah I should
probably just back up and say you know
um real quick when people talk about sex
work that's usually sort of a broad
category that includes both legal and
illegal things you know everything from
people who are working at strip clubs
and doing legal sort of you know sexy
photos or pornography to people who are
you know engaging in sexual services for
money um prostitution or what we would
call prostitution sex trafficking
theoretically and when people hear about
it they think of these the worst sorts
of things you know they think of people
being abducted they think of people
being held against their will under
federal definition of sex trafficking
anyone who is under 18 is defined as a
sex trafficking victim if they get paid
for sex or if anyone offers some money
for sex so there doesn't have to be any
force fraud or coercion involved oh god
it's like a girl who lies about her age
on tinder
she's 17 she goes on there she's 18 she
says send me five dollars venmo and I'll
send you like a topless nude she's a sex
traffic victim yes yes 100% and that's
actually like the bulk of the people
that they prosecute in federal courts
are stories like that technically if
you're an adult then there does have to
be an element of force fraud or coercion
involved but that's very dicey and
especially while that while that might
be actually true when it comes to
federal charges it's not at all how they
use it in the media I mean this started
sort of at the federal level and it
seeped down to local news and local cops
and now pretty much I mean if you look
at any headline across the country and
you see a human trafficking operation or
a sex trafficking operation and sting
and then you look at what it says it'll
always say that they arrested a bunch of
people for prostitution
maybe they dressed them bunch of
customers maybe they arrested the sex
workers themselves maybe they arrested
one or two people for being a pimp you
know which is you know taking money from
someone who is in prostitution
it doesn't necessarily involve violence
it can you know they can become a
manager yeah I mean there actually are
there really are though because I'm sex
workers complain that anybody who helps
them out does get charged with well what
you now they say they call them sex
traffickers so if someone drives them a
xanax as a bodyguard they can
charge of it like an adult yeah and
you're driving an adult woman yeah to
meet with an adult customer yeah and all
you're doing is driving the woman to her
herb sex work gig yes and then you're
now a human trafficker or sex trafficker
I mean it depends yet what the charges
are for specifically but yes that's how
they do these operations you'll look and
they'll say you know we arrested this
many people for pimping and related
crimes or sex trafficking related crimes
then you read the stories and it's you
know it's very often anybody who is with
the person and and obviously like I'm
not naive you know I don't think that
everybody was working in sex workers
just has this great relationship with
ever and it's just you know totally
there by choice
obviously there are bad you know bad
pimps out there and bad bad people who
are you know taking advantage of people
and exploiting them but also there are
very good reasons why someone who was in
prostitution especially at a sort of
lower end level and his meeting people
off of you know internet ads and going
to hotels why they would want someone to
be with like especially a guy you know
who's big and it could protect them and
can wait out in the collar and make sure
nothing goes wrong or to do that sort of
thing so I mean it's it's not always in
a exploitive situation but it's always
treated like that right so where do you
think this this hysteria came from I
mean I use hysteria is it a hysteria I
think so what is the point and who's
winning from this and and how does it
play itself out in our national
dialogues and in our in our laws and
then what is what are the negative side
effects yeah so where this came from is
really there was sort of and it's really
fascinating actually there's this paper
that talks all it has all these quotes
from these people when they were passing
the first trafficking anti-sex
trafficking federal law in 2000 and
they're pretty much three coalition's
there was a sort of Human Rights
coalition that was just like we want to
deal with global issues you know we want
to make sure we were giving enough US
resources to stop sex trafficking abroad
and whatever and then there was a group
that was kind of concerned with the
bureaucracy and they were like we want
to make sure we have the right I don't
even know what you know weird federal
grant categories so that we can get
money to victims groups or domestic
violence shelters and whatever within
the United States and then there was the
coalition of sort of Christian
conservatives and evangelicals
conservatives and radical feminists the
sort of anti porn
ninis you know Catherine MacKinnon style
Andrea Dworkin very and
you know sex feminist so they had sort
of teamed up and been working on anti
porn stuff and now they needed a new
issue and they settled on sex
trafficking they settled on being anti
prostitution and there's actually all
this stuff about them sort of talking
and coming to the idea that most
Americans at the time were even becoming
more and more comfortable with the idea
of legalizing or decriminalizing
prostitution and that in order to draw
up support for you know these sorts of
policies they were gonna have to reframe
it as sex trafficking and reframe
arresting the customers of it as ending
demand for sex trafficking
so it's sort of been a concerted
strategy use the radical feminists get
involved and they want to end access to
sexual partners for men it's or they
think that yeah or they're under some
you know that sort of silly like oh by
letting men pay for sex then you're
promoting and objectification of women
reinforcing the patriarchy right exactly
just that all that sort of I'd be remiss
if I let this go without commenting that
it's a the radical feminists tend to
want to sort of enforce the sex cartels
and like it's a way of limiting sexual
access for men whether it's through
pornography prostitution
don't you dare masturbate any of those
things and then you find this very
strange alliance between the religious
right and hard courts or rightist people
teaming up yes with the radical
feminists in order to shame people like
individual actions and consensual sexual
activities yeah when I say radical
feminists I don't mean just like really
really feminists like it's a kind of
specific sect of Furness like I consider
myself a feminist you know there are all
sorts of different kinds but um
definitely but yes so they combined and
they sort of they started pushing this
legislation I mean why it's bad is so
many reasons you know the ones that
we've just been discussing is the fact
that it it catches up a lot of innocent
people who are adults just trying to
engage in consensual sexual activity and
throws them into the criminal justice
system and all sorts of horrible
outcomes and records and you know
sometimes even registered as a sex
offender and all sorts of stuff right
and there's more like this adds an extra
layer of prosecution on the top of just
solicitation and prostitution
they're so they're ramping up the
charges for these things because they're
saying well now we're going for some
people like yeah ramp that you know
penalty up for I mean in in Seattle they
even redefined soliciting prostitution
as soliciting someone for sexual
exploitation or something like that like
it says it in the new town its
exploitive no matter what yeah yeah um
so yes so it's you know bad for sex
workers bad for people who want to pay
for sex or it's bad for sex trafficking
victims because they're spending so much
time you know a they're spending so much
time doing this other stuff with the
money that they're supposed to be using
to try and help people who are actually
in trouble right and be they are driving
things deeper into the shadows with a
lot of their policies and you know
there's a whole lot of different ways
they're doing that but the the net
effect is that it's made people less
willing to you know be customers less
willing to be screened people less
willing to be communicating in open ways
and therefore both makes you know it
more likely for people to be explained
without anyone knowing and harder for
the cops to actually find them and you
know when people are in trouble and then
just at the the larger level though it
there's all sorts of ways that harms
people just not at all connected to the
sex industry or anything okay
because we your politicians have really
learned over the past 15 years that they
can use sex trafficking as a way to pass
pretty much anything and so there's been
every two or three years these giant
bills and at the federal level and also
various state houses and they will tuck
all sorts of stuff into it all sorts of
sort of civil liberties infringement and
various things into it and in terms of
sort of regulating the Internet in terms
of you know sort of surveillance and
creating you know giving giving
government permission to do warrantless
wiretapping on things and various things
and so there's just been a whole and you
know as a result of this - I mean one of
the most recent examples is fast I mean
get into that in a second but it sort of
resulted in people cracking down on
speech and on images online just more
broadly in a way that just affects the
whole internet just affects everybody
because they're so worried about running
afoul of these sex trafficking laws that
now they're just preemptively you know
banning all sorts of speech
you mentioned FAFSA and we're gonna get
to that we're gonna also get to social
media and internet censorship and an
infringement on on freedom of speech but
one thing I wanted to follow up on there
was you you mentioned that they're using
you know jurisdictions are using the
guise of sex trafficking in order to
sort of like pass bills and increase
their budgets do you think that the the
the false threat of sex trafficking has
led in part to the militarization of the
local police forces of they they use
this as a way to get more money and then
ramp up their their budgets and buy more
equipment and get that leftover US
military gear and they're just not it's
not just like the guy walking down the
street with this nightstick like running
it along the fences anymore I mean these
are like heavily equipped heavily armed
serious sort of paramilitary operations
I mean is that are you seeing that as a
result of this sort of madness I think
most of that came from sort of the drug
war and then the aughts that like sort
of terror budgets that police
departments had I don't think a lot of
the the militarization stuff came from
this but what I do see is two things any
departments that hardly we're doing any
sort of Vice stings at all before then
they get these grants to do to do sex
trafficking stings and which just turn
out effectively as vice stings so
they're doing you know
prostitutions things that they wouldn't
before but they also end up sweeping up
just a ton of people I mean they arrest
you all for drugs they adjust you for
driving on an expired license for having
unpaid Court funds I mean every time you
look there's dozens of people so they
sort of just use it as a dragnet to get
anybody who's done anything wrong at a
very petty level these aren't like big
criminals that they're catching it's
like unpaid court fines and then also
the they work with Homeland Security and
ice and with the FBI and with the US
Marshals and all sorts of stuff on these
anti-sex trafficking operations all the
time so they do end up very militarized
in practice he sort of SWAT raids on
hotel rooms I mean there's some footage
of the FBI's operation cross country
which is this big annual and online and
it's it's really disturbing to watch
because it's just this you know gaggle
of men in the Swat gear busting into
there's a woman who looks like she's not
even 18 years old and you know underwear
boy shorts and a tank top and you know
sitting on the bed crying and they're
busting in to arrest her after she just
thought she was you know me you know
customer and it's just it's very it's
very disturbing the way they handle this
and it's very traumatizing the way that
they treat these people who they're
saying well we need to find out if
they're victims and then they often
arrest them and they make them victims
yeah so it's you know it's I mean
obviously we should make it very clear
that like in any instances like kid
being transported and forced in the sex
work and stuff we're obviously very
adamantly opposed to that and we really
would like to see that taken care of but
what we're seeing though is like just a
crazed overstatement of the case
totally inflated facts using this as a
weapon as a way to go after and we're
gonna get to even like the bigger
picture issues but as using it as a way
to go after you know just local people
doing local things that we both at least
in our sort of libertarian perspectives
believe should be left to individual
adults is to decide what's what's good
for them but also and it's you know
people will try to do this all the time
- yeah with with me writing on this
subject try to say you know why do you
care more about them than the victims
why do you care more about these people
and it's like I don't I mean I care
about both and I think that what we're
doing actively harms the victims I mean
especially just because we're not at all
treating the people who need you know
finding the people who are needed
because the people who actually are end
up sort of you know coerced and forced
into prostitution and even occasionally
abducted and things like that and and
it's bad stuff and if they're underage
they tend to be foster children it's
like 75 percent of them come from foster
care or state care because they're just
I guess you know state cares are so
horrible in so many situations that
they're just runaways so they're just
constantly running away and also when it
comes to adults it's usually a domestic
violence sort of situation or very
frequently a domestic violence sort of
situation you know where the person
thinks that they're in love with the
partner and then they're abusing them
and taking advantage of them and taking
their money and making them you know
work in prostitution you know so there's
you know if they don't want to so those
are I mean those are yeah those are
serious problems that I care about those
things that it's like by focusing on the
sudden you know imaginary mythical idea
of sex trafficking
we're not devoting any resources to
those things first and foremost like
figuring out what the heck is going on
with the state you know care of children
that are underage like why is it so bad
that the vast majority of people who are
being who are minors in the sex trade
are supposed to be being taken care of
by the government and meanwhile they're
just spending all their time arresting
adult sex workers instead of figuring
that out it's just like right and you
know a similar thing happens with the
inflated campus rates rape statistics
you know what happens is it distracts
from the real issue and it harms actual
victims if everybody is a victimizer and
everybody is a victim then the people
that are actually suffering from sexual
violence are are not getting the care
attention and resources that they should
get so that's really what this is all
about right now there are actual
follow-on consequences to this that are
even more impactful or more widespread
and so why don't we start talking about
that a little bit what what has evolved
out of this conversation and joined
infused and some weird mad you know
marriage mutated marriage and resulted
in and basically like the end of free
speech too dramatic but it's on it we're
on our way there I mean it's chipping
away at it so we'll start my thoughts
when I get in the back page and all that
now yes so FASTA was a law passed last
year in this in the winter or spring and
it may be in the works for a while and
various forms but they finally got it
through it effectively it was described
a lot as being a law that makes it
illegal to advertise sex trafficking
victims online that is not a thing that
was legal before this law it was not
okay to actively advertise sex
trafficking victims online before this
so I mean that's just--that's crap that
this is what that law did the federal
government explicitly passed the law in
2015 to make it a crime at the federal
level to advertise someone for sex
trafficking if they're a victim of sex
trafficking
um what this what FASTA actually did is
make it a federal crime to host any ad
that facilitates or promotes
prostitution or any kind of any kind not
sex trafficking not forced prostitution
not minors of any kind adult sex workers
you know anything yeah
and by hosting this means like running a
web
site in which people are paying
advertised advertising fees or do they
have to even be so that that's by
hosting it means any being any sort of
online platform that facilitates content
or communication so Twitter Facebook
snapchat Instagram the comments section
on Reason magazine you know email
whatever it's working yeah read it but
but but any you know any sort of forum
if if they Craigslist you know back pay
to shut down our back page but not just
those sort of advertising forums on it
can be you know anything where someone
is it turns out you know engaging in
prostitution or is a victim of sex
trafficking and it's being advertised on
the site then you would be liable and is
it like a misdemeanor
it's a felony right it's like a serious
felony yeah it's a serious it's a
serious federal felony and not only that
but it also carved a hole out of this
thing and we can talk more about this
and if you want to but just for now
carved out a hole in this Val section
230 of the the Communications Decency
Act and so before this you know you
wouldn't be able to you wouldn't states
prosecutors and people with civil
lawsuits couldn't go after these
websites for this so it would just be
you know it wasn't a federal crime
before but say it was you could only go
after the federal government could only
go after them it also opens it up so
that state prosecutors and anyone with a
civil lawsuit can sue platforms for
being for hosting an ad that leads to
their prostitution not sex trafficking
prostitution
so under this someone could go on a
website you know solicit someone for sex
meet them have sex get money and then go
and then sue Facebook or Twitter or
whatever sue that website in civil court
for for violating FASTA and you'd be on
the right side of law and also you know
every every attorney general in every
state could bring you know a case
against these platforms also right so
but this is something obviously the
impacts basically every online platform
right right so I mean yes so that's
that's what's bad for just at the
extreme level like if we see that
happening and we
haven't seen people doing that yet I
think we will definitely see that soon
because Attorney General's have just
been like dying had prosecute people for
online speech that in encourages
prostitution but um the thing we're
seeing right now is that there are such
huge penalties for this and there's you
know yes such liability that they could
face if they are hosting this content
that we started to see people crack down
on all sorts of speech which is why and
you know it's hard to say exactly how
much of any particular new policy is
related to FASTA and some of them
indirectly are it's hard to say on some
of these more recent ones if it's
because of FASTA it's because of
corporate pressures if it's because of
you know European data rules I think
there's different things but you know
tumblr saying that you know no adult
porn or adult sexual contact again the
site Facebook just put out crazy new
sexual solicitation rules which say even
implicit sexual solicitation not for
commercial sex just for like a hookup
banned in consensual ones yeah yeah
consensual non paid just normal people
hook it up and someone pointed out like
this is the site that started off by
saying you could put in your
relationship like looking for whatever
yeah cat the Craigslist is shut down on
the personal stuff you can't talk about
on Facebook you can't transmit
pornography on tumblr anymore Instagram
probably and especially then when it
comes to sites that were sex workers a
specific sites and again not necessarily
talking about prostitution even but
sites where people are just doing you
know erotic modeling you know fetish
modeling sites where people are offering
dominatrixes which you know that's legal
doing a sort of B do something as long
as you're not engaging in you know
sexual but you know so but because it's
very very I mean most people aren't
online being like hi I'm good because
prostitution is still illegal in almost
all parts the United States the ads are
always a little coded nobody's so it's
so hard for an ad to tell if someone's
trying to yeah if they're trying to
solicit prostitution or if they're
trying to just do some legal sex work or
if they're trying to just to have a
hookup or whatever I mean how is these
content moderators that have you know
millions of posts per day through theirs
their services they don't know so
they're just casting a huge net and just
censoring all sorts of speech that's
related and you see even sex educators
like you knows people who are doing sex
education or sex worker rights
organizing they've had a lot of their
stuff get cooked off of Facebook and
stuff like that so I mean things not
even really yeah really because I mean
if you're promoting so the sex worker
rights groups usually promote
decriminalization of prostitution right
if you're promoting prostitution D cream
couldn't you be said to be promoting
prostitution yeah you should be in
violation of FASTA I mean I don't you
know I feel like that case we get thrown
out but I don't think it's above
prosecutors to try and bring a case like
that right right and so all these
platforms are just beginning to take the
like easier approach it's easier it's
easier to to ban all this kind of
communication and messaging than it is
to be like take a stand yeah and fight
and fight lawsuits that are gonna
involve lots of money and a lot of
negative profiles so it's interesting
we're seeing such a D sanitization of
the Internet in general I mean I
remember when I was growing up you know
I remember telnet chat and stuff like
that and Internet Relay Chat and stuff
I'm like old man and you know dialing up
to chat where you could see one
character at a time come across a screen
and I tell you what like the very first
thing to be Baghdad would start start
hooking up and talking about sex and
looking for relationships and like men
chatting me up in a o al chat rooms when
I was like 13 all the time like people
exactly now there's this new sort of
scary dangerous thing too where kids are
being solicited more than ever before
it's like no we just used to say I think
you cheat you teach your kids like
report those people to the site welcome
tell me if anybody's bothering you don't
talk to them but you don't tell them
like you know what we should probably
remake the entire internet so that like
you know kids can go unsupervised
without any chance of an adult ever
saying anything negative right right or
without what your kids are yeah right
exactly yeah so I mean the internet from
day one was about sex and pornography
and now we're trying to like scrub it
out of that completely and that's you
know it's like a cultural thing to I
mean people people seem to be really
down on sex workers and prostitution and
pornography and stuff right now and and
and what more sex more broadly and then
even as though even as
the liberal side of things tries to kind
of pretend to be sex positive about a
lot of things negative yeah I mean it's
like well I mean I think a few years ago
this is kind of died down a little bit
but the whole like SlutWalk you know the
whole life you'd see that but then you
also just see anything coming out of of
the mouths of these are is just that sex
isn't inherently sort of traumatizing
and negative experience I mean I never
so it's yeah well thank you thank you
radical feminists yeah you know it's
interesting I hadn't thought about that
the whole SlutWalk phenomenon has sort
of evaporated hasn't it there's a
there's there's not really like a public
push for like more sexual acceptance
these days it's actually it's actually
the opposite and that's sort of a
manifestation of like kids these days
aren't having as much sex and drinking
as much or driving as much for going on
as many dates or having as much fun or
going outside as much they're just
sitting in their bedrooms on their
phones getting depressed and anxious
well you know I think that's a
phenomenon that can be applied in a lot
of scenarios we're like the more equal
of society becomes then each instance of
inequality gets amplified even more so
groups that have someone to comment tend
to yeah fight or amplify the things that
are then right and and so we see that
sort of in so many different
circumstances that's interesting I
hadn't really thought about that
SlutWalk phenomenon that's cond that's
gone that's gone I know and it would you
would you would feel it would feel out
of context or slightly wrong or
something if it happened again today
yeah yeah I you know I saw I you know I
was in you know grade school and junior
high when the sort of 90s riot girls
stuff was was happening and you know
that that sort of wave of feminism but
you know I I remember like looking at
like bitch magazine and stuff and
they're always like I always I use the
like crocheted dildo covers it was just
like every other ad was for a crocheted
dildo cover but I feel like there was
this version of sort of and that's what
I thought of as being third wave the
wave conversation is not very helpful
cuz I think we all say different things
but you know that's what I thought of
his third wave feminists
you know ii was the 60s through the
Andrea Dworkin porn Wars but now we had
these people who were like interested in
pop culture they were you know yeah
they'd you were like I can wear a
lipstick and dress slutty and it doesn't
not even slutty but I can just pretty
and care about my looks and great
emphasis on choice so it was very
positive towards some sex workers but it
was very positive towards women owning
their sexuality and you know things like
that and I feel like even though it's it
maybe changed it was sort of a steady
trend in that direction and feminism
until recently and then it's just now
then it's changed yeah I think we're
like we're like careening wildly off my
topic list but this is awesome because
because this is actually very
interesting I think I think that part of
the the sort of anti sex element within
the feminist movement has been generated
by their sort of battles over what Trant
the trans issue right and like it's
really it's really put a big divider in
that sort of radical gender feminist
community of like who actually is even a
man who actually is even a woman and if
you're having sex with that person are
you reinforcing the patriarchy and
you're not doing your duty as a feminist
I mean I've gotten a lot of trouble for
talking about sex and feminism and
whether or not feminists have like you
know sexual fantasies that veer towards
you know you know violent or dominating
or whatever like I've got I've dipped my
toe in this conversation before but it
fascinates me to no end that I end up
arguing on behalf of the rights of women
to make their own choices yeah I mean so
that's what and I know now I'm very
enough your topic list even further but
I should use this opportunity to plug I
started a group recently with a with a
woman named Kat Murray and it's called
feminists for liberty and basically our
goal is to promote libertarian feminism
because you know a Bert Aryan friend
every go yeah and you know I've can I
discovered that I was I just sort of
discovered feminism around the same time
I discovered the Praetorian ism and I've
thought that there was never any
conflict between them I've been very you
know I've considered myself both for you
know over a decade now
longer than that even so but I don't
identify with many people and you know
mainstream feminism I think that right
now there's just such a solution to
identify problems that are real but then
reach for the wrong the wrong solutions
to them and then also the tendency which
is just very common in politics across
the board though to then even exaggerate
and you know yet the bad statistic and
that sort of stuff the hyperbole in
service of the solution to the problem
which is about solution anyways
and so I mean I think that one of the
things that I really try to do is focus
on usually people kind of be like that's
just a stupid issue altogether the
feminine feminists are talking about or
like here's the issue and you have to
feel like this way about it or that's it
so I think that you know one of our
things we're trying to do is is try and
not be negative about a lot of the
things that are important to talk about
but try and encourage you know non-state
solutions on sort of a intense
authoritarianism both both from the
state and at a cultural level you know I
think the thing that always struck me
about the evolution of feminism was that
if if to me I always thought it was
about celebrating female agency yeah and
and the ability for women to that that
but they have the capability to make
their own choices I mean it seems absurd
to even like lay it out like this but
they have the capability to make their
own choices and that they should be
empowered to make those choices and then
there's like the third thing that people
don't want to talk about which is like
and then everybody has to live with
their choices right and that includes
other women living with the choices that
other women are making and that's where
I started to see this like inherent
contradiction this sort of like
coerciveness that wasn't that doesn't
jive with some notion of like
libertarian feminism which I love that I
love that idea and and that's when I
found myself like arguing on behalf of
women's agency and women's rights
against feminists which to me is just a
fascinating position to be and so I like
really indulged it and took it that far
but the fact that you have identified a
need for something called
libertarian feminism I think that's
fantastic I'm like
yeah like you know there's a lot of the
classical liberal writers you know sort
of the classical liberal tradition there
was a lot of feminist writers and that
they kind of went by the name into
individualist feminist Scott it's what I
would say until the seventies there was
a Association of libertarian feminists
founded in the 70s so it's been I mean
it's been a strain of and I think a much
bigger strain back win back a long time
ago when there was less you know talk
about things but there's always been
there's always been this tension if you
look at any era of feminism there's
always been this tension between two
sort of groups of feminism and I can
call it like individualist versus
socialist or whatever but I mean
whatever name they take there's one
who's sort of yet once once women to be
protected by either a state or you know
a bureaucracy or thinks of women as a
class that has sort of been historically
downtrodden and then therefore needs
extra protections or whatever or you
know and then there's a class that sort
of says women should be equals under the
law and then that's it like you know we
don't want and so that's obviously on
the lab the former centers the equals
under the law side you know that we
shouldn't be we shouldn't be worrying
about that the equality of outcomes per
se we should be worried about treating
men and women equal under the law so
yeah and I mean this is a poly dump
phrase but I'm gonna test it on you I've
been I heard someone say the thing
recently about how you know feminism is
what feminism is the radical notion that
women are people that that saying yeah
libertarian feminism is the radical
notion that women are people who can
think for themselves right so right
exactly and you know you when you laid
out that first case and you said women
looking to like it's like an appeal to
an authority right to help sort of right
the wrong and I think that we're seeing
that play out in sort of the the on
college campuses where in the 60s and
the 70s they wanted to get rid of the
administration out of the out of the
dorm room and locos parentis however the
phrase was and they fought really hard
to have the choice to do whatever they
wanted which really meant like fuck and
drink and smoke weed and do whatever
they wanted because they were free from
their parents and their their adults now
and then now you've got bias response
teams on campuses and and administration
urging students to narc on each other
and every little sleight and every
little bias is reported to the
administration and you know I've learned
a lot about this stuff through your
colleague Robby
suave Robby swab is work I mean it is
great work on title nine I'll just plug
that right now and and even in my own
experience traveling to different
college campuses getting feedback from
people they're like it's so crazy you
know I won't even try to date somebody
on campus right so it's like that that
feminist strain is like what has won out
in terms of like the power Wars I think
of this appeal to Authority so it's so
like frustrating about it too is that I
mean I get why people are angry
sometimes I don't mean all the time
about all the reasons right but I do
think that women have you know has some
has some damn good reasons to be angry
about certain things and I get why
people are you know kind of I understand
the impulse and not just for women if I
wasn't but to be like we've been treated
this way so therefore we need to go and
correct it we need to have a corrective
and overcorrect but but that inevitably
comes back and you know harms I think
the group that is more marginalized to
begin with because when you're creating
I mean a there's a resentment factor but
I think be when you're creating
disparities between between different
sort of things and creating more
regulations like power will always find
a way to use it so for pecho eight it's
self correct and so I mean even and that
could be that could be in the form of
you know being like well men are still
more in charge so they're gonna end up
finding ways to use it but it or like in
the college thing I mean it doesn't have
to be that because it could be people
that are in administration or colleges
they're just gonna find a way to protect
corporate interests and the you know the
PR school and stuff right they're never
actually gonna care about whatever
social justice or feminist issue like
the kids think that they're gonna care
about they're gonna pretend to and so
that's why it's just like appealing to
yeah appealing to a benevolent higher
power I think to secure your equality is
just always gonna backfire right right
especially when we're going beyond
equality of opportunity which is I think
you could yeah I think they're not they
say that I think saw them actually
believe that they are doing that right I
don't know when I went to the Cavanaugh
protest at the Supreme Court on the day
that he was sworn in and I saw all the
camp
rape reformer people they're giving
their speeches telling lies about how
one in three women on college campus is
one in three now the scare number used
to be one it was one of that's what I'm
saying it was one in five and then it
was one of four now is one in three in
the it was the executive director of end
rape on campus was standing up there in
front of like two thousand people
screaming out that that one in three
women will be a victim of sexual
violence
I used to write about this a lot when I
first started reason two and then I
Robbie and I were both writing about
this stuff and then he ended up sort of
there was he was taking enough gaming I
was like I you know I we were both
fighting about a lot of different I'll
take the heat for this but yes I mean
yeah I did a lot of research into those
studies to it it's they're all so
ridiculous and flawed and right
it's and also again one of the things
that struck me the most reading those
back in the day when they would they're
always sort of publishing here are the
real stories on campus was the people
didn't describe them often as sexual
assault or rape and the only they're
like self reporting right and they would
even have the you know quotes from from
college women saying you know like well
I didn't think of it like that but the
researchers then Anna stick you this one
in The Washington Post which was but
I've seen a lot of them like this and it
was like the research was then if they
said though that a certain set of
circumstances happen you know yeah or
like they had felt uncomfortable not
wanted to but didn't think they could
say something then they just code that
as assault right even if the respondent
said it wasn't right yeah I mean sure
someone could be not saying something
because they were literally feeling
threatened but like often if someone
says oh I just felt on called me a mean
that they just for whatever reason you
know people are very uncomfortable in
communicating in sex and it's like
instead of teaching when I was reading
those things what I was struck by was a
that yeah researchers and you know media
we're not respecting women's agency
young women's agency when it came to
them defining their own experiences but
B that there was a lot of there is
obviously a lot of room among young
people in general to teach them better
sexual etiquette that she said how to
better understand partners cues to
better understand and especially amongst
these women there was so many of them
saying I just didn't know how to tell
them no I so I just froze or I didn't
know what to say I found uncomfortable
just decided to do it and then you know
whatever and it's like assertiveness
like young women I mean anything
probably always but young women today
have still have such a problem with
sexual assertiveness and instead of
focusing on why that is and how he can
correct that everyone's like yep you
know what we should just not expect them
to say no then and we'll just decide but
that's rape if they thought that it was
you know I mean that's literally what
these things are doing and it's yeah
it's right you know let's dig down on
that a little bit where do you think
that this sense comes from that women
shouldn't or can't or incapable of being
assertive in that in those kind of
situations and like who benefits from
that and where's that coming from
I don't know because yeah I don't
understand I mean I think that they're
probably it's one of those things
sometimes where like there was a few bad
examples that are that are real and so
people take those and try to shove that
and like you know obviously there are
situations where someone has been too
incapacitated literally in capacity you
know unconscious drunk and or you know
or was so traumatized because of
previous whatever and I mean there are
situations like that and the person
hasn't been in trouble and I don't know
so like the thing that comes to mind to
me like his louis c.k right like he
basically would just like whip his dick
out and start jerking off in front of
girls but like they could have just
gotten up and left but then they didn't
they just sat there and then they blamed
him for it later
I mean sure you don't hey if you don't
want to do it don't say no get up and
leave I mean isn't it that easy and I
remember the Z zones are a thing too and
I kept telling to myself that that was a
case in which the woman could have just
gotten up and left but she didn't cuz
she wanted it well I don't I don't mean
she wanted like the size she wanted she
wanted to continue to be there straight
she wanted to have a good impression of
her if she weren't him to act
differently and he wasn't acting
differently but well and I think and
this is again sort of one of the things
where it's like okay how can we look at
this in a way that is you know um
constructive from him from this point
like I look at this and I see not that
it's just that that women do have a
problem with this assertiveness and it's
like why yeah why is that even in those
situations the comedians and the Izzy's
I'm sorry thing like I mean I think that
yes I tend to read this and I get so mad
sometimes and my first thing is just
like
just leave just go then you think about
it you're like I don't know the
circumstances right and so for whatever
reason if we assume these people are
telling the truth you know forgive him
the better for the doubt they did feel
like they say they really did feel like
that so why is that because even if they
didn't in particular some people really
do there are a lot of women it seems
nowadays who really feel like just
telling some man know is gonna get them
assaulted or killed or whatever I mean I
think that there I'm shocked Holly
people does seem to really believe this
so it's like what is going on and how do
we solve that instead of just be like
right well I think that the part of it
is the hysteria right the hysteria
around sex trafficking the hysteria
around rape numbers it's the hysteria
around all sex is about power all sex
could be rape like I mean even the more
the most radical ones out there will say
that all penetrated sex is rape but you
know there's definitely trade war can
never said that no not dworkin but the
crazy the crayons you know and and
clearly that's not the case so yeah
there's just a lot of fear and I think
that a lot of people are not bad who are
spreading and I think there are just
like yeah a lot of average young women
out there who actually just are fucking
scared because they're but yeah there's
there's people who are concertedly
making an effort to spread that and
that's the people who I think deserve
the blame and right now well you know
they'll say well men are much more
likely to commit acts of violence well
yeah no shit cuz men and women are
different and men are aggressive but
that's not to say that in like every
situation in which a woman says no that
like an assault is like you know sure to
follow immediately thereafter I mean and
that's what that's what I think that
some of this yeah this is like so much
fear-mongering has convinced women that
that will happen and so then you have
them having sex that they don't want to
have or stay in situations they don't
have because they think it's gonna get
worse if they leave really right and
this this is a great example of how
misdirected rage and fear are actually
creating more victims than they're
actually helping yeah well I mean that's
a subject that I could talk about quite
a bit and I and I have you know I
started my writing definitely was around
some of these subjects but it's great to
talk to somebody who has both a feminist
perspective
in perspective and you know the the
experience in these sort of markets and
information zones as it were to
understand the history of what's been
going on and to see it holistically
without without having a real tainted
advocates position which is what you
find all these stats all this
information all of it all comes from
advocacy organizations that are
dependent upon their funding that is
dependent upon people being afraid so
that's another thing with the sex
trafficking stuff driving that panic to
you know I said the groups that were
driving it at first I think now is
pretty much all comes down to money
because there's been a whole industry
built up of tons of nonprofits that are
getting so much money bonus exists
exclusively on federal grants contingent
and police forces that are getting the
money contingent on either making
arrests and calling them sex trafficking
stings and sex trafficking arrests or
with you know getting grants to create
awareness about the problem the problem
has to be getting bigger or you have to
be you know in order to keep demanding
money for awareness so it's just yeah
right you know every time I Drive to
Richmond or go down 95 and I stop
there's this rest stop and you stop in
there and then like above all the
urinals in the men's bathroom are these
signs that say like signs that people
are being sex trafficked and I'll have
you know I think about you every time I
see those signs so I wanted to take this
conversation and move it a little bit a
little bit more forward when and get
into section 230 social media publisher
versus platforms so just pretend for me
that like none of my listeners or me or
I know anything about what 2:30 means
what a platform is what a publisher is
and can you just like walk us through
that and then sort of set up the crisis
that we're facing right now yeah so it
was um you know it was part of the
Communications Decency Act of 1996 and
it said that no Internet service
provider should be treated as the
speaker of the speaker or publisher of
content treated or posted by a third
party and unless you know unless they
created that content
it's you know the legalese surrounding
it is sort of complicated but basically
what it's saying is that any sort of
internet platform and the words here are
kind of hard to use to write cuz it's
like what do you call Twitter or what do
you call different things like that's
the crux of it all right and I mean I
think a reason reason is a publisher
reason is literally a news outlet right
but we were protected by section 230 in
our comments so let me just back up real
quick what section 230 does in effect it
says that any of these online platforms
from yeah you know any sort of Internet
service provider online messaging board
anything like that that has
user-generated content cannot be found
liable in state court or in civil cases
for offenses that happen because they
there's their platform was open for that
kind of speech John it so if I posted
something on on you know Twitter and I
was like I am gonna come and kill you
and then I got arrested for making truth
that's against you Twitter couldn't be
held responsible offense right right you
know if if I post an ad on Craigslist
and I was like hey you want to meet and
hook up and then I raped you
Craigslist wouldn't be responsible for
that right so without this law people
who were you know who facilitated the
speech there were sort of neutral
facilitators of the speech that ended in
criminal conduct could be held liable
and you can see why that would prevent
you know pretty much any of the internet
as we've known it today from having
developed right and it's been really
really essential for the building of the
social internet blogs
I mean comment sections on things
everything like that has been really
dependent on section 230 existing um to
to just quick notes on that is that it
doesn't one thing is that there are some
exceptions and it doesn't prevent people
from liability for federal crimes so you
know if some of a platform is um and
there's special things for IP and
pornography related crimes and try child
born so you know you can't just host
child porn and they'd be like well you
know we didn't put it there so I mean
that's that's and if there's there's
exceptions like that that exist for
federal crimes but not for the state
crimes and not for suing people in court
well what about didn't we just say that
the publishers or the platforms are now
responsible
for the sex trafficking stuffers yes so
that was the first big carve out that
we've had in this eye in a long time and
so they carved it out so now yes you you
do not get section 230 protections if
you are hosting content that facilitates
prostitution okay so I've got a blog and
in the comment section two people
solicit each other for some sort of a
transaction sex transaction I am now
responsible for yes and there are a lot
of people who want to carve out other
exceptions for various other things too
you know you've seen it everything from
in Vkontakte about that bias is a big
one but but there wasn't on the sort of
liberal side are people talking about
you know for people who facilitate gun
crimes if there's a mass shooter if the
mass shooter you know posted anywhere on
a message board beforehand about his gun
collection or whatever you know you
could hold the site liable on hate
speeches would be when people want to
carve out inspections for hate speech
and I hope people can't see what I'm
doing air I'm always guilty of doing
that air quotes while on the podcast
does not work does not work so they want
to carve out these exceptions for that
and the other side the other just really
important thing to note about section
232 is that it specifically states that
good faith efforts to moderate content
do not disqualify someone from section
230 protections so if you have you know
words that are banned on your site or if
you have Terms of Service that say this
kind of content you can pretty much pick
any sort of Terms of Service you want
and try to enforce them and doing that
and trying to filter out content that
violates those or trying to filter out
content that is illegal does not mean
that just because you tried to you know
banned some of that content and maybe
you did banned some of it and failed to
ban other parts of it just because
that's the nature of processing there's
so many yeah then you aren't you know
suddenly liable okay and that's the big
understanding I think a lot of
conservatives have right now with you
know calling out social media companies
for for bias and so they've been saying
oh we need to you know we need to do
something about this because they're
they're acting like a publisher or not a
platform and they shouldn't be liable
for a section 230 protection but that's
a very fundamental misunderstanding of
how this works yeah so let's talk about
that argument a little bit so with
the way that Twitter I mean less you've
got let's use Gavin McGinnis for example
so Gavin McGinnis has recently been
banned from YouTube which was his last
social media cow was banned from Twitter
ban from Instagram Facebook he's been
he's been basically wiped off the
internet he got fired from his job at CR
TV and they took down his entire back
catalogue now that's a completely
separate issue right that's like a
private employer hiring somebody in a
private basis they can do whatever they
want it's wrong it's stupid I cancelled
my see our TV subscription because of it
but still and so he's been banned and
there are people that would argue that
he has been banned because he's saying a
particular thing and if he's saying a
particular thing and they're saying it's
hate speech and whatever and a proud
boys are an extremist group even though
now the FBI came out and said that they
are not classified as like an extremist
or a hate group but what there's what
people will argue is that by selectively
taking people off of their platforms
YouTube and Twitter are effectively
pushing a certain kind of content while
restricting a certain kind of content
and therefore have become publishers and
that platforms right right so what do
you think about that well whether or not
that is true and that they I mean I
think it's definitely true that they
have certain proclivities in certain you
know norms of speech that yes they
respect and they are not necessarily I
mean equally applied I don't I don't
think there's all of the bias that a lot
of people say there are but I think
there are certain you know different
platforms have different norms of speech
that they enforce in different ways and
so people saying that and pointing that
out sure but that doesn't make them a
publisher for the purposes of this law
okay because like I said like um you
know actual magazines are protected by
section 230 Reason magazine is protected
for our comments right for our comments
so not for the actual stuff but that
stuff that we pop you know write the
stuff that users this we're still
talking about things that users post on
Twitter it's not like Twitter created
this certain sort you know sort of
content and then said you know they're
there this is concept posted by users so
saying that they are allowing or not
allowing a certain sort of speech it
just it doesn't matter
for terms of section 230 protections got
it it's a different issue and I mean I'm
very sympathetic to I hate you know the
sort of idea that we should do platform
people from from all across all the
social medias because we don't like what
they're saying you know I think that you
know I don't hardly agree with Gavin
McGinnis on much of anything but I'd you
know yeah I don't think that I think
he's a libertarian too but you know I
but that's but that's a separate issue
from the section 230 thing and that's
what's so dangerous is that I think
people have been trying to say like well
now we need to you know do something
about section 230 because it's allowing
this to happen and it's like do you
understand the alternative because it's
horrible right the alternative is that
you know if if the government has much
then the government has much more say
over what anyone on any of these
platforms can say and and so I mean I
was trying to say like if conservatives
think it's bad right now that you know
private companies are you know kicking
off people for various things like
imagine if the federal government is in
charge at bureaucrats in the federal
government are in charge of moderating
content you're just gonna have the same
problem we talked about with foster
earlier which is that there's just gonna
be almost no even second thought about
whether we should allow anything that's
reported if something gets reported
they're gonna they're gonna ban it you
know I mean they're gonna they're gonna
err on the side of you know harm so yeah
this is I'm kind of mixing things
because obviously the federal
government's not gonna be running
Twitter directly right what I'm just
saying when you invite and when you
invite then when you invite people to be
able to prosecute websites for for the
way that they you know moderate content
then you were there's only gonna be so
much more content moderation right well
I think the argument is actually maybe
coming at it from a different
perspective which is they want to use
the hammer of the 230 tip force these
sodas like platforms into not moderating
right into into leaving often right
right and because if your mom if you're
moderating you're modulating your
moderated you're modulating and then
your but so you're crafting a message
but I mean they specifically say you are
allowed to moderate content
that it without it because you can
create a Terms of Service I mean these
are private platforms they're allowed to
craft a message they're allowed to say
only people I know I blog about their
day I was like if you wanted to Chris
you know say we are a social platform
you know we're creating that's just like
Twitter but like only Amish redheads who
are into BDSM and koalas can write here
like it sounds like a party yeah and if
you post about you know BDSM and Amish
people but like panda bears they'd be
like no right right but would they be a
platform or a publisher yeah it's not
about it's not about not being able to
set rules it's about who creates the
content okay interesting so this is why
the big thing with Backpage has been you
know a thing because they filtered out
ads that said certain words right so
let's this is a great segue and let's
just put wrap a bow on this last one the
reason why I wanted you to bring this up
is because I hang out with a lot of
people on the right who are very I think
rightfully scared of being deep
platformed I suspect at some point I'm
gonna get kicked off of Twitter I mean
if they go if they're even like looking
at like your offline activities and
looking at your past deleted posts and
whatever I mean you know someday the
hammer might come for me but you know I
hang out a lot of people that are really
concerned about that and a lot of them
are I want to use this argument that
Twitter through their mod moderation and
through their content sort of window
Overton Window I guess not really but
they're the window that they're opening
is becoming a publisher and therefore
subject to all kinds of laws as a way to
force them to not moderate content
you're saying that that argument is just
dead on arrival
yeah yes and you can look I mean there's
been a bunch of people writing about
this on online over the past couple of
weeks too and people who are actually
like First Amendment lawyers and so Pat
ken white is one of my favorites and
very libertarian leaning formal federal
prosecutors say that say his name again
please his name is Ken white and you
know it's just yeah it's it's a
fundamental misunderstanding of how of
how section 230 works okay I don't mean
to dismiss the problem that people are
talking about and
you know I think yeah like the way we
are the way we are treating people on
websites and the way we are sort of the
mob sort of you can you know get kicked
off for if people go out for you but
there's plenty of they're not even the
enforced I agree that things are not
right for us right yeah sure God do not
mess with section 230 people right yeah
and and this is this is one of the main
reasons I want to talk to you is I
wanted to get that issue out there and
you know I'm not coming at this from
right or left perspective I just want
like accuracy yeah the truth and so I'm
glad that we got that cleared up so now
so now we're gonna we're gonna we're
gonna continue building this
conversation we're now we're building oh
it's a back page right and now back page
contains all these things that we've
been talking about it contains sex
workers it has you know solicitation
issues it has quote human trafficking
issues it has 230 issues it has
published her platform issues it has the
big hand of the government coming and
doing stuff it's got all kinds of things
going on so can you like sort of queue
this up for us and give us a little
background on the back page does it work
yeah well so I mean right now the the
two guys who are in charge of back page
are are in Arizona in Maricopa County
with ankle monitors around confined to
the confined to the County facing
federal money laundering and conspiracy
charges and for facilitating
prostitution so just to say that common
misunderstanding people think that they
have been or are charged with sex
trafficking and you know what they're
not they're charged with for running
this website that had online adult ads
including escort ads including
prostitution is and obviously sometimes
ads for people who are and I say
obviously because just like on any site
you know it's impossible to get people
to real ages to get minors not to post
on them unless you're requiring IDs and
even then there's a people have fake IDs
so it's really impossible to completely
filter out underage people posting so
basically they ran a newspaper and in
the like Craigslist right people I think
yeah people they're not familiar with
Mike back page most people know what
Craigslist is right there's like all
different categories like for sale Help
Wanted and one of them was a adult got
it okay so they didn't create any other
con
they didn't create any of the content so
the guys who started it yeah I should
back up to say about them that they
started a alternative weekly newspaper
in Phoenix in the 70s and then went on
to own like 20 of them including the
Village Voice at various and all over
the country so um they were very very
libertarian leaning newspapers that were
just you know speaking truth to power
but not not very you know idiotic adjust
you know against government corruption
and all the cities they were in very
cool sounds cool to me yeah I mean I I
was just I got to read a bunch of that
in reason there was always it was just
fascinating there yeah but they you know
when when the internet came Craigslist a
lot of there a lot of their newspapers
like many free alternative papers
especially like in the you know 80s and
90s and early eldon's were supported by
advertising classified advertising in
the back of the paper
and when Craigslist came along it killed
that so they launched back page as an
online competitor just you know
associated with their various site so
would be the classified section of their
newspapers online and then eventually it
became popular so it started spreading
to other cities where they didn't have
newspapers and then that became their
sort of main thing they ended up selling
the company The Village Voice company
and all the papers back in 2011 and just
um
owning back page okay so back page yet
itself did not publish any content it
was just an online classified anybody
could create a created account with
either your email address or phone
number and then you post an ad for
anything including there were adult
section ads and that's what's drawn all
the fire the Attorney General's the
state attorney general's there's there's
an association of them called nag and so
nag wanted Craigslist to shut down its
Adult ADD section and it pressured them
and he pressured them and pressured them
and finally it Craigslist caved after it
got hauled into Congress and had to
testify and all the stuff there was just
federal pressure and state pressure and
it caved and it closed it and after that
they started went after back page and
the Craigslist people shut down their
Adult Services section and their and
their personal ads on the personal ads
last year okay
so this year I was the funny face yes so
they shut down the adult section back in
2009
okay and after that there are still
adult ads on on Craigslist as anybody
who looks good no you just went over the
to the dating section or the personals
the casual encounters section it was
just 180 roses but but so a lot of but a
lot of the adult and art market also
does it go over the back page so then
the nags started going after them and
saying you need closer ads you need
clothes there doll beds and you know
there's there's all these quotes from
their lawyers at the time being like
look we want to help stop bad stuff we
obviously want help stop underage
prostitution we want to help stop you
know exploitation on our site but like
this isn't gonna do it we're shutting
down even if even if you're against
prostitution this isn't gonna stop it
because you can see the example of
Craigslist like there has to be some
other ways and so they refused and that
really got a lot of people mad right but
didn't didn't the back page guys
cooperate with law enforcement officials
yeah so that's one of the things is that
that has ended up getting them in
trouble too and this is what's so
summers about things is that they from
from that time they started really I
mean they met every few months with the
National Center for Missing and
Exploited Children they answered they
said I think something like a hundred
subpoenas a day from different law
enforcement around the country they
worked very closely with the DOJ and the
FBI they let them post fake ads for
stings to try and catch sex traffickers
he turned over you know probably cuz
they had the records the credit card
information
well first they weren't letting as be
free but then they said please charge
for these ads because we want
information so they did
oh they started sending you they'd send
all the information to the to the cops
if they if they had a subpoena and
they'd also anytime makes suspect that
anyone have been under 21 their madres
they would send that add to the you know
block it and send it to the National
Center for Missing Exploited Children so
they very much helped and they also
banned a lot of words words that were
directly for illegal services like you
know I want to have sex for money or
something you know right but also a lot
of words they ban at the specific
request of lawmakers and the National
Center for Missing Exploited Children
it's so long to say because they were
like these ads indicate underage and
some of them were just sort of dumb and
I don't think they actually do but but
but you know they were just like
whatever fine yeah well be a teen
exactly because like a lot of I mean
all teens aren't unrated a lot of sex
workers use things like barely legal as
like marketing it doesn't mean that
they're you know but so the bank barely
is still great it's still legal
so they they banned all these words too
and all of these things they have
prosecutors are now you and have used
against them they said oh well you
started charging for ads because you
want a profit off of child sex
trafficking and they're like no no we
started charging for ads because you you
know literally told us to do that
they'll say well they let people write
an ad that says this word that indicates
the child sex trafficking in it and then
they strip out the word but they still
at the ad go through and so that shows
that they actually want to hide South
child sex trafficking because they would
you know strip out the word or whatever
it's like those words because you yeah
fine if they if you think that words you
know looks bad or whatever you know so
they would do these things and pretty
much every step they took to help now
they're trying to use against them which
is just they started on after they they
there was a sheriff who got the credit
cards to stop doing business with them
and they wouldn't
so then Visa and MasterCard and AMEX
wouldn't work with the Slayer anymore so
then they started accepting Bitcoin for
ads and then they've been like well you
only started as something bitcoins that
you could further try and facilitate
like illegal things like be shifting
Bitcoin cuz the sheriff like right
threatened in and it went all the way
through the federal court and it was
ruled unconstitutional that he did that
but it was too late already business so
what you got is like guys who own this
newspaper they're doing everything that
they can to coordinate with law
enforcement they're they're letting
people run stings they're durs
responding to subpoenas they're
transmitting information and they're
basically doing everything that they can
to prevent the sex trafficking okay from
happening things involving minors well
still having a platform where people can
you know to consult sex work right legal
sex work and you know obviously probably
some that's not legal but is consenting
between adults right right so nobody's
being exploited per se in that case so
what do you you know what do you think
drove this prosecution of them and
or the motivations and who are the
players in the bigger picture of what's
going on here with these guys in the
back page a couple of different things -
I mean I think you just said sort of
some of the general you know all the
like we were talking about earlier the
sort of general hysteria around this
issue and they kept needing to find new
targets and like I said the Association
of attorneys general especially the guy
who was in charge of it was the
Washington State one and he'd made this
his like signature issue so he put a lot
of effort going into Craigslist and put
it all these press releases saying we're
gonna get him to do this and then they
didn't anybody else things saying we got
him to do that so I think a back piece
just pissed people off by not just doing
what law enforcement said you know like
they just wouldn't do what they said and
they were like if you would have just
moved the adult section and let the
other stuff happen I think you probably
been fine but they were like no so then
they you know they really started going
after it and then you have people in the
federal government who started sort of
making it their signature issue too and
you know back page presented a very good
scapegoat for for everything so I think
that you just had it become a very
convenient target for something that
people wanted to talk about this is a
really really cynical part too but at
the there's a couple of people who are
you know in every single state and
federal testimony about FASTA passing
FASTA and about why back patientsí be
shut down all this stuff you have these
parents whose daughters ran away and
ended up working selling sex and had ads
on craigslist and backpage and other
places and then when they came when
police found their kids please actually
found the kids through they were I think
one of almost fifteen or one of them was
16 they found them through back page ads
that they had posted and they were able
to get their information through back
page and find them and return them to
their parents and the parents sued back
page and they lost because of section
230 okay and we've had various attorney
generals try to sue back page two and
it's there's you know I want to say ten
maybe more cases in federal court and in
every single one the judges said like
look that they are this is they're
protected from this because of section
230 I mean they did not the the ads did
not say these were underage girls the
girls said that they were above age you
know things like that so it's there was
there was no way of knowing really and
so
they were you know not liable for it and
the people who actually were guilty of
exploiting them these girls had pimps
both of them they were found guilty and
went to prison and so like there are
people being punished for this right and
those people were found with the help of
Backpage but these people don't have a
lot of money these sort of petty pimps
that are that were in this particular
case or in general when I see these
cases you know they don't have deep
pockets these sort of guys who are
hustling and you know maybe have like
two teen girls who are working for them
I mean they're scum and they also don't
have a lot of money from being scum and
so they're don't have a lot of payout
for civil asset forfeiture purposes or
for victims to get awarded in civil
court okay so a lot of money back page
and other internet sites and tech giants
so I think the goal has been all along
at some level for some groups to be able
to I mean you specifically have one of
the moms who said this and at the
hearing and Congress saying like I want
us I lost my civil suit they both lost
civil suits against package I lost my
civil suit and like I want to be able to
get money from them right and so there's
just you know I know she's hurt and it's
you know had her daughter go through
this and looking for someone else to
blame other than the actual person but
like at a certain point it also is just
like you can't and that guy who was
supposed to pay like five thousand
dollars it hasn't really paid very much
of it he's paid some though you can see
that it's in the court thing but you
know they were asking for like a million
from Backpage so I just think that
there's there's a lot of that right you
know you and I have had talks about this
before the podcast and the name Kamala
Harris came up what talked about her
role her role in Back Bay she's my
favorite person to and I think that if
she is seriously running for president
we have a moral obligation to talk about
her as much as possible so what what
what was her involvement in this whole
in this whole shenanigans here yes so
she was one of the when she was Attorney
General of California until 2016 or
until 2017 she was one of the people who
was very big on with the other Attorney
General's talking out about Backpage and
saying you know it's the world's largest
online brothel and all this stuff we
must shut it down we must shut it down
she was one of the Attorney General's
assigned a letter asking Congress this
is back in
2013 I think to get rid of section 230
so that they could sue back page that's
specifically what I said it was like
you've got to amend section 230 so that
we can sue back page and Congress was
like no no I can do that right now
and so then Kamala Harris brought
charges against back page under the very
theory that she I mean she knew it was
illegal she knew that the Constitution
barred this because they had already had
these courts say that a bunch of times
and then she'd asked Congress to be like
can you change the law so that this is
okay they said no and so she just did it
anyways so this was and I think the
first charges were in 2020 16 she
brought money laundering and pimping
charges or assisted pimping charges
against the CEOs and the heads of
Backpage and assisted pimping yes and
the because because of the same thing
you know where there were ads for people
who ended up you know but not you know
back page had no knowledge of them
whatever that kind of thing so again a
judge threw the case out and said no
this is unconstitutional like you were
not allowed to do this and then this was
right in 2016 right during the elections
so she was she arrests she had them
arrested right before she was a you know
election week and she got her name in
all the earth so she she knew that
something was against the law she filed
a lawsuit that she knew was unlawful and
then she arrested people for violating
right before the election on the same
yes
Kamala Harris and December by December
the judge threw the case out December
27th she's got like three days left as
Attorney General of California she
brings another charge more charges
against them pretty much the exact same
charges but like very slightly different
in another court she lumpin does this
already thrown out the pimping and
facilitating prostitution part of that
he did let the money-laundering charge
stand this small and so it was just like
but it was like yes she just was not
gonna it didn't even care about the law
just wanted to make just want to make a
name for herself and you know she made a
name for herself during the Senate
Judiciary
hearings I'm Brett Kavanaugh that's for
sure she was one of us she was there
during the Backpage hearings in 2017 -
she'd just gotten to Congress yeah she's
like the Queen grandstander and
apparently you're telling me she's part
of this Nags organization - so she was
so she's like queen nag yes Queen Mad
Kamala Harris Queen mag I just can't
when it came to criminal justice issues
in California and now she's trying to
sort of remake herself as this you know
very very enlightened
she was anti pot decriminalization also
wasn't she
yeah I mean she specifically was anti
pot accumulation anti prostitute and
Ukraine she specifically was anti
letting people out of jail or pain thing
about Oh letting people out until early
because she we needed their labor in
prison yeah advocating for slavery but
like okay let's go up through back page
and call them you know and I think this
is what has disconnected so many people
from the new progressive left within the
Democratic Party is that it's know that
when I was younger if you wanted to if
you wanted to be in support of civil
liberties then you were a Democrat right
if you wanted to support gay guys
getting Marian or whatever if you wanted
to be against the drug war you know if
you want it to be about freedom and
liberty for yourself that what you that
was like a democrats position that's
what I remember but now now that it
seems like the far left progressive and
I don't want to get you in trouble for
coming on my podcast but I'm gonna rant
just a little bit the the far left
progressives seemed to be more about
abdicating curtailing civil liberties
than sort of releasing them from from
the control the government and I think
for me personally once once a gay
marriage was off the table and now that
the pot decriminalization seems
relatively imminent in the next I don't
know two to four years maybe federally
the those social issues no longer like
confined me to being a Democrat and
that's sort of like allowed me to
participate in new political coalition's
and there's no way I could participate
in a in a democratic political coalition
that includes something like Kamala
Harris who doesn't care about civil
liberties who doesn't care actually
following the law is all about
grandstanding and pandering and we're
seeing more and more of that I think
interestingly I mean this is where I
tend to get along better though with
socialists you know then I do with like
mainstream Democrats and progressives
okay because at least most of the people
who I know who are socialists I mean
it's like we tend to disagree on
economic issues and that's you know
that's not nothing but like that's a
political disagreement it's not like
whatever they tend to be less of the
like you're a bad person if you don't
you know if you don't say this or
whatever and they tend it I mean they
hate come out Harris it's tend to be
very good on the civil liberties issues
in a way that most of the Democrats and
progressives aren't so it's it's
interesting because yeah right I feel
like there's more there's more
sensibilities they're the same when it
comes to them but I mean I'm not talking
about like I know we see people just see
like these protesters like out and they
think of that but like wow that's a
really good like leftist contingent of
criminal justice or formers who are not
ridiculous and who are like actually
you're able to build a coalition
libertarians are able to build a
coalition with them I think yeah well I
would love myself I would love to see
some element of criminal justice reform
I'd love to see some pot
decriminalization I'd love to see as a
truly a libertarian and in many ways I
would look just to see less government
involvement and as many is it many
things as possible just just stay out of
our way and so I have I have one one
question on the minds a little bit
scrambled on the FAFSA Fausta 230
publisher platform stuff how how did
Backpage get caught up if the law was
very clear and it said as a platform
you're not responsible for the content
of user-generated content how did how
did Backpage get caught up specifically
[Music]
having anything to do with section 230
or FASTA they arrested the people back
page right around after when FASTA
passed I think this was sort of
intentional because they'd been saying
we need FASTA to go after back page
people have been say no you don't and
you know but but a lot of lawmakers have
been making that case the Department of
Justice is even like don't pass this
bill as is because it'll make it harder
to prosecute but there are people who
had been doing a lot of grandstanding
about it both Republicans endemic
and they were like no we gotta pass it
so uh and the people from back Pedro
arrested right a week later so I think
people think that it had to do with it
but the law hadn't even been signed by
Trump yet when that happened they were
arrested on money laundering and in
conspiracy charges which is what people
have been going after prostitution for
for the longest time I mean if you think
of actual and I don't I don't want to
call them a prostitution ring right I
mean because this is very different with
them but you know when you think of any
sort of actual prostitution ring over
time or or when you look at actually the
90s and when there are a lot of like
call serve it like escort services or
call into and stuff in the yellow pages
yeah yeah I mean they've ever looked
they've always gone after them under
money laundering and conspiracy charges
because pretty much money laundering is
just like making a procede from
something illegal so if you know sex
workers criminalize and you're making
money from sex work that anything you do
with that money you put it in a bank
using it to buy more stuff for your
business like if you paid for you know
advertising emphasis future your money
yeah then your money laundering so
that's what they know that's what
they've got the back page people on is
just the charges that they've gone after
people throughout this a long time got
it and it has their case concluded or
they think we're they convicted oh no
they they're putting them through the
wringer they uh they were like let's go
to trial and the Michael Lacey and Jim
Larkin the back page guys and then I'm
like no plea deal yeah they don't want a
plea deal and they think that the
prosecutors are trying to get them to
accept the plea deal by dragging this
out they have those the trials not
scheduled till 2020 okay and that was
like right off the bat the prosecutors
are like all right here's your ankle
well first they did what about about on
bail but then I did and they were like
here's your ankle monitors
you're not going to try out till 2020 in
the meantime they've been trying to take
all their assets and get their lawyers
disqualified oh nice oh yeah real
heavy-handed tactics right what did you
see uh you know prosecutors do that all
the time especially the Trump Miller
thing I mean they're just grinding
people down and liberals love the
thought the left the Liberals and the
Democrats love the FBI now - right all
the photos they come on guys right just
the day after the action all of a sudden
you love the cops yeah go for it this is
what I wish we'd see less of from both
sides cuz I feel like it's just
you know I'm getting enough to watch it
happen with either side just be like
whatever the other side isn't power it's
like they just forget all the lessons
that you know or when they're not in
power they just forget and it's so well
they're the opposition so they use all
the opposition tools that they have at
hand and it doesn't matter it's not
ideological it's just like being opposed
yeah yeah well Elizabeth we have covered
so much ground here we've had a lot of
salt all the other problems of you know
I think so doesn't charge no no no you
know we've known each other for a couple
of years we met at a press conference a
couple years ago and we've stayed in
touch and I think that we've always sort
of shared some similar sensibilities
especially when it comes to civil
liberties when it comes to female agency
and independence and you know I would
never recommend that my daughter go into
prostitution but if some woman out there
decides that that's the best thing for
her at that time they know you know I
support that kind of decision and and I
think that we've we've also sort of
always had like a an appreciation for
the overlap between sex and politics and
stuff and so it was really a pleasure
for me to come down here to the reason
offices what city I'm gonna take a
picture of this thing so that I can post
it with the with the blog post but
there's literally like half of the human
body with like a Godzilla face with a
half of a Godzilla face on it and then
he's wearing like a police uniform and
every so often I'm talking to Elizabeth
here and then I out of the corner of my
eye I see this like Godzilla we filmed
Stephanie everything TV so there's a lot
of props and costumes but the minikin
has been it used to have legs you can
see they're over in the corner although
the other half of the bodies had various
costumes on and this is by far the worst
I think I mean it's really it's really
it's really been distracting me whether
we've done well here in the window Bay
and we've got
an hour-and-a-half here of great
discussion we really work through all
the things I want to talk about with in
terms of sex work and freedom and
liberty and the freedom of speech
publisher versus platform Twitter and
social media censorship and all the rest
I really appreciate you taking the time
it was really great weird where can
people find your work what's the best
way to get in touch with you what's the
what's what's the word you should visit
reason.com reason to read my work and
reasons work in general because we are
all about a lot of the things were
talking here today just across the board
yeah you Robby suave his work and just a
lot of my colleagues writing on these
issues yeah and you can find me on
Twitter at E and brown and if you want
to get in contact with me my contact is
on there and my DMS are open I'll
probably regret saying that but and you
should also follow a feminist Liberty on
Twitter and that's a side the
libertarian feminist group I was telling
you guys about awesome very cool well
thank you thank you very much again and
I hope that we have a chance to continue
this conversation in another few months
when when something else terrible
horrible happens maybe I'm gonna have to
interview you next time for the feminist
for liberty podcast we're gonna I would
love you I'd be very happy to do that
thanks very much for your time and I
really appreciate it and hopefully we'll
do this again soon
[Music]