all right you guys we are back it is
Jack Murphy this is the Jack Murphy live
podcast you can find me on Twitter at
Jack Murphy live or website Jack Murphy
live.com Facebook YouTube Instagram Jack
Murphy live all over the Internet I
planned it that way and then also come
check out our all men's organization
based on three core values - or comm
today I am so excited I've got somebody
on the show I've been trying to nail
down for a couple of months he is a
fantastically interesting guy with very
important work his name is Joe Norman
and he is a PhD and he studies studies
complex systems and brain sciences he's
got a PhD he's done a lot of great work
you can find him on twitter at nor monix
joe thank you so much for joining me man
how are you doing jack thanks for having
me I'm doing pretty good and sorry had
to chase me for a couple months there
been a while a couple of months you know
obviously generally but also
specifically in my case so yeah yeah
yeah you've got you've got young kids
and you've got to get a fire on your
property and then there's the pandemic
going on and so you're in high demand
and you got a lot of stuff going on so
thanks for taking the time to talk to us
I really appreciate it as I like to do I
want to learn a little bit about you Joe
you know we've been exchanging on
Twitter for a while and frankly I don't
even remember how we got connected but
there you were and there I was and we've
been on similar themes lately so this is
an important talk for me and I'm really
looking forward to it but to give people
some context would you mind just giving
a little bit of background like how did
you get to where you are where are you
what are you doing what's a little bit
of your origin story Joe I think people
are gonna find it interesting
sure so sorry I do have a baby crying in
the backgrounds Servan on cue here I
don't know if you can hear it's no
problem and this is life okay okay so
let's see origin story so I kind of grew
up around complex systems science my dad
from what as long as I can remember
that's what he did he did complex
systems engineering so really taking the
lessons from complex systems
science flying into engineering systems
which turns out to be very very
different from traditional systems
engineering approaches and maybe we'll
end up talking about that but yeah so
that was something that I was sort of
around and sort of gelled with my
intuition about the world and so I ended
up going to grad school for as you said
complexes with brain sciences down in
Boca Raton Florida where I the brain
sciences part is fine and well that I
really went for the complex systems so I
did so some fun research there but it
was very insulated sort of standard
academia stuff so I want to get my my
hands a little bit more dirty so it
would it would is complex system science
what is complexity what is that
sure so so you know we usually break
down the sciences into connie's fields
you know like physics chemistry biology
and typically they're broken up by the
things the specific things you're
studying so biology is about study
living systems organisms ecosystems
physics is about material systems
chemistry is about chemicals complex
systems science takes a slightly
different approach where it's
essentially agnostic to the things that
you're studying it's more interested in
the interactions between things the
organization of things and how the
properties of the systems that were
interested in arise out of those
interactions and the organization so
it's it's less sort of essential you
know I'm studying biology because I'm
studying organisms and and more well I'm
studying biology because I'm looking at
the way systems are structured that our
living and what it is about that system
structure that makes a living system say
distinct from a nonliving system so it's
a shift it's a shift in perspective from
from the stuff that things are made out
of to the patterns that things embody
that they they generate they got it got
it and and so like in this context what
does complexity mean so complexity to
tell you the truth that maybe not too
surprising that is that's a
because I mean there's like these ideas
of computational complexity which
essentially means how long of a
description do I need to describe a
system so in that sense a very complex
system is one that needs a very very
long description a simple system needs a
very short description so you can think
of things like imagine a pattern of
stripes black and white stripes you know
I could have an infinite series of
stripes but I could describe it very
briefly I say you know four bars of
white four bars of black four bars of
white continue on forever that kind of
thing so that's sort of a compressible
descriptions that's not very complex in
terms of computational complexity system
but but more sort of colloquially and
sort of less formally it also has to do
with how how interdependent the parts of
the system are how much the behavior or
the exposure of a part of the system
sort of impacts other parts of the
system okay so so you know you get hit
and hit in the foot and you know if you
feel it because it's traveling through
your nervous system through your brain
and you're having some kind of a
emotional and chemical and hormonal
response to it maybe so so clearly your
system your body is very interconnected
all the parts depend on one another so
complexity can also refer to that kind
of interdependency and would you say our
world is becoming more or less more less
complex oh that's an interesting
question because it's clear that that
we're having more long range
interactions all the time but we're
coupled with that we're having a
decrease in short range interactions
because we sort of as as individual
units we have a bandwidth we can have
you know how many interactions add a 100
interactions a day or something like
that so where are we spreading those so
so at a global scale we're becoming more
interconnected and local scales are
becoming in a lot of ways more
disconnected and then you have the issue
of when you have these large scale
events say like a pandemic like corona
virus pandemic whatever in some sense
that's actually a very simple event
because it's one thing happening
everywhere you know if you return to the
computational complexity you know all I
need to describe is well there's one
virus and it's you know this is
obviously not quite true but it's evenly
spread across the planet and you know
it's 50% of the people got it
so it's interesting because the
interconnections and the interactions
can lead to very what you might call
coherent behavior which is simple in a
sense but it's a a kind of pathological
simplicity arising out of that that
interconnected this interesting I guess
it's like bringing everything into
correlation these kind of events huh
that's exactly right so so when
everything gets correlated you know you
might all grow up together but then you
all go down together - yeah and that's a
bitch for people that study portfolio
theory and want to develop
non-correlated trades and sort of reduce
systemic risk in their portfolio but
oopsy-daisy there's incidents in which
everything is correlated and there's
absolutely nothing you can do you know
something about that kind of work don't
ya yeah sure so that's exactly right so
so and you know you look over some
sample period and you convince yourself
you know these two things are
independent from one another but then
some much larger event comes out and you
get into order you know where knows the
tails of the distribution the extreme
events and all of a sudden everything is
moving together so so it actually takes
an obscene amount of data to look for
those things that are really either
correlated or they have a more generally
a tail Association so maybe when things
are kind of normal they're they're
fairly independent seeming but then when
things go wrong there they're kind of
failing together and this work that
you've done it's brought you in contact
with some interesting folks and some
people that folks may know about you've
done some good work with Nassim Taleb in
fact I was under the impression that you
had only done some recent papers with
him but I went back and looked and their
stuff from from years ago
tell me how you came to that
relationship and some of the work that
you've been doing with him sure so I met
in the scene when I did a postdoc at the
New England complex systems Institute up
in Cambridge Mass he already had a
relationship with you near Bari am who's
the president there I came in his
postdoc I was already a fan of the seams
primarily I'd read a few books but anti
fragile was the one that I read that
really hit me and so I took the
opportunity when I saw that relationship
to kind of stick my nose into it and
 right so so you know how that goes
and your love that yeah so so I started
working on a paper and a theme of papers
we've had several releases around the
same topic of the precautionary
principle where the idea is there are
certain kinds of risks that at a
societal scale are not worth taking
despite their potential benefits because
the the downside to if something was
wrong is so catastrophic that they just
there's there's a failure of a kind of
cost-benefit analysis with that kind of
infinite downside yeah the infinite
downside and I read somewhere you had
written a quote about the inevitable
death cascade of our current system
which is something that that I want to
talk about and I think it's a theme of
what we've got going on but just to
finish the thread here with Nasim you
guys did a paper in what January or so
of this year talking about the pandemic
and you guys were way ahead of the curve
in terms of sort of popular
understanding of what was gonna happen
and what's currently happening and I'm
trying to stay a little bit away from
corona talk just so these conversations
have a little bit more evergreen nature
to them but I am curious to what was
what was sort of like the pre
conversations like how did you guys
decide to write that paper at that time
what were you seeing and did anybody
listen to you and what do you think is
is coming still yeah so so it's
interesting and the idea of I wouldn't
want to get too bogged down and talking
specifically about coronavirus either
but actually this issue of pandemic is
unfortunately likely evergreen true true
so that's an unfortunate reality it
comes from what we're talking about with
we have these all these long range
connections now so things just spread
very easily so they're coming so yeah we
really said in late January
you know wrote it over weekend saw what
was no thanks to Twitter essentially
social media but Twitter specifically
saw the videos coming out of China so it
was going on the for me the big data
point was when they started walking down
first they locked down Wu Han which is
like eleven million people right I mean
I I don't want to get overly sir
geopolitical here but I don't think that
the CCP is too too interested in the
kind of welfare of individuals so for
them to do that that says that they
looked and saw that their nation their
government was at risk right but that
that was a big data point for me and
it's actually more more of an important
data point than some kind of specific
viral parameters that you that
necessarily is going to take you a long
time to figure out track down studying
all that so I talked to the seem about
it I talked to a friend will go unnamed
down in DC about it friend said hey look
what you're saying is making a lot of
sense and I don't see anyone saying it
so if you have a paper or something you
can point to that would be awesome I
didn't have a page of paper I can point
to so we wrote it Wow
the big thing is in this connects to the
precautionary principle the big thing
that recognize is that in this expect
went back to how we think about things
in terms of complex systems
it's not not all systems are the same
but subsystems you can compare in terms
of the way they generate their behavior
contagion so viral contagion in this
case it's kind of the prototypical
multiplicative dynamic so that means
that you know you have one person sick
they get two people sick they get four
people six and that's where we get
talking about this exponential kind of
growth that comes out of the underlying
multiplicative dynamic and there is just
a huge chasm between systems that do and
don't have that multiplicative property
and when they do have that property that
means that they can become systemic when
the system is interconnected very easily
so you can think of something like you
know there's a lot of comparisons for
instance to car accidents like well you
know only five Americans died so far and
look how many people are dying in car
accidents the thing is car accidents at
a macro scale are not contagious if I
crash my car into treaty or even into a
person up here in New Hampshire there's
not going to be any causal chain of
events that's connecting directly some
some car accident in DC but with viral
contagion you indeed have those
connections so it's a bit like a forest
fire where fire spreads grows the
difference is the forest tends to stay
in place but people are up moving around
so the multiplicative dynamics just are
that much more exacerbated though the
air travel and all that so that's so we
saw that and the the reason to write the
paper was actually not because
coronavirus specifically we had any
certainty that this is a going to be a
devastating problem the specific virus
but the logic is that because you don't
know how bad it's going to be coupled
with the fact that its multiplicative
and therefore systemic then you need to
take precautionary actions immediately
and if you're wrong then you spend some
extra money some extra energy in
you know an overkill quote-unquote kind
of solution and if you're right thank
God right whereas you know if you take
the other side of the bed you know I'll
probably be fine then even if you're
right in the case of say for rotavirus
or any specific instance when you start
to stack up those probabilities because
because that logic justifies its own
reuse right like yeah it's probably fine
so what about the next time one comes
around that's probably fine - it was
fine last time so eventually there's
probably stack up or you get a guarantee
that one of these things is going to be
absolutely devastating and we're gonna
be behind the eight-ball on it we're not
gonna be ahead of it and unfortunately
you know that's kind of where we are
headed we sort of we did these goofy
ain't was lock downs and all this stuff
and it became politically polarized and
you know it doesn't seem like as a
society we learned much of anything yeah
yeah it's been tough because the
messaging hasn't been perfectly clear
the fruits of people sacrifice hasn't
been exactly clear to folks and then you
add on at the end this political mess
where public health officials who just
yesterday we're saying everybody needs
to stay home no weddings no sporting
events no graduations no marriages no
church no services no funerals one day
next day if you want to protest
something that you believe is an
important political issue
go right ahead hundreds of thousands of
people all in the street let's have a
street party and that part I think is
going to do some long-term damage to us
as a society because our faith in public
health officials and epidemiologists has
been diminished we we've we've seen just
some totally just wanton pilatus eight
how politician of this event and like
discarding something that was told to us
as life or death it's life or death but
if you have a political issue that's
based on some people would say very
flimsy statistics and it's probably made
up and has not as much relevance as you
would think hey go right
ahead and just protest and that's that's
gonna be damaging and especially when
you talk about how the logic becomes
reinforcing well you know maybe we don't
need to do this next time don't need to
do this next time and what do you know
news out of Beijing today is that
they've closed all the school systems
cancelled inter intra sort of intra of
our travel and they appear to be
freaking out over a resurgence and I
think even they might have said a
different kind of strange so it's it's
the I've been telling people were like
barely in the third or fourth inning of
this thing and it's gonna go on for the
rest of the year complicated by politics
complicated by elections of protests and
rallies and it's just kind of a mess do
you feel like how would you compare our
readiness we've compared today versus
January of 2020 for the for the
remainder of this or for the next one
that comes I mean I mean my worry is
that like you said it's it's not that
our readiness hasn't improved we might
have even gotten worse yeah because it's
become this thing that's now when it
first rolled in it was political they
was made to be political but it was in a
different way and now it's so pervasive
that everyone sort of has their their
position that they've they have taken
and they're gonna stand by it no matter
what the empirical evidence seems to
suggest so I feel like we might even be
less ready maybe we'd have more masks
and it wouldn't lie to us about masks
don't work or something but uh other
than that yeah I think I think we might
be even worse off you know you know the
only thing that maybe we're better off
now is that people are a bit primed to
shut down air travel
Nega so one of your questions was did we
have influence and the the feedback that
we received is that our paper was used
to sort of back the decision to stop the
flights from China and that was the
absolute right decision at the time
there were attacks saying oh it's racist
xenophobic you know which is absolute
insanity I mean if we can
we can't stop a virus from being
imported if that that if that in itself
is considered racist xenophobic or
somehow morally wrong then what can you
do what are you what are you be able to
do in your own interest and defense
after that right right you know what's
fascinating is that you complex science
guys were ahead of the curve on this and
then some of the more active social
media guys you would call them
right-wing maybe a former Mogga guys
whatever new right social me you guys we
were on top of this too and I think that
it is partially due to our sort of
innate and instinctive feel with these
complex systems and the spread of ideas
and memes through our network and the
way that we're all connected all around
the world so we could see because there
parallels right there's parallels
between information networks and actual
physical networks and biological
networks and natural networks there's
there's a pair that's almost if we're
over it's all related to I don't know if
it all comes from the same place which
we'll get to and so we had a sense you
could just feel it and we're used to
these things happening and seeing the
spread of viruses whether they be actual
or or informational and so we were kind
of ahead of the curve and it's just
interesting to see these parallels and
you know this the stage for this all the
negative fallout from our what I've been
calling indiscriminate connections
whether it's through the WTO and world
trade whether it's through the ever
encroaching you know span of NATO into
places where we probably have no
business being or social media or
information technology connectivity
we've seen now the the risks involved in
that and one of the things that you've
been talking about just briefly with us
is these things called long-range
connections and that influences mimetic
and viral spread can you talk about what
a long-range connection is in the
context of complex systems and then also
related to your experience and
understanding of social media and why
they're similar and related and why we
need to be concerned about that yeah for
sure
so one of the big kind of modeling
paradigms that you use in complex
systems often are networks so where
networks are just
nodes and connections between them
basically little dots lines drawn
between them very simple the reason
that's that's so common in system
science is because of what we're talking
about before because you are so focused
on the interactions among the parts so
this becomes a super stripped down
representation of parts and their
connectedness or their interactions so
if we think about networks and then we
think about imagine just sort of
physical Euclidean space as a network
what kind of a network would that look
like
well if we think of one dimension you
might imagine a chain of nodes each
connected by a link to its neighbor
that's kind of the space that we came in
to in this world that you know if I want
to travel from from New England to DC
then I have to go pasture through New
York City it's in between them so you
know there's all these steps in between
one spot and another on the network
long-range connections are where you
have one node in one place that gets a
direct link across where doesn't have to
traverse through these other nodes
anymore to go a far distance that's the
quote-unquote long-range the the
interesting thing about say you take
this kind of spatial grid network and
you say well how far am i away from some
spot way over on the grid and you're 1 2
3 4 however many hops that takes you to
get there when you start adding these
longer-range connections in it doesn't
only bring those two points close
together but it also brings their
neighbors close together so very rapidly
you go through a where most nodes are
really far away in this space from other
nodes to just a few a handful of
long-range connections makes any two
nodes only a handful of hops away so
this is like the six degrees of Kevin
Bacon kind of idea it's like doesn't
matter who you are you can be in the
middle of the Congo somewhere you're
only like six degrees away maximum from
Kevin Bacon no and and so so it's it's
the the intuition that thinking about
this this way can build is that
transition from everything being far
apart to everything being really close
together happens very rapidly when you
start adding these connections in and so
it's it's we've already passed that
globally like you're two hops away from
most people you know you can get on a
plane and be anywhere and so effectively
that kind of shrinks space into a much
smaller package and anything that does
have that kind of spreading quality that
cascading quality just goes through the
entire system I mean instantly
essentially you know and that's what
happens with social media right so we
are now instantly connected to everybody
in the world virtually we can broadcast
a signal that anyone can pick up on so
that long range connection doesn't even
have to be robust it doesn't even have
to be something massive infrastructure
project they just happened sort of
instantly now and in the kind of
historical context if you zoom way out
we went from nothing to everything in a
blink of an eye basically and I think
it's safe to say that our brains
probably haven't caught off our society
probably hasn't caught up our culture
our norms or customs haven't caught up
to the fact that we have these built-in
long-range connections both physically
for goods for people for services for
information now for ideas and social
connections and so anything can travel
basically all around the world to all of
us all at once and I read in one of your
papers you were talking about how we
need to start thinking of the world as
an ecosystem of organisms and not the
organism itself so in my mind I'm
thinking about this like if we're all if
we all have long-range connections then
basically we're all short-range
connected in a way right and so we kind
of are have built ourselves into being
and maybe I'm wrong you can you can tell
me and we've built ourselves into being
like one giant organism but you've
written that you believe it's important
for us to believe to look at ourselves
as an ecosystem of organisms rather than
just one singular organism can you
expand on that tell me if I was right or
wrong and what
I assumed and and to sort of relate its
what we're experiencing right now yes so
so it's definitely related to the
connectivity and how close we are to
each other and the fact that if
something infects one part of the system
it centrally cascades the entire system
readily and it's also the centralization
of function and the lack of functional
redundancy so you know when you look at
the way we've we've centralized global
manufacturing to China yeah sure other
countries manufactured but no-one's the
manufacturing powerhouse like China so
what happens when China manufacturing
goes down well that has massive effects
on the entire globe it's bit similar to
you know you have a heart attack how
does that affect the rest of your body
well as massive effect on the rest of
your body so in that paper I was I was
in part responding to I've seen from
several sources several perspectives
offer that kind of solution for the
global problems is to become like a
super organism at the global scale but
organisms have this property of these
single points of failure these
centralized functions and so we don't
want to be that it's it's great when
things are working well and when they go
wrong it's a catastrophe so at a minimum
we need to be a planet of several
organisms such that you know as sad as
it is when one organism dies it doesn't
kill off the whole species it doesn't
kill off the whole ecosystem the the
larger system that's embedded in is able
to go on in many cases even involve and
become something better stronger or at
least different and that's that's kind
of like an ecosystem an ecosystem is not
it doesn't have a well-defined
trajectory like a single organism where
there's sort of this development
unfolding and then then senescence and
death it's something that is contains
organisms that interact and evolve
within that system and kind of have an
open-ended quality to them where where
the forms that an ecosystem can take
over long periods of time are either
very difficult to determine or maybe
even indeterminate so we need to be able
to evolve we need to not be so rigid
that there you go a single thing
can take us out and so an organism is
just the wrong just the wrong model
right so globalism basically was this
idea that we'd all become super
connected and that would be great for
everybody but what we're learning right
now and again related to social media
because mimetic you know infection is
the same way and viral infection is also
the same way this the super connectivity
that we have actually is bringing in
additional risk that we had not
considered and fascinating for me is
that I've been working on all of these
subjects sort of all the food that went
into this mess talking to guys like Sam
Hammonds about the shine the China Shock
Doctrine where we basically just handed
over our manufacturing and an important
national defense manufacturing and
pharmaceutical manufacturing all over to
China I've been talking to Jordan Hall
about designing systems that for
emergence rather than for a specific
goal and that's what I've done with the
liminal order we didn't set out to
achieve a specific thing we designed a
system that would foster emergence and
that's what we've seen that happening
and then so when we start to see what
we've done in response to corona social
distancing and I was talk to Jeffrey
Miller about this and he reminded me of
the subject of adaptive disconnection
which is found in biology and nature and
and and we now I see a parallel to
social distancing as well so can you
explain a little bit about what adaptive
disconnection is and and how that might
be something favorable and just one last
thought before you answer that when we
are one eeeek one organism there's no
healthy competition and that is a bad
thing right we need to have open
landscape of competition so that we can
have the best ideas and the best
outcomes bubble up to the surface in the
long run and again that's sort of if you
if you just put that in a political
context you know it's almost defines the
differences between the rights and the
left is that we we want to have an
environment that breeds for emergence
that breeds competition
that's gonna give us our healthiest
outcome that involves things like
adaptive disconnection and avoids things
like this indiscriminate connectivity
that we've had where you become one
organism and if something fails within
the organism the whole thing dies so
what what can we do what what will help
us put this in more context and and talk
to me about adaptive disconnection and
relate it to its existence biology and
then into our sort of social life that
we just did in response to Corona well
so you know one of the possible
responses to issues of contagion
pandemic systemic risk is to decouple is
to be relatively independent systems the
downside of that is there's a lot of
opportunities in being connected into
trading goods long range into all of
those things so it kind of compromise is
a system that takes the opportunity to
have long-range connections and to you
know if some country does a really good
job with something and you want to get
that stuff from them then go ahead and
do that but then when you detect that
something spreading is happening if
there's there's some systemic risks
starting to grow and unfold then you're
able to say you know what we're gonna
we're gonna stop international flights
and kind of see see what's going on and
reorient and observe and a lot of the
disconnection from from my perspective
should be that way it shouldn't be
thought of as a solution so much as a
way to slow down the dynamics and to
orient but if it would a loop type of
thing where you kind of get getting the
opportunity to orient to the environment
and then make better informed decisions
by yourself a little time so and this
goes back to you know when when Trump
shut down flights from China the better
call would have been to shut down all
international flights no we got a ton of
stuff from Italy not that surprising I
mean maybe it's surprising that's from
Italy specifically but that it was
somewhere else too you know and came in
anyway should not have been a surprise
and and so that ability to to say hey
we're gonna pause these connections for
now we know that we
we'll resume them later or that in many
cases ago need to resume them later but
for this moment we're gonna pause them
so we've been we did it we did it
reluctantly
the reason we're reluctant is because
how much it will cost and ends up
costing more because we wait right so
that's the adaptive part of that rather
than rather than adaptive to imply
dynamic and and context-sensitive as
opposed to sort of something rigid
structured and fixed forever in time
right so it sounds like we need to build
into this system triggers and and you
know failsafe systems basically where I
mean like a fuse or something right like
in the old days you know if the if the
circuit overheats the thing just pops
and cuts everything off to protect the
house I mean that's a pretty good
analogy and it seems to me that we need
something like that with all of our
physical connections I've also seen
people talking about how to regulate
social media in such a way now I don't
know how we're gonna do this but I've
seen people suggest that a solution to
like you know viral spread of fake news
or panic or whatever is is some sort of
throttling on social media as well which
fits in sort of theoretically within the
same conversation I don't know how we go
about doing that in practice though
especially because of all the bet and
this is the same struggle right all the
benefits that come from these
connections and the speed at which they
occur but there's also some serious
downside so you have any thoughts on
that
so the difference I see between these
two I mean there's a few differences
obviously but but one of the important
differences is the fact that for the
kind of throttling it sounds like you're
describing that would almost be like at
the central control central command like
throttling it down with some a I or some
BS like that so when I'm talking about
you know we need to be able to
adaptively decouple our trade relations
I'm not saying that there needs to be
some Authority that's propped up that
decides when that happens I'm actually
saying that we as say a sovereign nation
make that decision we're not letting
anyone in right now we're decoupling so
social media already has a lot of that I
mean I use the
button liberally I think you do too yes
and it you know Twitter would be
unusable without that yeah and there's
you know a lot people complain about
echo chambers and tribalism and things
like that but actually that's the way I
see that is a kind of re-emergence of
our localist tendencies in the virtual
space yes we just do we need boundaries
we need to know who's on the inside and
who is on the outside
what is the system what is the
environment you know in in system
science one of the first things you do
if you're analyzing something is to make
that decision in your analysis what's
the system and what's the environment
that's there's it's not there's no
objective means of deciding where that
exists there are some but in many ways
it's also a judgement call
you know if I'm interested for instance
let's say I'm interested in studying the
nervous system do I then consider the
nervous system to have a boundary and
its environment is the rest of the body
or is the the whole organism the system
the the environment is what it's
interacting with so these basic sort of
bounded patterns are essential in in all
of the systems that were embedded in
that we generate and and one of the
things that I think we've seen is relate
to all of this is this sort of through
the modern period a belief that
boundaries in general or somehow
antiquated not necessary whenever
backwards and that's just couldn't be
further from the truth
and and moreover the idea that if we
eliminated boundaries what we get is
integration and actually when you have a
system that needs to work let's say if
you're doing software development or
something to get a very complex piece of
software to integrate properly demands
that you draw appropriate boundaries
around the components so so these two
things are not actually completely in
concert they're not in contradiction at
all we need to have the right boundaries
that allow the system to integrate
properly at multiple scales man it's so
fascinating to me how many parallels
there are between this
social media biology viruses politics
you know woke ISM spreading all over the
place you know when it comes to social
media and my and me blocking I'm not
blocking to create an echo chamber I'm
blocking to get rid of idiots and what I
want are people that are engaged in
actual conversation so that's my tribe
my tribe is people engaged in actual
research conversation analysis
that's why I'll slam Trump when he needs
it and I'll praise him when when he
deserves it and and I try i troll people
off my timeline all the time by being
talking about Trump just be like
get out of here you red meat people you
don't you don't need to be here but
we're doing the same thing in the
liminal order - we've experienced the
negative side effects of being
indiscriminately connected myself I got
docked by an information attacked by an
Tifa and they ruined my life in many
ways and and I realized that I was just
totally out there and exposed with all
of my connectors like saying engage
engage engage but instead I needed to
erect a little bit of a barrier and give
myself a chance to build some strength
and that's what we're sort of
paralleling in the in the limo order is
creating a high trust high value network
where we can do what we need to do
inside and then selectively gauge engage
on the outside I'm just continuously
fascinated by all of these parallels and
and unfortunately unfortunately this
phrase inevitable death cascade keeps
coming to mind because if the system
keeps up at the way it's going and and
this complexity continues and these
long-range connections continue without
any discrimination whatsoever it seems
to me that you have a feeling that quote
extinction becomes certain so can we
talk about how that all plays together
in our system and the trajectory that
we're on what do what do we do to
prevent the inevitable death cascade and
the extinction becoming certain due to
our connectivity in the system that we
have built for ourselves I mean there's
basically there's basically one place
that we're going and that is a less
connected system there's two ways of
getting there there's sort of the
thoughtful intentional way and the kind
of kicking and screaming way and
essentially our institutions our systems
see systems that we continued to depend
on can't handle either the complexity or
the scale of the events that are now
commonplace and so when they can't
handle that then they will break and
something else will take their place
you know the u.s. is a really special
place in terms of it was so
intentionally set up as a federated
system I mean we have 50 states that's
that's no small number and you know
inside the 50 laboratories or
libertarianism idea of that we could
make the political decisions to start to
devolve and return to that and we would
experience everyone would experience
much more harmony and where failure
occurred it would be at a much smaller
scale and so you you you sort of have
the benefits of many places as things
working a lot better and as well as the
risk reduction of when things don't work
well the scale at which that happens is
a lot smaller and that this is really
related to this idea of localism and
bringing decisions as close to home as
possible and for different kinds of
issues that scale is different some
things are right to take care of on the
homestead some are right to take care of
in town some are right in the state and
some are right at the nation and that's
exactly how we've been set up is with a
recognition that there's really these
these different scales of behaviors and
of problems and the system needs to have
those scales to match those those issues
and you know I I do think there is some
hope in that happening you know funny
enough even though it's a bit of a kind
of a comic strip in many ways this chess
thing going on so Tata Mazzone it
doesn't surprise me at all
decentralization is where we're going
these are people that feel that they
have a certain set of values and
cultural practices and all these things
they feel are very important to them and
so what do they do they made a coherent
area formed a boundary said when you're
on the inside you're in chess when
you're on the outside you're out of
chess and here's how we do things in
chess you know they like I said it's a
bit it's a bit of a joke because they're
not really set up to you know feed
themselves and all that or trade for
food or anything like that but
nevertheless the the sort of it's a
symptom of something deeper
it's happening everywhere with all of us
so the thing about localism there's so
many ways to start to penetrate that
because it's a kind of a meta system
structure that would allow many more
natural organic patterns to unfold and
so and so it's a hard thing to penetrate
because it's like well do you do it for
this reason or that reason it's kind of
all of the above but yeah I mean I mean
I mean local autonomy local sovereignty
and scaling up decision-making only when
it's necessary so that's the
subsidiarity principle is that could get
us by without that inevitable death
cascade yeah
I'm glad that you brought up the
autonomous zones I'm getting I'm getting
like excited because these issues are so
relevant to me my personal life my work
the country it's I've had lately do I've
had like a singularity lately where like
all these issues I've been working on
starting with radical feminism and woke
ISM and antifa and emergent networks and
information warfare and 4g warfare and
connectivity and disconnection versus
connection all of it's happening all
ones and then the riots happened in my
own backyard so I knew all the players
and all the streets and all that
everything it's just like the
singularity for me all happening all at
once so it's it's actually been I mean
it's sad moment in America in many ways
but it's been really exciting for me if
I'm allowed to be so crass because this
is just what I've been working on
thinking on so much and the autonomous
zones it's something that I wanted to
talk to you about it fits in within an
adaptive disconnection model right it
fits in with with a decentralization
model it's also what I see is a natural
extension of the existing sanctuary
cities and counties and states that
we've had in the in the United States
for for years actually now and that's
both on the left and the right you've
got immigration sanctuary cities you've
got Second Amendment gun sanctuary
counties in Virginia now you've got an
actual autonomous zone in Washington
State Chaz as it's been called and
frankly I got to say
I don't support their agenda I kind of
support what they're doing in a way
because in if you fast forward many
years from now it's entirely possible
that there's gonna be no more of these
right and based around a number of
different issues whether it's my kind of
issues my values or their values or
whatever this this decentralization
theme is we can't stop it it's just it's
what's happening and it's because of the
system and the federal government had
been moving towards the centralization
for so many years starting really back
what like around 19th late 19th century
early 20th century and this it's just
been growing and growing and growing and
then spreading that into the world
community and trying to centralize
everything WTO we're gonna decide
everything United Nations decide
everything but here we go we've got an
autonomous zone we're exactly right
they've set up a border thinks they've
adaptively disconnected from the network
that they don't like and they're giving
it a shot right and you know my advice
to trump right now is just to let it go
and just see see what happens it's not
gonna work for them long run because
they didn't start with like a farm they
didn't start with the things that you
need and it's just sort of a frolic or a
lark for them I think and in a 4G
warfare context they've gone from
fighting a network war and a surgeon see
war to basically like creating a trench
and holding the line so I'm happy to see
them distracted by that go ahead and
hold your territory while the network
war rages on I like to see that so you
brought up localism which was sort of
our crescendo here I want to get to that
this is this is your answer or at least
one of your answers to this complexity
problem the inevitable extinction desk
cascade the problems of long-range
connections localism tell me what you
mean by localism how do you live local
ISM in your life what do we do to spread
this idea you fought with me about
nationalism I'm saying nationalism is
Hell itself cared you're like no no not
nationalism localism which is fine all
on the same vibe right on the same path
so tell me what it means to
you how are you living it how do we
spread this idea it's set for etc lay it
on me Joe this is where I wanted to go
all right so so localism let's just
start with how I'm living it yes
I we moved to a spot New Hampshire
almost two years ago now we moved with
the idea of living a more local life
primarily that's centered around food
our where we get our food what we're
eating how we prepare it all that so one
of the nice things about this area is
that it's it's kind of hilly and rocky
and so it's actually spared the
industrial agriculture spread sort of
take over so we have a lot of nice
legacy small farms around here where
people are you know they're not
necessarily paying for their usda
organic sticker but they don't need to
they do everything the old-fashioned way
they build a compost pile and they you
know there's no chemicals no nothing so
so we're really fortunate to get I can
say close to a hundred percent of our
food comes from within 15 miles of us
nice that's that was kind of the first
thing then of course we bought a
property that has a few acres and
started growing our own food got
chickens started learning how to
cultivate the land learning how to
manage the forests so all of that the
truth is that that work takes a really
long time to learn for one thing because
I'm not doing it full-time I'm working
as a data scientist a lot of the time so
I'm attached to the computer like so
many other people nevertheless so so
many of those iterations are one year so
it takes one year to kind do something
and to figure out was that a good thing
was that a bad thing that it matter at
all so it's very slow and and I think
that a lot of frankly what we lost in
terms of know-how will take a long time
to recover because a lot of people got
to put a lot of time into into building
those skills back up to have a sort of
genuine robust localist system so that's
that's what we're doing in our life and
you know actually recently I can add
another thing on there you mentioned in
the beginning up front so I can't
remember this before we start recording
or not but we got a fire on our prop
sucked but the Volunteer Fire Department
showed up in five minutes and so that
was incredible I couldn't believe I mean
I just couldn't believe it I was like
they're here already that's that's
amazing
so I'm also now training to be a
volunteer firefighter so that's that's
something actually a few hours after
this I'm going to learn how to cut up
cars so for for extraction Wow that'd be
cool
so you know in addition to the food
stuff it's it's building relationships
when we live in a really small town talk
to people talk to the neighbors doesn't
mean I always get along with them
they're also not necessarily on the
localist vibe right like in a general
sense it's it's present around here it's
kind of in the air at the same time
everyone's part of this modernist era so
it's it's for me been just allowing
myself to get a bit uncomfortable with
talking to the people grow my food
talking to the people around town you
know the the select the Board of
Selectmen go in there talk to them the
cops go talk to them just literally talk
to everybody that I can that's in my
town and feel the push and pull and and
also you know part of one of the
implications of complexity is that it's
essentially in a complex system
impossible to know how things will
evolve the the predictability goes out
the window
so I'm also in my personal kind of
localist endeavors I'm not trying to
fulfill one specific vision or one idea
or one plan of what's gonna unfold I'm
allowing myself to be an agent in a
larger system that's interacting having
local micro interactions and seeing
seeing what unfolds and kind of
observing that and dislike volunteer
firefighting thing is a perfect example
that that was not part of the plan but
you know they came to put out my fire
they were awesome guys they said you
ever thought about fighting fires I said
now I'm thinking about it so so that's a
bit of it
so that that's that's on me in general
you know we have these issues we talk
about long range connections building
some of that down with with circuit
breakers you mentioned boundaries and
whatnot can de-risk us globally so that
when failures happen they're bounded and
not sort of global in scale that means
more decision-making brought home that
means that that Town Hall matters it's
not some extra thing and this is you
know you mentioned I push back on
nationalism this the issue with
nationalism and you know obviously I
don't want to do kind of worded thinking
thing here where we're like Oh Nationals
is bad because nationalism is bad but
but as a general kind of connotation
that comes along with it it's sort of
you know you either have globalism which
says that the globe is the one system
and we need to make decisions at that
scale and one interpretation of
nationalism is a similar thing just at
the national scale sort of this one
decision-making body but much like
biological systems which we are we
should be structured in sort of
radiations of scale so it's natural to
have things at a you know few hundred
people that's a unit now a few groups of
a few hundred people that's another unit
a few groups of those groups that's
another unit so this kind of nested
scales sort of hierarchy of scales
there's a very natural thing and and I
the reason I push back on the word
nationalism is so that doesn't get lost
please you know every person is an
individual we kind of know and
understand that some individuals are
similar to others but each everybody's
unique places ought to add the same
character they used to but we've started
to modernize them so so once again a
place kind of she have a feel should
have a personality should kind of be
quote/unquote somebody and so so
localism is also about that that letting
letting a place have its character and
find its character
also the fact that you know when you put
your money into something where does it
go well guess what if it goes straight
down the street to my to my neighbor
who's farming his farm gets better now
when I Drive up the street that's a more
pleasant drive so there's this kind of
local effect of the the capital
circulating very locally that that can
engage is kind of positive feedback
loops and then you know once we're
overflowing with abundance in my
neighborhood then we're able to not only
feed ourselves but to help our you know
the next town over or something like
that when they're in need so localism is
all about that what's the proper scale
the decision-making
what's the density of the
interconnections and interdependencies
among people that live physically near
one another so in this case I see a
localism as rather than a sort of you
know it's just making things less
complex or more complex or some like
that it's actually reducing complexity
at these very large scales global scales
nation state scales but increasing that
code that that complexity and that
interdependence very locally so that in
fact the local situation does look more
like a single organism and you could
have that cascade failure in that local
organism then but it doesn't it doesn't
spread the same way
what else what else that's fat I mean
that that's absolutely fascinating to me
it struck me as you were talking that
it's it's a sign of our times it takes
effort to do things the old right way
yes and it's easy to do things the new
bad way yeah you know having to relearn
how to farm but that sounds like
an insane thing to say but that's that's
where we are we're even learning a hat
needing to relearn how to make local
social connection yep how to get
involved with other people and we're
also relearning the value of getting
involved locally you know if you want a
really great contemporary example if you
don't go to your PTA meeting then one
day you will wake up and in your
children's inbox will be white fragility
by Robyn D'Angelo telling them that they
are innately and in in incurably racist
and that they should throw themselves on
the floor at the at the feet of critical
theory and I you this it's a sort of an
exaggerated example but it's absolutely
a hundred percent applicable if you
don't go to your local meetings if you
don't go to the town hall if you don't
vote in your local elections then people
who do go are gonna make decisions for
you and you may or may not like that and
the other than James Lindsay in our
podcast that I did with him he really
pointed that out to me as a solution to
some of this issue all the macro yelling
and screaming black lives matter and
blah all that is noise the real rubber
hits the road in your local school
meetings in your local committee
meetings and you got to just suck it up
and cook meetings and raise your hand
because guess what they'll probably be
other people there that wish they had
the balls to step up and they'll be
happy to stand behind you if there's one
thing I haven't discovered over the last
five years if you display an act of
courage you can turn around and all of a
sudden they'll be people behind you
wanting to follow and want to go where
you're going and that's what we need
it's like a whole like an epidemic a
pandemic of acts of courage that's what
that's what we need today another thing
that I was struck by when you were
talking is that home is is how would you
rate this homogeneity seems to be anti
adaptive right like you're talking about
putting all the same in all the
places everywhere irrespective of the
local conditions the people the customs
and norms even the genetics of the
people that settled
even the terrain even whatever
homogeneity seems to be bad for us on an
evolutionary scale what do you think
about that I mean that's just absolutely
correct the thing is evolution works by
variety production of variety and then
selection and then sort of continuous
intimation of those two things without
the variety there's there's nothing to
select either make it if you don't and
one of these days something will come
along where you don't and there's
nothing nothing to continue on so
there's actually something from
cybernetics system science control
Theory called the law of requisite
variety and it says that you need your
system that's responding to the
environment to be at least as complex to
have at least as much variety as the
environment so that it can respond to it
this is exactly that issue that's
fascinating we've seen evolution and
political theory on the same subject
matter as well you know you've got the
United States interestingly preaching
plurality at home but practicing
unipolar politics and ways of life and
civilizational organization abroad and
then you got a guy like Alexander Dugan
who I was introduced to through Michael
Miller men in Canada teaching me and I'm
not saying I believe all this stuff or
everything that he says but he taught me
about how the fourth political theory is
about creating a space that actually
appreciates political pluralism and if
that is if that doesn't scream like
competition variety and selection I
don't know what does I remember when I
was in undergrad in the 90s it was the
tail end there just just after the end
of the Cold War and I wrote my my my
thesis on you know the the necessity of
competition for economic systems right
so that we could see what works and what
doesn't and you know I saw the communist
capitalist competition and we saw who
won but you know when we don't have
anything else in no variety I don't know
how we can select further and just one
little other tangent I was watching a
documentary last night on the font
Helvetica and it was amazing to see how
in this design community Helvetica
became like the most popularly used font
in the world and it be they some of the
guys in that world thought that like
hell
was like the final evolution of font
right and so they're like what do we do
next they even there was even like an
anti Helvetica movement where they
treaded it apart and tried to go
somewhere else but then there's like a
return to it so it's just interesting
parallel that we're seeing and all these
things it almost makes you think that
we're all connected and that we all kind
of come from the same and when I say we
I mean the earth the galaxy the universe
us our DNA our cells our biological
systems they all seem to have similar
themes right so like we're all we're all
if people said well we're all just
Stardust it's actually kind of true
right the DNA for the universe might be
just the same as the DNA for us what do
you think about that I don't mean
precisely but you understand what I'm
saying so I mean it's pretty clear that
we are all in the same world and and we
are of the world we come out of it at
risk of getting to to kind of woowoo you
know Alan Watts
if you're familiar talk about how the
universe peoples like an apple tree
apples I think that's a good visual of
kind of how that goes
so so what we share is not some code or
or you know we're not I don't believe
we're in a simulation or anything like
that but rather these kind of principles
of pattern formation and there-there's
these and this is one of the reasons
that I was drawn to complexity in the
first place is that it's that you get
this rich variety out of a few
fundamental principles of how patterns
come into being
that's sort of the opposite of the law
of entropy right entropy is about
patterns disappearing it's about things
disintegrating but what we observe in
the world is not just that but patterns
forming patterns growing and I think
that some of these issues and we're
talking about you know boundaries and
borders these are some of the basic
pattern elements that you see over and
over and over again no matter what kind
of a system you're looking at so there's
clearly some principles at play here
that we can we can look to and and it's
it's in the calm
nations of those principles and those
patterns that you get this essentially
infinite variety of possibilities so
there's this there's this deep uniting
set of pattern principles that kind of
everything obeys because if it didn't
the thing would fall apart that wouldn't
exist and then there's the fact that
when you recombine these things the
novelty is endless mmm something came to
mind just now boundaries and health we
even see that in personal relationships
in emotional relationships right like if
you don't have boundaries
emotionally between you and your spouse
or you and your friends or just random
people on the street that disrupts your
own internal emotional thermostat right
like you can get out of whack if you
don't have a boundary and it doesn't
have to be mean or anything but you can
just like say no I'm not comfortable
with that or no that's just not for me
and it's fascinating to me to see that
even in just the the noises we make with
our throats and the telepathy that we do
it's like we need to have a boundary
there too right there's boundaries
everywhere and in fact if you really
think about it since we're both most
mostly made up of space right in our
atoms in our construction or molecular
construction really we are just a
boundary around space even just
physically in our manifestation to the
world I just love seeing how all these
things come together one of my favorite
things might well I think when my top
skills I test out at is ideation and
just being able to see how everything
fits together and identify patterns but
when one thing you just mentioned that
struck me really was
you said entropy versus pattern creation
now I'm not a physicist but isn't some
lob of entropy isn't that like a
universal law like physics second law of
thermodynamics is yeah entropy is always
increasing okay in an isolated system
what we observe are not isolated systems
we observe open systems so all of that
physics that follows from isolated
systems we started applying
sort of liberally to the world at large
and it turns out that most of the things
in the world are indeed not isolated at
all and even to develop those theories
of isolated systems what did people have
to do they had to create crazy like
contrived experimental situations so
that a system could be more or less
isolated not really but you know it's
got like insulated surfaces and whatnot
so open systems are what we actually
deal with in the world and the second
law of thermodynamics has not much to
say about those so so then when people
say yeah but in general like in the
whole universe it's going towards
entropy that's actually making an
assertion about the structure of the
universe that I don't think anyone is
able to make with any confidence you
know you can you can feel more or less
compelled by a particular model of the
universe but the idea that that debate
is is over is absurd of course what
there's only one universe where it's a
closed system yeah that we know any or
that we can make any claim like that and
feel like we know what we're talking
about obviously we can build models test
the predictions of those models and feel
more or less confident but that's about
it
so how radical of an idea is it to say
that the second law of thermo-dynamics
it doesn't apply to our closed systems
that we operate in is that that radical
is that widely accepted it's it's it's
widely accepted that open systems you
need something else theoretically that
it doesn't apply is I I think that it
does apply but under those very specific
conditions of isolation okay so when you
you know if I stop maintaining my house
it's gonna fall apart okay and that's
not because it's strongly isolated but
because the kinds of inputs it needs
will not be there anymore to maintain
its form
are there gradations of open and closed
systems if we move towards a more open
system with long-range connections and
stuff like that does that increase does
that increase entropy so okay let me
think about this for a minute so so one
of the things I want to mention it
connected back to what we're talking
about is that we're talk about
boundaries you were talking about
you know making sure that not everything
goes through kind of boundary but living
boundaries are selectively permeable so
it's not about things go in or they
don't it's about that the the agent or
the system is making decisions about
what comes in and what doesn't so that
that's one thing that's really important
about think about boundaries cuz because
if you have a boundary around something
and nothing gets in then indeed yeah
you'll get the second second law will
take over you'll get nothing but entropy
so you have to take in something yeah so
so a lot of these questions revolve
around what are those decisions who
makes them and then and then what
follows from those and you know I think
you've nailed it the earlier you
mentioned something like a high trust
inside and that's exactly like a cell on
your body is able to kind of trust
what's going on inside of the membrane
and it has less trust about what's going
on outside the membrane and you know it
might it might decide that you know
you're a viral particle and I don't want
to let you in so so I think I think
that's really important it's not it's
not that boundaries are for pure
isolation it's that they're for a
selective interaction mm discriminant
strategic disconnection the end of the
age of indiscriminate connection you may
not have an answer to this so I
apologize if I'm putting you out there
but do you know in the history and just
literature that you've studied like
where this idea that it was okay or a
good idea to just reach out and reach
out and reach out and connect and
connect and connect and connect where
did that come from you know like how it
seems to me like that's a fundamental
grand strategic error and yet somehow it
seemed to have been driving everything
was it just emergent was it just what we
had to do in order to find that boundary
and decide to pull Berger you know where
the batter should be and decide to pull
back or become more selective with who
passes through the membrane because I
don't know here is this not like a
general theme out there right now like
oh we need to be more selectively
disconnected okay great
that's gonna take decades to change that
boat around but do you have any idea
like just with talking to your dad or
who knows what like just in your past
experience of where you
you could see this coming from I don't
have the answer I'm just curious well I
mean I'm no historian but I mean you
look at history and you see that with
increasing connect
I mean increasing connectivity for
humans physically is related to
increased speed of transportation and so
you get these local competitive
advantages if I'm able to bring in a lot
of metal from from a distant land and
create weapons out of that I have a
distinct advantage or if I'm people even
just able to trade easily you know on
the Silk Road or something or getting
spices you know so there's there's
obviously these benefits to long-range
connections and I my sense is that it's
just something we never reflected on we
just kind of kept going kept going and
so I think there's two things there's a
long range connections and and the
centralization I'm more confident to say
that the kind of centralization that we
default to today is if not generated
from at least extremely kind of
catalyzed by exasperated by the
Industrial Revolution where you were
focused on repeatable processes that
could be scaled up and and workers that
could be changed out and be fungible in
kind of be parts of a of a large machine
type of vision so I think I think that
those two things are distinct but
related the long-range connections in
the centralization of and scaling up of
processes what's interesting I've had
conversation with Jordan Hall about this
a number of times talking about how he
calls a game a and game B societies and
game a Society was basically scaling up
of our hunter-gatherer tribe and inside
the hunter-gatherer tribe there probably
is some element of centralization and
it's even probably like communist in
some ways and it's like you know we're
gonna decide to do this we're all gonna
go do that and then we're gonna share
this stuff around even if you it scales
all the way down if you've read sex at
dawn it scales down into even like
sexual relationships and whatnot
according to some people but basically
game a has us scaling that up
to a point now where it just doesn't
bucket more it just doesn't work right I
don't know why we thought something that
would work for 30 people is gonna work
for 300 million people or 7 billion
people and some people have their way
right and so what he has described is
the evolution now of game B he doesn't
know what it is just yet nobody really
does but it is based on a themes of
decentralization localization emergence
and when you combine that with
technology then it becomes you can now
create the tribe that you miss from from
the old days with people that share your
values not just the people that are
nearby you right and so we're starting
to be able to form communities based on
values irrespective of where you are
physically and that is a major major
change for us because not only does that
mean you can find your tribesmen you may
be in California but it also means
you're actually living next door to
people who may not be in your tribe - so
what do you think about that and and are
you're participating and that's some
degree - aren't you oh oh yeah
absolutely so I think that like to your
later point that you might be living
next to people that work in a different
tribe there's real problems with this
you're getting this kind of we're not
sorting out spatially we're sorting out
my values virtually and we're not
sorting out spatially so what are those
relationships now with your neighbors I
think one of the important things though
to recognize about localism is that
you're not always gonna be best friends
with your neighbor even in the best case
scenario it's just not realistic
you know GK Chesterton talked about this
and it talked about how you know often
it's it's portrayed that the the city is
sort of you know it's a cosmopolitan
everything's there this massive variety
and the countryside is some you know
homogenous place where everyone's the
same and from the experience of the
individual it couldn't be more opposite
because when you're in the city you can
seek out those like-minded people you
know you get together once a week though
that's your crew where you're all see
things the same way in the country
there's no one to choose from so you
better learn to get along with whoever
the hell's out there or move so
so there's a bit of you know I think for
this kind of localized vision to come
come you have to be realized
has to be some willingness for people to
get up and move around and then move
around less after that I think there
also has to be sort of large-scale
assurances on the ability to get up and
leave a place I've met something that
does deserve to be a large-scale shared
value that you shouldn't be trapped
somewhere physically held in you know
like in North Korea or something but and
the reason being so that if you don't
make sense in a place or place doesn't
make sense to you you go find the place
that does make sense so so there's a bit
there's a bit of both I think that needs
to happen one is that we figure out
where we should go and get up and move
around a bit and to learn how to have
neighbors again and learn that that
isn't always pretty
right and you know good good walls make
good neighbors yeah that's that's a
truism for a reason interesting comment
there on mobility one of the assumptions
in globalization is that labour mobility
is perfect and even within the global
economy and also domestically and what
we've seen actually is that that's not
true and that labor labor mobility is
not perfect and that when you do ship
out capital and you do ship out products
and services and businesses away people
like to stay where they are where their
family is where their community is where
they were born I never thought they
would leave so there there is some
friction there and what you're talking
about and and what's happened in
globalism the the failure of labour
mobility to be perfect is pretty much
the fundamental failure of globalism
besides the choke points and the
strategic errors of manufacturing and
whatnot that people were just you know
somehow their local space was fungible
as you said earlier that they would just
say a I lived in Youngstown Ohio
my whole life but now I need to move to
Nogales Mexico all right it I'll do
it
but no it just doesn't happen like that
so there's an interesting element to be
considered there when you
talk about people needing to be free to
move to find the right place there has
to be a sort of freedom in ourselves
also to allow that to happen I
personally have been looking at at land
like I've been in DC for almost 30 years
basically I love the living in the city
I just use past tense man that's sad I
love living in the city I'm a city kid a
boring a raised here grew up on the
block like built institutions and real
estate and communities in the city but
I'm coming to accept that this is
probably not my place and I've been
looking at acreage and basically I've
called it Appalachia Stan like some
stretch out there that that spans
through Tennessee Kentucky Ohio Virginia
West Virginia Pennsylvania up into New
York though that seems to be that seems
to be calling my name right now and the
amount of acreage you can get it and the
ability that we have these days to
become ought to build off the grid and
you know fit into the nature there
rather than dominate it like these
things are really attractive to me and
you know combined what happened with
Corona exploding for all of us to see
that work can be done anywhere holy cow
and that all this driving and commuting
and water cooler and lunch that
we all engaged in was totally
unnecessary in fact probably
counterproductive so I think we're gonna
see an explosion in this type of
thinking are you seeing that are you
getting vibes like that too I mean
however the last six months between
Caprona globalization China virus riots
and protests tribalism on a national
scale playa how how do you see this
impacting us moving forward and do you
getting vibes is it having changes are
people being motivated to move and do
things
I mean anecdotally yes a number of my
friends just since this whole
coronavirus thing started unfolding have
moved from the Boston or surrounding
towns into New Hampshire just like that
you know during the lockdown shot the
real estate bought their house said I'm
getting the hell out of here
in general I think large cities are
going to keep being they're kind of the
places that connect the globe right
these large cities that's where the
airports are that's that's the
connection they're gonna keep feeling
these extreme events pretty hard I think
as we go forward you know it's these
things seem you know depending on how
you think about it but seem unrelated
yeah the coronavirus and you have these
riots and stuff but this is like these
are these are Cascades and there's going
to be more of them until we do
disconnect a bit more and so are you you
know could go on yeah and so for myself
I mean like I said we've been in our
home for about two years now we didn't
move here without this awareness I mean
what's happening we sort looked around
and say oh wow didn't we get lucky we
said oh wow I'm glad that we made that
decision now or when we did because look
at what's happening now I'm glad I'm not
dealing with that so in my face um so
you know part of the reason we were able
to release that paper in January was
because we weren't surprised by any of
this we've been sort of keeping our eye
out we know this stuff is coming so but
I think people do like urban settings
density I think you're seeing more and
more interest in kind of classical urban
architecture walkable spaces fewer cars
things like that what I think many
people are going to start realizing is
that you can have a lot of that and you
can have the countryside and you can be
in a little what I'm calling micro City
or on the edge of a micro City that
you've never heard of before and has you
know let's say 40 restaurants and a few
clubs or whatever it serve enough to get
that what you get out of the city enough
to get that out of it without being
these massive sprawling see things see
things sure yeah they sort of danger
zones you know so so I'm seeing I'm kind
of long on what I'm calling my purse
cities and especially especially
especially where they're not surrounded
by suburbia but actual countryside so
that hard delineation between them none
of that
none of that in between stuff yeah yeah
and I say this as like an avowed
urbanist right like I love living in the
city I love getting up and walking to
the yoga studio going to my CrossFit gym
getting coffee walking to work taking my
kids to local park all the Arts all the
anything but maybe at 30 years maybe
I've already maybe I've chewed it all up
I'm not sure we'll we'll see the the
land in West Virginia looks really
appealing and it is beautiful and I
can't go to Pennsylvania I can't go to
Virginia because I just don't their
political future is a little too
uncertain for me whereas I think West
Virginia pretty sick seems pretty solid
definitely in a place where they won't
call the cops on you for lifting weights
in your front yard as has happened to me
four times now in Washington DC you
mentioned something about Cascades and
cascading effects and there's a concept
in complexity that I want to talk to you
about self-organized criticality and I
would give a primer but you can give the
primer but basically the idea is I want
to understand how in this systems you
know event how this is applying to us
societally and if we can expect to see
events like that so assume the audience
doesn't know what it means and just give
us a quick primer on it and see if we
can relate it to like our current
culture and cultural events sure so the
classic model that's used to talk about
this self-organized criticality
quote-unquote is the sand pile model
which is the idea that you build up you
drop sand onto a pile and you keep
dropping that sand and build up the pile
over time as you're dropping more sand
on to it you get avalanches around the
pile those avalanches have different
sizes sometimes it's a few grains of
sand kind of tumbling down sometimes
it's going the whole side of the pile
will go so this huge avalanche so that
that distribution of the sizes of the
avalanche that's really the key marker
of something is kind of in that critical
range meaning that there's not a good
sort of typical size to these things you
have many many many many tiny avalanches
a few great
and then every once in a while you have
a massive avalanche basically the whole
pile goes right so I mean in turns out
that sand piles are not modeled well
this way ironically but other systems
are including actual like snow
avalanches and this is why you get you
know all the time little bits of snow or
trickling down the hill it's no big deal
every once in a while something triggers
and the whole hillside goes and so
another another distinction that's
relate to things we've been talking
about between how you characterize
systems one our systems with a
characteristic scale meaning that they
sort of have a general size that they
have and never get much bigger or much
smaller than that think of a human
beings height or weight you know you you
might see someone who's 500 pounds maybe
a little more but you're never going to
see someone who's a thousand pounds so
you have a characteristic scale of human
beings exist around 150 pounds whereas
an avalanche
there's no characteristic scale of an
avalanche it's sometimes it's small
sometimes it's many many many orders of
magnitude bigger than those small ones
so this is this is known as a power law
distribution it's kind of probability
distribution and the self-organized part
of that is the fact that when you're you
know back to the sand pile model when
you're dropping those grains of sand
onto the pile
there's no controller who's deciding how
those pieces are organized to cause this
to happen it's just by virtue of the way
the forces build up in the system so you
know a 1 you'll hear about our forest
fires when a fire happens it burns out
the the fuel the dead wood that's around
if you have more and more debt would
build up so it's a long time between
fires and your fires bigger so there's
no one organizing that explicitly say in
an uncontrolled environment but it just
happens that way that a lot of times a
little spark or a spark the lightning
bolt hit something there's a little bit
of dead wood around and burns up and
it's done maybe there's a long long time
between that happens and the dead wood
is still built up that your fire is a
massive forest fire you know
encompassing whole
coast or something so the self-organized
criticality is the fact that without any
design you're getting these kinds of
dynamics that are sending out every once
in a while these events so massive that
they just door if anything you've seen
before they're just bigger than anything
you've seen before and and not only that
but you'll continue to get bigger ones
in the future that you've seen before so
even when you think you've seen the most
massive thing no there's there's more
massive things to come that haven't
shown themselves yet so so you know this
is a this is a law of you know of some
kind is you know is this something you
can bank on its in are there counter
points to like when you clear the forest
brush do you end up with bigger smaller
fires in the end or bigger fires in the
event a well if you clear it you'll end
up with smaller fires if you stop the
fire and don't let it burn out and keep
it there you hit finger fires
so it's I would think of it so much as a
law as a universality class which is
just a big way of saying that there's
many kinds of systems that can embody
this specific pattern so have you seen
have you seen that in social systems
well I mean certainly seen in financial
systems right so get these small little
dips and then huge huge crashes so and
and and yeah you course see it in social
systems otherwise and there could be
some things akin to the forest fire in
that as we attempt to quell our passions
to not fight to not Duke it out you know
that stuff gets bottled up and how does
it come out I don't know so eventually
in in in warfare physical violence and
all that so there there is something to
be said for you know kind of a Steven
Pinker kind of stuff that you
know everything's getting better all the
time and don't worry about it look
here's the data the GDP and flip dude
you know oh all that stuff he bases on
like well there's fewer fistfights you
know in the bar
and so it's clear things are getting
better but local infighting can actually
be something that releases the pressure
so to speak and you know people talk
about in history oh they used to be
everyone used to be at war all the time
but if you actually look at what those
wars looked like before the 20th century
they were actually pretty small scale
most of the time yeah little skirmishes
some people died no doubt terrible stuff
but not the kind of stuff you know not
world war two type stuff not these huge
massive events that that's go on and on
and seem to have no end so you do see
and this is sort of where I was going
with this is there are some people some
some authors out there and writers that
are speculating that the violence is one
of these complex systems and that to the
extent that we like stop the fire from
burning we're just actually postponing a
later power law event of violence that
is just going to happen as a matter of
sort of mathematical certainty based on
this principle of self-organized
criticality well I think there's one
author saying that there's one author's
saying that and I was interested in the
way that this applied here because it's
just fascinating to see where where
cause and effect you know you think
you're you think you're helping
something out here but you're actually
just back logging and waiting for
something more more terrible to happen
down the road and it's just a
fascinating concept and you know the way
you tie this into the masculinity issues
and boys being boys and we don't let
them fistfight there's no more mutual
combat hell we don't let our kids play
football so much anymore and we're not
teaching kids out of box and there's no
just controlled way to either express
your anger in a controlled environment
that's non-lethal and whatever and to
also sort of find your place in the
hierarchy right like it's good to know
where you stand in a hierarchy I'm
oftentimes a dominant person in a group
but I know when I'm not right and then
when I'm in a room or in a circumstance
where I need to be a little bit
behind-the-scenes or step back a little
bit I'm happy to do that man-like
hierarchy is good for us and I don't
think that our current political
environment appreciates hierarchy as a
benefit to us in our organization and to
our evolution well sort of you know I
would actually I would actually say that
maybe in terms of the rhetoric you might
do right but it seems that people are
constantly fired vying for sort of top
of the control hierarchy right yeah
because it's smoke and mirrors right
yeah so it's not it's not that we've
somehow evolved beyond that but I think
an important point what you're saying
I'm kind of I get I get a little bit
worried about hierarchical claims
because so many things are that we
assume or I or gold turn out not to be I
think in what you're you're talking
about are these dominance structures and
whatnot one of the important points is
that they're dynamic it's not some fixed
thing so you walk into this room this is
this is the kind of structure that
emerges you walk into a room with
different people and it's something
different and and your place there
depends on who's in that room and the
actions that unfold and all the
interactions and all that so it's it's
very dynamic there are hierarchies but
they're they're they're fluid they're
dynamic and they're they're subject to
the push and pull of a lot of other
forces that are non hierarchical
definitely and and as Jordan Peterson
pointed out and was very careful to
point out when he would use the phrase
dominance hierarchies which I think he
was beaten into submission to relenting
to changing that into competency
hierarchies but what's important to
remember about a dominance hierarchy is
that it has to be beneficial for
everyone in the hierarchy for it to for
it to maintain alright like the long
term health of that hierarchy depends on
people up and down on all around you
collectively benefiting from it it's not
like dominance has such a negative
connotation to it it sounds domineering
or I'm authoritarian or something but no
I mean it's his leadership and
capability and power and but if you
don't take care of the people in the
hierarchy then the hierarchy
have no reason to exist and I think
people get confused when they hear the
phrase dominance hierarchy and think
that it's some terrible and nefarious
thing but it's actually I think
something that we fall into very
naturally use a look at each other's you
know physical sizes power outputs
intellectual outputs powers I mean I
know where I fit in the hierarchy and
I'm ok with it because I just want to do
the thing that I can do the best and
again if you don't have a 360
perspective and make sure that the
hierarchy works for everyone involved
then it just doesn't have any any
longevity as far as I can tell I guess I
like the idea of not necessarily like
not necessarily this hierarchy but it's
calling it dominance hierarchy because
then you have some kind of a slice of
reality that maybe maybe makes sense to
think of that way you know that guy can
beat the out of that guy then you
know no question there you go that's the
order yeah yeah but there's like you
said there's like this intelligence as a
whole there's infinite dimensions you
could slice the situation on and and
what is the what is the context and
that's gonna affect everything that
that's further reason I'm kind of
hesitant about committing too much to
hierarchies because it's it seems
there's too much going on to kind of
reduce it to such a simple structure
yeah yeah but you know I think about it
in terms of evolution right you get
variety and then selection and what what
is what is a proper evolution approving
you know that something is actually
adaptive and functional it has to
somehow stand out right it has to
somehow appear to be superior right so
should we should be we should be
creating systems in which the superior
tends has an ability to surface right
isn't that something that we've been
talking about through all this is like
making sure that we still have enough
variety that then is allowed to flourish
so that we can see which one wins and
which one loses there has to be winners
and losers right there certainly has to
be winners and losers but there doesn't
have to be sort of back to your point
about Helvetica there's not sort of one
static winner for all time and now we're
done right that's exactly right exactly
right and it's about for my perspective
with liminal order about designing for
emergence trying to create a system that
will surface the most important salient
topics the things that are most relevant
to us allowing us to focus
our signal in on that so that we are
adaptive I've designed the liminal order
with all these things in mind for
generation warfare which we haven't
talked about but all this
decentralization localism even within
the group we have the sort of HQ level
workshops and seminars and theme setting
but then we strongly encourage you guys
to find their ways into squads of like
four to eight guys so that they can make
personal connections we encourage them
to do that both geographically and by
interest and so even within the group
that I've built that has some structure
we're also trying to build the
decentralized nature of it where people
can coalesce around whatever it is that
they need to call us around but all with
the fundamental values as the thing that
brought us together in the first place
I saw a tweet from Balaji the other day
that tech guy and he said that he came
up with a way to create a new town he's
like here's how you create a new town
first forget about the land the land is
the absolute last thing that you need
the first thing you need to do is
establish a set of values get the
customs and the norms established get
the community established and then you
can begin to speculate as to what kind
of geography you need you build a city
virtually you test it all out in VR
everyone's like this works for me then
you find the land then you build it and
then everybody moves in you already have
the values you already have the customs
you already have the norms and the
geography is sort of the last bit which
totally turns on its head everything
that we've experienced this humans up
until this point is that right and do
you see any value in that in the future
it's an interesting idea I don't think
that it's right ok tell me I I think
diggable house I think I think so for
things like cultural practices to emerge
this is another process of evolution
that a culture forms the the kinds of
ways that we exchange information
between people does not translate online
exactly the same way at all it's a much
different kind of interaction you might
get along with someone so well he's your
best bud online and then he you know
comes your roommate and you hate
each other so so I don't really see
and I think that you know it's back to
the Chazz thing what's what's one of the
things that they missed is like how are
they gonna feed themselves you know
you're autonomous how are you gonna feed
yourself so I think we need you know
Balaji is a tech guy I really like him
but I think that tech mindset can cause
you to kind of forget about some of the
things that actually ground us in the
world and actually sustain us and I
don't think it's without it's um it's
sort of merits to discuss that because I
think there is and is what we're kind of
discussing earlier you know maybe the
solution in part is to move and then
stop moving kind of find your zone and
stop moving and stay in place for a
while so that's kind of that kind of
feel you know but I when I was think
about I was think more of finding a
place that kind of already exists this
is already town I'm moving into the town
trying to form all of that structure
without the actual physical interaction
of people to me I don't think so I you
know one of the things that that is so
whom has been so useful for me is to
actually you know grow a garden have
some livestock
I can't imagine kind of even thinking
about autonomy without thinking about
agriculture first that's just it's just
the way I'm wired this is how I think
about it's how I see it you know open
systems right so so how are how are
people open systems how our organisms
open systems we eat food we drink water
take in sunlight
it's very easy to forget about those
things when when you kind of take them
for granted but I think moving into the
future we'll be able to take them less
and less for granted I mean you look at
this rotavirus thing in those uh
Smithfield plants shutting down and all
of a sudden there's meat shortages
everywhere that's insanity that's
insanity yeah yeah so that's fascinating
element of the way that all this is
being introduced to people
bit by bit by bit even if they're not
getting the grand theories if they're
not wisely listening to you or this
podcast but they're experiencing things
bit by bit
little pain points a little notice of
choke points and like ha man we are
connected this happened who owns
Smithfield anyway over time it does
where did the virus come from and
there's just so many you know people but
the thing is is people are rationally
ignorant right they're rationally
ignorant because most of the time this
information is not actionable for them
at the moment and they're rationally
ignorant about politics because you know
you do the math your vote is very
unlikely to be the determining factor in
an election but you know as it has been
in my life you know the the times at
which I felt the most pain were the
times of which life was compelling me to
act right so eventually we're going to
just have a dissonance of feeling inside
of us that just gets so great all these
little things add up that you get
spurred into taking action and I wish I
figured out the solution to just taking
action before the pain comes but the
pain does seem to be a really big
motivator big motivator for most people
and that's almost a rat a rational
response to everything that's going on
this has been a fantastic discussion for
me I loved seeing the way all these
different things have have a have an
echo have a have a similar scent have a
similar vibe with the systems and the
connectivity and and and memes and ideas
and viruses and actual viruses and
safety like we've exported safety
imported risk and danger Manufacturing
wise national security wise and I think
that the study of these systems is
obviously more important
than ever and hopefully these ideas will
begin to percolate out into the wider
conversations I mean it's it's it's a
heady stuff there's no question about
that but it is it is a way to see the
world and it is a model that has a
unifying factors from the universe down
to you and your chickens and manukan
tune yourselves to the to the vibe of
the of the universe right like work is
good action is good right and an
evolution is good if you can tune
yourself to those vibes you're gonna
find yourself in a better place one
thing that you said that struck me also
is we need to also be aware of the time
scale of this stuff so you said that
your agricultural iterations are annual
and man that must be tough for somebody
you're a programmer you said or you work
with data you know so you're used to
getting pretty quick results you grate
some code you get a result you see what
happens but man if you gotta take a year
to see if that one plan worked out that
that requires a whole different vibe
doesn't it it absolutely does but I'll
tell you the thing I felt most from that
is actually relief so yeah things things
go fast in the digital realm and things
go a lot slower in the physical realm
and there's a kind of rhythm slow
frequency rhythm that I've started to
tune in to I'd almost say tune back into
but I can't really say that I ever was
tuned into it personally and that is for
me one of the important parts about
about kind of cultivating a place-based
life is that there's these rhythms that
were embedded in and and play a role in
and this high frequency buzzing of
modernity has drown it all out and you
don't even feel those feelings anymore
you don't know what you're not feeling
them all right but you know I don't know
if you've ever read any Wendell Berry
nope
you should I would recommend the
unsettling of America he's brilliant and
you
talks a lot about local agriculture
police based living all those kind of
themes and one of the things that he
articulated that I feel more and more
all the time is that when you start to
live on a spot and and try to make your
actual living on that spot the place
starts to kind of material materially
run through you in a way that has a big
emotional impact it's no longer a kind
of resource like we're talking about
inside and outside of the system and you
start to those start to blur a little in
an in a way where my garden is that
inside me or outside me I'm not even
sure anymore
and that the the
called contentment that's come along
with that has been something that I
didn't have before and I'm looking
forward to continuing to do that year
after year and get more in tune with it
and the failures are really painful
because of that slow iteration they're
like oh my god I'm really stupid but you
know that's that's how you learn
so yeah vibing into the low frequency
rhythms of life that's awesome
that's that's the name of the book
coming low frequency rhythm love it
alright how the out of out of like
rekindle your connection with the slow
vibes of the universe you know there's
no thing there's no law that says that
we are supposed to appreciate the speed
and complexity of what happens around us
from right now or the way that we're
dropped into this mmm you know this is
the circuit board of light just flashing
on and off all the time we're you know
that this is new this is all new for us
you know we're tuned into the Sun the
moon the tides seasons they all make
sense and I learned for a simplicity of
that even as the same time as I double
down on my connectivity and social media
in the same way man I'm the same way I
got that kind of dual dual life going
I've got this online life you know I
work remotely for many things and then I
have this yearning for that simplicity
in that place based living and I'm just
trying to do both because the the
reality of the economy right now is
putting your tendrils out there is it's
beneficial I think that with this remote
work situation kind of coming online
there's gonna be more and more people
who can do what I'm doing and my you
know medium range plan here is to
continue to shift towards the local like
I don't want to always be on the
computer online whatever programming I
enjoy it it's good stuff but it's not
something that I want to be my full
existence yeah yeah well that's amazing
that you were able to identify that for
yourself amazing that you were had
courage enough to take action and to
risk and to do it and make it happen for
yourself I'm a little envious that
you've already made it out there I'm
looking around I'm thinking about it
myself it's been a time out in nature a
lot we always have with the kids and
even just in the backyard they just you
can just see that they just when their
feet get in the dirt and they just start
playing with the dirt and it things slow
down there's no devices or youtube or
anything you know there's a joy that
comes from that that you don't get from
watching your favorite influencer open
some box again for the 50th time not
that I let them look at that shitty but
you know you know what I mean you know
what I mean well Joe I am just so
honored and thankful that you took time
to talk to me about all this stuff it's
been a fantastic conversation we covered
a ton of themes I hope people get
something really good out of this if
you've listened to all the other
podcasts this one fits right in with the
themes and right in with the curriculum
it is part of understanding the world in
a more holistic way so that you can do
what you need to do for yourself we're
doing this in the liminal order we're
dressing all these themes we're reacting
to all of these issues we're taking
proactive measures we're starting local
with ourselves improve ourselves improve
our families improve our communities and
hopefully in turn improve our nation
this is our ethos this is what we're
doing and Joe thank you so much for
contributing to this where can people
find you online I'm going to send them
to Twitter at norm onyx on Twitter is
there somewhere else where you'd like
them to find your work or to engage with
you I have a little website that I don't
update as often as I share at JW Norman
calm but honestly Twitter just head
there if you want to connect excellent
excellent
and and a word to the wise just like
with me don't come stupid to the Twitter
feed because you will get black eye for
the record I do not mind disagreement at
all but I can't stand lazy like like I
said take like you block yeah right
so just come come correct and all will
be well Joe and I both have worked hard
to build
online that engage in critical thinking
and are not ideologues in any way
whatsoever so thank you very much sir
guys you can find me again at Jack
Murphy live on Twitter Jack Murphy
live.com is a website liminal - order is
the other website come check us out if
you believe in masculinity sovereignty
and Brotherhood and if you appreciate
where we are in this complex society
come on down and check us out I think
we've got what you're looking for Joe
thank you so much can't wait to do it
again there's ten more things I had on
the list to talk about we will get to it
sir but please get back to your chickens
get back to your young children go learn
how to cut a car apart so you can save
some guy's life in the volunteer fire
department next time up and thank you
very much man I appreciate oh thanks
jack man thanks for the invitation I
really enjoyed it too and I'm really
glad that our pastors crossed here this
is good stuff thanks man excellent
thanks a lot man see you later guys
[Music]
you