everybody it is Jack Murphy and we're
back on the record podcast and today my
guest is somebody that I've been wanting
to talk to for quite some time and
reading all of his work quite in-depth
Lee even in the last few days I've just
been neck deep in articles and by lines
from this man of which there are many
all over the place and all over the
place sort of intellectually it felt
like to me too which is one reason why I
want to talk to him his name is Sam
Hammonds and he is a director of poverty
and Welfare at the Miss Canon Center
here in Washington DC welcome thank you
very much for coming on oh I really
appreciate it and maybe if you could
just give a little bit of a background
to the listener it's just a real brief
sort of introduction because I didn't
really know too much about you until I
discovered you through the China shock
syndrome or trying to trying to Shock
Doctrine article that we're going to
talk a lot about so part of the thing I
like to do is bring maybe some new
people to my audience and so if you
could just give like you know a couple
minutes background on where you came
from just a little bit on your education
and we can just jump right into it sure
I mean I grew up in Canada as a
quintessentially very online nerdy kid
living in rural fishing communities okay
you know given just the nature of my
interests in politics and philosophy and
stuff like that you know you finally
find a space on the internet for to have
the discussions that you might not be
able to get in your backyard
absolutely when you say very online what
do you mean by that because I got that
sense from reading your Twitter for sure
because you definitely throw in little
bits and pieces in there that indicate
that you've been online and around for a
little bit yeah I mean I'm 28 but you
know I've been online since 98 probably
right I think my my Newgrounds accounts
from like 1999 and my Twitter accounts
2007 nice you know and you know early
early chat rooms and our mirc and and
stickam the old video chat say us yeah
you know YouTube I used to have a cringy
YouTube channel you know debate
philosophy and stuff like that did you
have
deleted to get this job here in this
fancy office no there was nothing that
bad on it was just you know when you
have when you're like when your voice is
still cracking and you're like debating
the ontological argument for God or
something like that it's like right
right maybe just wait just a minute
longer yeah we tackle those issues yeah
so you know from from there I went to
school Nova Scotia
st. Mary's University study econ then
went off to Ottawa Carleton University
to do a master's at the same time
you know from a very young age I you
know wanted to work in policy but
specifically American policy and I think
this is actually general cultural thing
Canada is we're all kind of America
watchers to some degree or another
and in DC itself always felt like a kind
of you know like an athenian or like
room in like classical sidious fit not
just by appearances but the kind of
density of intellectual debate and
America as well my perspective was
always always felt like a higher
variance country and by that I mean
there's high highs low lows there's not
a lot of social consensus and there's a
feeling of even if you know the politics
is typify by gridlock that you know we
could be another civil war or could we
could be a you know could have a
renaissance it's always like right who
wears in Canada things work very well
but very consensus-driven
it's actually something I think you know
America should try to emulate because it
does lead to good outcomes but if you
are in the world of policy and debate
philosophy if you sort of feel like
there's you know the end of history is
common here not much to do anymore so
the end of history right I thought we
put an end to that actually and well at
the end of history or is that still a
thing I think history branched off and
and Canada is still still pretty pretty
you know knows what it wants and it's
working pretty well and and you know
I've also you know what is it young and
I was big into you know
Christopher Hitchens and and those kind
of people and and sort of had a level of
romanticism for the you know that the
life of that like a public intellectual
right and but not just that that like
someone who's like I could actually but
changing things not just you know
scribbling and so you know and it was
also a very early you know big fan of
libertarian writing and sort of the
political philosophy of liberalism and
and also rationalism you know the kind
of less strong kind of overcoming bias
kind of community and it was was always
fascinated by by George Mason University
in particular and one to want it to go
there and not not necessarily for
education but to be around that milieu
of sort of the intersection of
libertarian thinkers and like
rationalist thinkers who are like
actually you know sort of like stepping
outside of history and and been studying
it like an anthropologist or something
like that mm-hmm
and so after I got my masters at
Carleton I came and did a second
master's at George Mason worked the
Makeda Center which was a research
center attached to the school and just
sort of dove headlong into public policy
and have unfortunately got hired at
niskanen niskanen Center so we're kind
of like you know people use all of words
today we describe ourselves as moderate
but it's more like a it's not a split
the difference Howard Schultz kind of
moderate it's it's we take from
different buckets right so there may be
some things that I think a OSE is right
on and some things I think Mike Lee is
right on right and so so it's a
heterodox right heterodox or a or kind
of you could say bipolar and and and
specifically like our history at the
niskanen Center is our founder Jerry
Taylor was at the Cato Institute for 23
odd years or something like that was a
vice president by the end of it and ran
the energy and climate shop he would be
the kind of figure had to go on Stossel
or Fox News and and debate climate
change activists but you know over that
time he had a road wrote at Damascus
moment where he realized he was sort of
had become you know in cat captured by
his own you know filter bubble and that
the evidence for climate change was was
real and so he and we in it we are
initially founded as a kind of break
break off from the Cato Institute Jerry
left brought some people over so we
initially were like post we were like
libertarian libertarian Republican
climate realists but since then we've
sort of expanded to be heterodox in a
number of areas so you know when I was
hired it was partly because I had done a
lot of writing on on like the normative
foundations of the welfare state and why
in some ways a effectively designed
welfare state is conducive to economic
dynamism and the free market and that
sort of hit a sweet spot of like
heterodox Rose where I was saying where
I came from I have I have the pedigree -
you know - I have the bona fides as a
libertarian but was deviating on an
issue like the well first you know
classically liberal libertarians think
that you know we should yeah either
taxation is theft or we should just go
back to some kind of like friendly
society well I think one of the things
that attracted me to your writing was
that I couldn't really naeli down and so
that I would read and be like oh that's
great then I'd read the solar at the pen
hello I'm not sure that all drives but
in this world where I think especially
my audience and a lot of people I talked
to we're sort of like in a post
libertarian world a lot of us at least
the in my sphere I think once identified
as libertarian I myself went to George
Mason - back in the 90s and and studied
under some guys like Brian Kaplan who's
now very prominent writer and professor
there at
Mayson and so I was really indoctrinated
into into the libertarian thinking and I
know a lot of my colleagues and
associates were too but I think that
we've all sort of all say maybe matured
out of that or evolved out of that and
and I heard a critique thrown at some of
my friends like my friend will
Chamberlain who runs a human events the
website and long-standing conservative
publication they started calling us a
was it Mogga socialists which is an
interesting way of I think identifying
the fact that we have begun to move
beyond just strictly strict libertarian
understanding of the world and are
willing to entertain you know maybe like
early Roosevelt sort of ideas on like
how to how to marshal the economy in
such an order in order to you know come
to a greater good for everyone but you
know with leaving the libertarian
doctrine behind and so in reading your
work yeah you definitely have the
pedigree you have and what I really
enjoyed about your work and we're going
to get into it is that you make your
points but then you also put it very
heavily into context and very heavily
into political history contact local
science context economic history and
economic context and you really draw
very clear lines through the existing
literature to come to the point that
you're trying to make today and the one
piece that really stood out to me that I
read of yours well back I guess it was a
late last year was an article called the
China Shock Doctrine and what appealed
to me very much about that was in in my
book Democrats a deplorable I identified
the Chinese ascension into the WTO and
the battle for Seattle and the World
Trade the WTO protests and such as a
really pivotal turning point for a lot
of us who once had had supported the
Democratic policies and Democratic ideas
the neoliberal consensus Washington
Consensus etc and then now was this man
20 years 20 years later 20 years later
we can look back at that moment and draw
a straight line to here and see many of
the negative consequences that we are
experiencing as a nation a culture as a
an economy that
gave birth to the Trump moment the Trump
movement and and so I really wanted to
dig into that because in particular
there's there's you take a very sharp
look at a comparative advantage for
example and that's something I'd like to
discuss and and for my regular listeners
this one may be a little bit dirtier and
a little bit wonky er than usual but
trust me please stick with me we're
gonna we're gonna tie it all together so
we can understand how it relates to our
world today because the main goal of the
podcast is to try to help create a new
mental model of the world because for
most of us the the models the software
that we were given as kids is just not
functioning right we're just trying to
process this new world but the the
data's coming in and it's just not we're
not getting the right results so this is
part of that exploration so when we just
get started right with the China shock
thing and can you maybe tell us a little
bit about its genesis why you decided to
write it and then we can just start
working through you know your thesis and
and and the you know the power of the
grand strategy for China which appears
at least from my perspective and that of
some of my other guests including John
rabe as to be a failed strategy and one
that wherever we engage in this grand
strategy we're just creating more
problems so I'd love to hear your take
on that so let me just start with that
that China Shock Doctrine in Nashville
is a national affairs I think yeah sure
well I mean the genesis of it is it's
really a kind of spiritual follow-up to
a piece of rope for the bulwark called
the cost of trade of China and the
argument I was having there you know you
know I am philosophically a free trader
I think you know globalization is good
it should be pointed out that on the
side of his I wear his glasses it's it's
it's as globalist right which maybe
that's something ironic yeah you know
there's a I think that the failure is
really an elite failure a failure to
communicate right so you know one one
way of understanding elitism is not
merely you know every society has any
elite but if if they are running the
show and not communicating what they're
doing to build buy-in right then then
when they're when promises don't come to
fruition there's a backlash and in my
and so you know originally I have a
another paper called the free-market
welfare state where you know I make the
argument for social insurance programs
as compatible with a dynamic free-market
open economy in part you know one of the
classic cases is something like the
China shock where you know overnight you
know in a period of three years we shed
two million manufacturing jobs in in a
way that is very geographically
concentrated where was that concentrated
Midwest and South Atlantic
you know furniture factories in North
Carolina and stuff like that and right
and and you know in our models in the
econ model textbook it's like yeah well
there's gains from trade and there's
increase winners and losers but the
winners outnumber the losers or at least
you can redistribute but we often don't
do the redistribute part right like we
we say you know the pie will be bigger
and so in principle we can make everyone
better off but we don't actually follow
up and do the in principle we don't
right and and so there's there's some
evidence that you know in European
countries that underwent
internationalization in the 90s places
like the Scandinavian countries had had
less of a populist backlash in part
because they had you know robust
reemployment programs for bust training
programs investments in supply chain to
to so for a displaced worker in one
industry you could move into a new
industry that's even higher productivity
and we kind of only did half of that so
we in a sense we only got half the
benefits of globalization right like the
benefits of globalization or one that
you know you you know you have the
comparative advantage that we're going
to talk about it but you know trading of
countries that have different relations
but the other half of that is you know
international competition puts pressure
on your domestic companies to compete to
be internationally competitive right and
that can be good for productivity
because that that will weed out the the
underperformers and reward the the
higher performers and it's
concept like called export discipline
like you have when you're competing
globally you have no more more intense
market discipline but we only get half
the benefits because instead of
upgrading leveling up our firms the
export discipline just wiped out a lot
of firms right and so you had this
massive offshoring so so the first
perspective was you know we apply it a
kind of naive theory globalization that
was only only captured half the benefits
and also left a lot of workers behind
because instead of retraining them or
giving them any level of 16 that they
fell into disability insurance or onto
opiates and unemployment or maybe they
became a Walmart greeter and and that
was a an elite failure and so the piece
I mentioned the cost of trade of China
it sort of begins with this anecdote
that the economist Dani Rodrik has in
one of his books the globalization
paradox where he was when he was writing
that book it came out in 1999 he sent a
draft Paul Krugman and Krugman read the
draft and responded Dani I can't find
any you know technical problems with
your arguments but I feel if you put up
this book that's critical globalization
you are quote-unquote giving ammunition
to the barbarians mmm
right and and and I think that's
highlights part of the elite perspective
which was you know there are more
there's more nuance to trading
globalization than we like to admit but
if we talk about it or if we make it
overt then we give ammunition to the
barbarians who will oppose it so we kind
of have to give this this so he
simplified version of it for political
reasons and and my view is that the
economists an economist job is not to
engage in strategic discourse is to tell
the truth about what economics policy
does so so economists especially the 90s
were what went from being sort of
analysts or experts into more advocates
right and and I think that as part of
the initial elite backlash is
we were sold a bill of goods right so
let's just back up for a second so like
in the late 1990s China wanted to obtain
was a permanent normalized trade
relation status with the United States
there was big debates about it it was
around the same time that we were
working on NAFTA as well and there was
just a general stampede towards reducing
barriers to trade would boost reducing
barriers to capital flows across borders
and the third component of that is also
reducing barriers for people to move
right so economic labor mobility is a
really key component to and importantly
political integration right political
integration so this is the distinction
daniel roderick is between globalization
and hyperglobalisation okay so you drop
trade barriers you drop tariffs on goods
and services
that's globalization there's nothing
really wrong with that but hyper
globalization is when you when you've
picked all the low-hanging fruit of
dropping tariffs and now to get more
efficiency you have to rectify the fact
that American tea kettles and British
tea kettles have different voltages and
so you end up having to myrrh in some
ways merge your regulatory regime
because the the quote unquote non-tariff
barriers of how things are regulated the
kind of product standardization the
different country has don't necessarily
match between two countries so if an
American company wants to sell tea
kettle two to someone in London they
have to have a separate product line
right and and that kind of hyper
globalization is what drove you know
these more super national institutions
like the European Union where you have
you know Commission's that are set up to
try to harmonize regulation across
countries and in the u.s. context there
really was in the late 90s a an active
program to harmonize North America and
even central South America into you know
these trading blocks and there's
arguments for and against that path but
it wasn't a path that anyone outside of
the elite
really consented to or even knew about
and to the extent that they knew about
it they they had you know they were
listening to Alex Jones write about the
New World Order and they're just like
they have this crazy vision of like
Illuminati people sitting in in there
Freemason which wasn't too far from the
truth actually given what you described
in that you've got guys like Paul
Krugman that don't want real information
out to people so that they can't argue
and then we've also discussed how the
true impact of free trade and
globalization wasn't necessarily
communicated to the masses and then
there weren't the safety you know got
measures put into place so I mean if
there's a sense in which that you know
I'm not a conspiracy theorist but
there's a sense in which you know the
the Alex Jones of the world what what
they what they believe is literally
false right but it's it's capturing some
element of truth that at least something
that's felt right and you know the you
know thinking thinking that pizza gate
thinking that comet Pizza is home to a
pedophile ring is obviously absurd but
then you get Jeffrey Epstein and Prince
Andrew and the rest and it's like well
they're your there is your your there's
a sense of rot in the system at the top
that's not wrong but it but the the way
it's being being applied is like just
not true it but and so that and then
that ends up disqualifying you were
discrediting you and but in some senses
and I don't want to get too deep into
this but in some senses it's
rhetorically correct but you're gonna
have a hard time persuading people it's
of the nuances of global trade it's like
when they said take Trump seriously been
literally rights there's a version of
that and you know it but the difference
is these were open secrets like there
there was journals of economic
integration
Judy Shelton who is sure but there who
they're open secrets but they're there
there's a barrier of language and
background knowledge and access
information etc it's there
if now you understand it right but it's
you know nobody nobody went to
Pennsylvania did they and said we're
gonna let China into the WTO and what
that means is like all these towns
around here dead gone and guess what we
also have this idea that you're gonna be
just willing to up and move to wherever
the new good job is somewhere but that
we know that's actually not true either
it's basically you're gonna stay and all
the jobs the money are gonna leave and
then all of a sudden you know you're
gonna be suffering from deaths of
despair drug abuse alcohol abuse etc etc
and how are you guys down with that like
nobody-nobody went and did that so
there's like an opacity right between so
it's not it's you say it's open but it's
it's not that the knowledge is there to
be fat like it as opposed to that these
are all like hidden under the right
under you know the Smithsonian or
something right no exactly no I get it I
get it and you know I'm not a huge fan
of Alex Jones by any means and and it is
interesting how the pizza gate stuff did
sort of presage the Epstein revelations
or maybe that's what they were talking
about in the first place I absolutely
have no idea I was just a common Pizza
the other day I go there with my kids
great pizza love that place I love that
place but back back to the China thing
so the United States and I remember even
we were looking at the free trade area
of the Americas back then but that died
with 2000 with 9/11 right like the whole
focus on I used to be able to go between
Canada in the US without a passport like
super easy right they wanted you to be
able to do that all the way down to the
tip of Chile and and you know there's a
world where that isn't like ultimately
and I'll put my cards on the table I
think I think that's actually a world
worth moving to directionally right it's
just that there's a pace of change
there's the level of buy-in and
communication with the public there's
and this is why I sort of awe and this
relates to how I write write I like you
mentioned I I try to embed what I'm
writing about the points I'm trying to
make in some kind of historical flow
some try to like retrace the the
dialectic that led
to where we are now and and I think that
also should it should inform the way we
do policy where instead of trying to
stand outside history and take a God's
eye view as if we have like some skyhook
to the through the moral foundations of
the universe and prescribe what should
happen like the these things are
evolutionary and in a way the elite
failure and I get into this sort of in
the final section of the china shop
doctor and it was sort of applying a
theory that was fastly removed from
practice right and and the bigger that
gap is so so there's a theoretical case
that we should have you know a global
common market and there's a way of
getting there it might take a century
and but but you know the the the the
like the conte and arguments about like
perpetual peace like there's there's a
lot of truth to that stuff like it would
be great for China and for the rest of
the world to be as rich as us for us to
all be peaceable and to trade and to
travel the world but that that like we
can't force that isn't there a
presupposition in that statement that
every culture and society wants to be at
the end of the day peaceful and coexist
with everybody is that I don't know if
that's true or not but isn't there an
assumption built into there and then
wouldn't wouldn't sort of history
say say otherwise and and wouldn't
looking at you know primates and other
animals close to us would not say
otherwise that you know conflict and
violence and resource competition and
that sort of thing sort of innate innate
in us and we're prone to it yeah but the
the it's it's the stuff of civilization
right like it's I think this is also
like part of the you know psychological
subtext to a statement like ammunition
to the barbarians like yeah there really
is like this this
figurative but almost literal dichotomy
between the us the civilized and them
the barbarians and but I think that you
know building constructing a
civilization is all about taming those
instincts yes and channeling in
productive ways and while also
preserving human particularity like and
this is why you know maybe even in that
globalized fully globalized world you
would still you know want to have a lot
of heterogeneity because even one of the
one of the bigger you know it used to be
the left critique of globalization was
you know we're homogenizing the world
right now you traveled to Tyson's
corners and then you go to Johannesburg
and they look like the same place yeah I
mean have you been to Singapore lately I
mean I was so bored out of my mind there
because it was just like a combination
of Miami and New York and something else
it was we had to seek out the you know
the novelty there because it was just
yeah it's the same you can go anywhere
in the world now and I used to call it
the Johnny Walker Black index you know
right you can get Johnny Walker walk
anywhere and you can gauge the economic
strength of the country based on how
much that drink costs right
at the same time if you're in Paris
McDonald's probably has the best french
fries so it's not all bad true there's
just a balance right and and maybe being
Canadian I have a more nuanced
perspective on it like I'm you know I'm
not so look there's a famous book in
Canada by a George Grant called lament
of a nation he was writing a
conservative writer in the red Tory
tradition which are sort of like big
government conservatives and today call
it like a conservative populist
nationalism and limit of a nation is
like this prediction that because
America is so big relative to Canada
that our culture is going to be absent
right and and that's why Canada you know
to this day has content requirements
where the radio station has to play you
know 16 percent of the plays have to be
Justin Bieber because he's happened to
be born in Canada
and and even now like Justin Trudeau is
talking is talking about how to enforce
content requirements on stream streaming
companies like Netflix and you know I
there the the pure anarchist
anarcho-capitalist libertarian globalist
economists would say that that's so an
efficient like if we all want to watch
the Kardashians which is all watch the
Kardashians but there really is a
trade-off right and and as a small L
liberal you know my I believe in
pluralism right and pluralism is sort of
the inverse of homogeneous Asian right
and and you know maybe there are
economic you know quote unquote
efficiency costs to you know
Canada having some level of cultural
protectionism right but maybe that is
also essential to having a broader
buy-in and also you know it's one thing
if we're buying TVs from Mexico it's
another thing if we're buying Mexican TV
shows right well that things have so
many interesting points I came across an
article you did in quill at a few years
ago referencing happiness hypothesis and
Jonathan Hayden and you know basically
he says that were 90% this giant
elephant running through the streets 10%
this little rider bouncing up on top
hoping and praying we can just guide the
elephant to go where we want it to go
and when it does go where we want it to
go where like look we did that even
though the hell that was gonna go
wherever he wanted to go anyway and
something that you had just said really
triggered that and for me and I can't
remember what it was because I was think
about so many other things too on top of
it when you start talking about sort of
cultural rationing in Canada and I was
trying to think about how or why we may
or may not want to do that in the United
States and is there a same is there same
argument to be made about cultural
rationing as it were protectionism that
you made in Canada versus in it versus
the United States would is there an
argument to be made for that yeah I
wouldn't say the US as a whole right
because the US is
cultural hegemon like you know we export
Hollywood all around the world it's we
America is the beacon for like America
has a robust national cultural place in
the world and that's not going to go
away like yeah everyone subscribing to
Disney Plus right now but I don't know
the biggest YouTube channel in the world
I think is those Indian guys isn't it
no it's PewDiePie but there's a big
competition right between the two of
them yeah but you know I think to the
extent this applies to the States is the
internal heterogeneity of the United
States right so like and a lot of the
cultural backlash the culture wars in
the u.s. is a kind of localized version
of the same debate where there's a sense
in you know like a religious community
in Missouri like feels like they have
absolutely no cultural leverage in the
modern world because everything is
dominated by New York and LA right and
and so that that's also one of the
forces behind the realignment where you
know they have Antigua they had their
adopting the left's old
the old left's like globalization
critique not just on economics but also
the level of cultural feminine a
modernization that's being that feels
like it's being forced pushed under
their throats because they have
relatively limited you know market power
right and you know consumers drive what
Hollywood produces right like Nike you
know took the Betsy Ross flag off its
shoe because you know Nikes customers
are Millennials there's their urban they
live in the city you know they're not
the same with like you know that the
example Tucker Carlson gave it the
National Conservatives conference like
the the Oreo the the rainbow colored
Oreo you know it's like well if I don't
want my kids to see you know LGBT stuff
on on their cookies I can't go start my
own Oreo company right so there's this
sense on the right right now that
that's reframing the cultural war debate
in terms of a kind of in terms of a kind
of new left critique of globalization as
homogenizing I'm gonna jump ahead to my
question that was like 10 10 pages down
after we went to the whole thing because
we're on the subject now and you wrote
in there that there was or maybe it was
in a different piece but you wrote that
there was a difference between civil
society and cultural identity and I'm
wondering if you could expand on that is
there a meaningful difference does civil
society come from our culture where does
our culture come from do different
populations have different ideas or a
civil society should look like is that
separate from their cultural identity I
think this is something that people are
really grappling with right now it's
like where does our actual civil society
come from does it come from our culture
where does our culture come from it
comes from us and what is who are we we
are the elephant yeah by civil society I
really mean like civic society like the
the state right so I think the best way
to get this issue is to contrast the
contrast the multicultural policies of
Canada with the United States so can't
so the United States has this this self
identity as a melting pot right so
multiculturalism in the u.s. context is
is really a kind of homogenate it's
really a kind of monoculture like it's
about you know having black brown and
every color person be represented but we
are all going to you know be pulled into
one sort of one one nation culture and I
would like the Civic nationalist idea
right well I think this is sometimes
called like one nation conservatism
right or one one caught one nation
culture and and that that that has its
roots and you know the relative you know
you know that the thirteen colonies were
diverse but historically America has
been was dominated by like this white
anglo-saxon culture to the point where
not dominated I mean created by yeah
literally created by let's not use I
think dominated for a lot of my
listeners they'll hear that
dominate it and be like that's a
negative thing well it's product of it
but I mean it's literally both like
wasps wasps are for the elite I you know
they're they used to restrict Jews and
and polish people from and Catholics
from going to their Ivy League school so
there was a level of actual doubt on two
of the three of those accounts there so
alright so like and because America had
this you know the the scots-irish for
example you know they they are if you
ever read like Albion seed that book you
know they're they were the first sort of
ethnic white population to lose the -
right they they just became white right
and then over time the you know the
Irish and the the polish and Italian
immigrants like they they all assimilate
into sort of one identity right and the
in Canada it's a very different very
different sort of policy are we have a
an official multicultural policy but
it's really a policy of accommodation
right so and this this has roots in the
fact that Canada was settled both by the
English but also by the Acadian French
and to this you know within our
lifetimes Quebec has tried to separate
from Canada and they they really are a
nation within a country right so we
can't have a one nation policy one one
culture policy in Canada we from day one
we were bifurcated because there was
genuine cultural differences and and
both sides didn't want to assimilate to
the other right and so that led to a
kind of pluralism that was ingrained in
our system our federal system right and
and this this ended up being
extrapolated to our immigration policy
as well so you know wait how does it how
does that mean and first of all just
just reminder I mean it quote worked
except for the fact that the cable quad
tried to secede from yeah that's right
yeah they succeeded how'd it did it
really work well this is one of the
another another difference between can
in the u.s. like the the history
secession in the United States is so
tinged with with states rights and
racism and slave
that in the way it's not in Canada and
so there is like this you know the herp
the Albert Hirschman exit voice and
loyalty sort of theory where like
there's different ways you can influence
an organization you can have voice in it
you can be democratic and and and put
your opinions out there or you can't
threaten exit
you can stop buying a product because
that you don't like what they're doing
and exit is a really important part of
what you know keeps a country responsive
right like and and so yes there's a
alternative world or a Quebec left and
we'd have had like a brexit and Canada
would be literally divided in half but
in in some way like the optimal is to
have that active threat of like a a
viable like real threat of exit that
never actually gets enacted because just
having that threat enforces a level of
federalism and pluralism and negotiation
that keeps the system sort of responsive
to those those deeper things and and and
just to explain how this affects our
integration policies of Canada has an
explicit accommodationist policy of
immigration so you know our view is not
that you know new immigrants have to you
know assimilate in a very deep sense to
Canadian culture we instead of having a
melting pot sometimes it's called the
mosaic right we have you know general
genuine you know genuine
multiculturalism in a sense where your
local ethnic identity is your Canadian
but you're also Hindu right like you
have the - we never had we didn't we
don't have an ideology of dropping the -
and the the Canadian part of the idea is
is less thick it's more about your your
civic involvement more about if you can
participate in democracy and to
participate in the state so one of the
biggest sort of turning points on this
was in the late 90s when you know can
has a large Sikh population and
a Sikh man wanted to join the RCMP the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the
RCMP is kind of like our our Federal
Police and the RCMP traditionally wear
you know red with with these these uh
funny hats and obviously Sikhs wear
turbans and so the question was can a
Sikh joined the RCMP and if so do we are
we going to force him to remove his
turban and so this created a big
controversy at the time and the the
conclusion was no we have to accommodate
that right and and that actually leads
to better integration in the long run
right if you if you force assimilation
as your policy then you actually get
resistance but if you're focused more on
civic integration then people from
different backgrounds and communities
and cultural identities feel comfortable
coming out of their home coming out of
their community joining in civil society
because they they don't feel like
they're there they don't have to give up
their cultural identity to to do that
well and what is it here in the United
States I think here in the United States
there's there's more an ideology of of
cultural assimilation really and I think
it's you know derivative derivative that
anglo-saxon Protestant sort of
philosophy a more Universal
universalistic philosophy I think it's
also reflected in you know the way the
cultural left has has become very you
know the intolerance of intolerance
right like whereas in Canada you know
one of the funny like coalition's has
formed you can't the Canadian
Conservative Party has a very large
immigrant constituency in part for very
obvious reasons like if you have if you
support more if you're a Christian and
support more traditional family values
you have a lot in common with the the
Indonesian immigrant who just got off
the boat and doesn't know you know they
they they don't they're they don't
understand any of this social justice
stuff and
and so you end up having these odd
bedfellows where like for example when
Ontario was trying to pass a a very
progressive sex ed curriculum you know
you had Christian conservatives and the
immigrant community joining forces on
that and and the solution is
accommodation we have we have to have
genuine pluralism and and genuine
pluralism we you know it's based on the
fact that our based on the premise that
even if you think there's a right answer
you know and I and I we all have our own
comprehensive moral views about what the
right answer is you can't impose that
you can't because imposing that is a
kind of domination right right so
basically what you're saying is the
Civic Society there gets made up from
whoever shows up on the boat right you
have to accommodate all these views and
you have to integrate all these new
views so basically it's like by numbers
right well that's what I mean by mosaic
right it's you you stand back far enough
from a mosaic it looks like it's been
blended together yeah but that's quite
different from literally you know having
a melting pot where everything becomes
fondue you know I'm grappling with that
one a little bit because it sounds like
if there's a loud enough faction on any
number of issues they would become
integrated into your civic society I
don't know that people in the United
States are open-minded like that am I
seeing this wrong let me give you the
counter example so that this this the
this mosaic policy that I'm I'm
describing in Canada the exception is go
back because Quebec has a very thick
cultural identity right they are French
and they are Catholic and they even
though you know since the 60s they
become very secular they they retain
that kind of French more rationalistic
view of assimilation right like the
French policy of assimilation is is kind
of parallels in Quebec and in the last
decade there was this initiative
advanced by the the parti québécois
which is the sort of more nationalist
party in Quebec that the they call it
the the values Charter
and if this had passed it did pass but
it was struck down by our Constitutional
Court it would require it would ban
religious religious garb of any kind in
public places right and this was
transparently a
a form of discrimination against Muslims
who were headdresses and so on and and
that isn't the opposite of what I'm sort
of describing that that's a that's a
forced form of sort of rationalistic
assimilation and and you know I've joked
before that like you know progressivism
the current mode of progressivism er
currently and like it is a kind of
version of that right like a you know
it's only a matter of time before you
know Bill Maher's president and bans the
burqa right and and I think that that
trend to see how you know the cultural
side of progressivism is of course
alienating to you know a six-year-old in
Kentucky it's also potentially very
alienating to the you know the Catholic
family man from you've just moved here
from Mexico right like definitely right
and and that is a kind of myopia that I
think the left is doesn't have because
they they don't because of this this
American Protestant assimilationist a
you know way of looking at the world
universalistic way we're looking the
world they they they don't see that
there's it's a false dichotomy right
like like you you can accommodate people
who are traditional family values even
if you don't you yourself don't believe
in them I'm digging through my notes
here because you brought up something
that I wanted to talk to you about too
and I promise we'll get back to the
China thing because I think it's so
important but you made a connection
between social justice activism and
Protestantism is that right did I get
that right yeah yeah I think can you
explain that to me because as I wrote
that down I thought to myself I don't
understand this well
you know I think a and you know maybe I
might be sort of out of my depth here
but there's a universalistic strain in
Christianity right there's there's a
more particular istic strain like if you
think Orthodox but then there's also
this more universalistic strain which i
think is is even as America secular
Rises is still part of the
presupposition cultural presupposition
of everything from cultural policy to
even you know the the trade issues we're
talking about is the sense of building
the kingdom of God on earth
and yeah this broader sort of
cosmopolitan equality and I think that
is in ways downstream of a kind of white
anglo-saxon form of Protestantism in a
way that isn't it it's very uniquely
American in that sense like there's you
know the cultural views the way the way
you know different countries in Europe
see these things or you know I think
there's also a parallel here to why like
a lot of the you know populist
nationalist governments in Central
Europe are also you know like the Polish
Law and Justice Party they're also a
kind of Catholic nationalist party
because I think there's just this sort
of underlying Catholic Protestant you
know war religion that that's kind of
taking place in the subtext even though
we don't use those terms but those are
the the kind of the deaths that like the
genealogy of those ideas even if even if
we detach them from theology so wasps
equal sjw's that's this is what I'm
taking away from this there's like a
direct line you can draw you think yeah
like literally like that that's the you
know the wasps ran the Ivy League's and
that that's emanating from the Ivy
League's the extent that it's it's
envisioning this kind of kind of
universalistic
social egalitarianism that that it that
gives permission gives license to a kind
of even evangelicalism right like and
these parallels aren't aren't to falsify
or to negate those few searches it's
just that's actually what the historical
context is even even something like you
know the effective altruism movement I
was gonna bring that out yes well uh you
know John Gray the the writer and
philosopher he has a book called the
seven types of atheism where he the
whole point of that book is to say you
know let's not just have the new atheist
like Sam Harrison and Richard Dawkins
define atheism the there's there's
different ways to be an atheist and a
non-believer you can be into Spinoza or
you know you can be a Buddhist and he
identifies like secular humanism right
the kind of new atheist creed is really
a kind of monotheism that has the has
dropped the label God right it's and and
and in in it seeks converts right but it
also it also is you know you could be
traced historically from you know a
Augustus or comped you know comped
was the first person to coined the word
altruism and this was part of the
Enlightenment where you know we are
becoming enlightened and we see the
natural religion or the natural science
the philosophy have kind of refuted
religion and now we need to construct a
new religion right and compt called his
religion altruism and they would where
they literally would wear tunics that
could only be buttoned up in the back
because then you'd have to have someone
help you right and this this sir
self-sacrificing mentality really is a
kind of Christian morality like you know
you can read in each other on Randy
you want confirmation to that and
there's nothing that isn't invalidating
maybe that more maybe that you know that
that is the culture we have we kind of
operate in that culture but we can't we
can't you're deluding yourself if you
think the cultural presuppositions that
you have just came from X Neil oh now
that they are deeply embedded in history
and this this this also goes back to why
you can't force things you have to take
more evolutionary approach because
because these things evolve like they
everything everything
today has some piece of the past in it
it's fascinating I mean my audience me
no no stranger to the notion that social
justice warriors are what the Claremont
Institute is now calling
multiculturalism or identity politics or
whatever the case may be that has has a
religious element to it for sure in fact
we've been talking about that quite a
bit it's been a great awakening right
like America has had these great
awakenings these Protestant evangelical
awakenings in his history and today's
it's the Great Awakening and we're kind
of missing the fact that you know it has
the exact structure of past Great
Awakenings is it came on very quickly
caught people off guard it's very very
evangelical and and and isn't and you
know wrapped up in all these sort of
rituals and social rituals and just
because it is nominally secular it it's
the exact same sort of sociological
phenomena right oh and they operate in
this similar way and you said that
they're seeking converts and they also
seek out to destroy apostates of which
one that that's what I am I'm an
apostate that's a former Democrat and
you know and I want to reiterate that
this isn't I'm not saying this as a
polemic against social justice I'm no
you can make it the exact same genealogy
not it be a different genealogy for
everything right and and I think what
I'm really against is is lack of
self-awareness yeah I think I think that
we can we can definitely agree on that I
had a conversation with a philosopher
and a missionary psychologist beau
Winegard
from Hillsdale I think he was on and we
were talking about different populations
having certain proclivities towards or
an appreciation for different types of
political organization or political
structures do you think that there's any
connection between our evolution as an
animal and who we are where we evolved
what sort of contained spheres we
evolved in and then what sort of
political system that we can either
appreciate or endure and if there are
those kind of differences what happens
when you put them together in the same
place and then ask for us to integrate
or you know create a mosaic or turn
everybody into fondue no absolutely you
know I think it's almost the essence of
conservatism to say that human nature is
really binding constraint on society and
that's not to say we can't modulate or
mediate human nature to produce
civilizations that are productive and
transcend like tribalism and stuff like
that but it is saying that you know in
the same way that your Xbox controller
is shaped like your hand right we mold
the institutions to our physical and
psychological form we can't mold the
psychology to the institution well
that's a very interesting point that you
bring up and you also tie in another
concept I think I read of yours
something about a veto and it made me
think about an elite veto or something
like that it made me think of the
tyranny of the minority and what happens
when the the minority is a tyranny and
their ideas are actually trying to shape
us in ways that don't conform to who we
are as human beings and I think that
that's one of the things that works
Baron Singh right now is there's been a
takeover of our institutions
universities media technology etc by a
minority of evangelicals who are seeking
to reshape a human behavior through the
power of these institutions so I do see
that happening because I feel it
I think something like that is happening
I so you know there's a great new book
out by Michael Lin called the new class
war right and and and this is a big
feature of his book because you know
there's a there's this sort of myth of
America as a class of society right
Lexus took the Tocqueville like you know
we are purely meritocratic and I'm like
the Indian caste system or you know the
British class system we have genuine
than we have inequality but we don't
have class and Lin says though that's
just malarkey all right yeah you know
the post new to New Deal era was the
last great moment of sort of class
compromise where you know there were
institutions like trading ins robust s--
Civic civil society in the form of
religious concrete congregations and
that provided a that channeled working
class culture and economic attitudes
into power and it wasn't to dominate the
elite but to have some kind of
settlement between them because you're
always going to have new lead even
communist societies have a managerial
elite and the issue is that in the last
four years those those institutions have
have crumbled because they were you know
deemed to be the dragon on efficiency
and in some sense like they're you know
unions can be a drag on efficiency uh
you know having you know you know Disney
buy up Fox and you know everything else
like maybe it's more efficient to have
one company that owns all the media but
but it ends up no well you know there
are these things called returns to scale
right like yeah and so there is there is
a argument but it what it neglects is
the role of power right and power
doesn't occur to it doesn't appear
anywhere and you know make textbooks it
but power does exist and and you know
the the when you when we when those sort
of New Deal era sort of institutions
eroded well all that was left was sort
of the existing power structure that was
made up of
of you know people with higher education
the managerial class the professional
class and and they've kind of taken over
the means of production and in a way
that you know you know I myself and a
totally socially liberal you know I I
you know to say the least
no I am NOT day a trad by any means but
you can you can if you take a more
pluralistic perspective I think this is
why liberal genuine liberalism is hard
because real liberalism is pluralism and
not a kind of you know american-style
liberalism which is like you know all
you Christians are backward be bold and
stuff like that like like the real real
pluralism requires you to sort of step
outside your ego and your own interests
and to recognize the ways in which
different people believe different
things and well I might not believe in a
God other people do and that God may be
informs our views on sexuality and other
things and you I can't it's not it's not
consistent with pluralism to say no
haven't you read The God Delusion
there's no God you have to you you know
right right but there are some things in
which you cannot compromise right like
what's what is I have some ideas what
what would be something that you would
not compromise on like for me it would
be the general framework of what what
does equality equality to me means
equality of opportunity to other people
that might mean equality of outcomes and
now those to me are completely at odds
with each other I think it's also a
false dichotomy right like that like I
think the the well not just a false
economy but equality the outcome is kind
of a bit of a straw man just to be
frankly I think that tell me lay it on
me
like the kind of egalitarianism that
that the pre rose ability and sort of
the New Deal style version of
egalitarianism isn't isn't about
equalizing you know in comes across it's
really about this social power right so
is and that and that and that's what you
know eat with the Scandinavian countries
are more egalitarian not because they
have flatter income distributions but
because
they have robust you know collective
bargaining that gives workers some say
over how their economy runs and and that
distribution of power is I think what
people are really striving what people
feel like they're lacking not that and
and it gets channeled into sort of
concerns about economic purely economic
inequality but I think the economic
inequality is is a red herring like to
me abstract wealth percentiles are less
important than add the kind of social
and class equality that prevents you
know the construction of these parallel
societies or caste systems like imagine
if India I don't know what India's
inequality rate is but imagine they had
relative income any income equality like
relatively speaking but they still had
Brahmins and they still had Untouchables
I think that's a bigger issue than
whether Jeff Bezos has a trillion
dollars right I think I was thinking
more along the lines of whatever
philosophy is driving people to say
things like you know we have to have 50%
women in tech and 50% of women in this
and half and retinas and exact you know
racial breakdown for every employer so
the way Michael Lin puts us in the new
class war is he says it's it's a
byproduct of thinking we're a class of
society because if we are a class of
society the only thing that's left is to
ensure that the that there's a relative
you know it's bigotry the only thing
left that's holding people back is
bigotry right I think I think I read I
think you wrote that right right and
what ends up happening is you end up
having you know in the old days they
used to call the the wasp you know elite
in the north and you know the New
England elite they used to call them the
Brahmin elite kind of as a kind of a
tongue in cheek but now but now it's
literally becoming a Brahmin elite
because you have you know actual you
know Brahmin Indians that are joining in
training that elite and they feel like
they're very diverse and maybe they even
you know play up there you know the lack
of white privilege even though they just
came from a country where they're at the
very top
but the caste system right so how do you
make room for somebody at the table that
believes that we have a classless system
and therefore the only thing standing in
the way of income equality and wealth
equality is is outright bigotry and
sexism and misogyny like how do you why
is there a place at the table for that
kind of person how did that person get
integrated in the way that you describe
that they may be integrated in Canada is
that something that we should integrate
into the United States you know general
policies on life is that no we don't
have a class we have no classes and the
only thing standing in the way of upward
mobility and achievement is racism and
it's a white guy's fault and we need to
ruin the white guy and take away his
power and the source of his power is
masculine energy etc I think affirmative
action is different from the kind of
integration I was referring to before
like the the the it the kind of
integration that really is important to
social stability
is is like it's in its intersect
intersectional if I can point a turn
it's my ears are burning it's the
intersection of race and class right so
you know there's a big difference if you
have a wave of immigration a bunch of
Italians come to America and they're all
stuck in in a lower-class under under
you know wage jobs that breeds
stereotypes about what Italians are like
versus a system where you have you know
some cross-cutting of race and class
such that you don't end up having the
like these no you don't have end up
having a white working class that ends
up identifying their cause as a white
identity cause rather than as a class
cause that might have some overlap with
what what black and Hispanic working
class people are facing right well I
mean I think that that's the broad
coalition that wins moving forward is
the one that I totally agree understands
that however you know I can't blame the
white working-class and I hate that term
actually because in my research
especially the people that once voted
Democrat who voted and for Donald Trump
were not uneducated right they had a lot
of them had
college education post-grad education
and even the ones that didn't were
entrepreneurs and businessmen and moved
you know products around the world and
so these are these are people that have
no education in the system but identity
politics came for them right it came to
them they keep hearing about it I think
in a way especially the Democrats at a
portable type where I was raised to not
think about race or think about gender
and I was like okay that's fine
you know George you slowly on however
you behave and how you engage with me
and what you can produce for the world
but now we hear everywhere it seems is
is about our race and about our you know
culture and about our 16:19 moment and
how our whole institutions and
everything is designed around race and
oppression so you can't really fault the
white working-class folks that get
steamrolled through the china right no
and then end up end up hearing about it
in terms of race and then saying okay
well I'm white he's white we're white I
mean we're all having the same problem
so maybe house it just goes back to the
kind of Alex Jones taking him seriously
but not literally sort of thing like
they're they're grasping at some truth
but the like it's very easy to just dump
on on people who you might be expressing
their views in ways that is you know
frankly racist or xenophobic not
recognizing that you can you can
acknowledge that and still acknowledge
that they they have some valid and
legitimate grievances and maybe
addressing those grievances would
preempt them from channeling that rage
into these these red herrings right so
you know I think there's a lot to this
to it to what we call identity politics
it actually isn't about identity it's
about it's about labels right it's about
so another way to think with this is
what what the floss Canadian philosopher
Charles Taylor wrote about in his famous
he's written about multiculturalism and
stuff like that but is he a famous essay
called the ethics of authenticity and
his his analysis is that we've moved
through these
phases of of what of how we how we think
about about the individual how we
conceptualize the individual the self
and in an earlier phase we had honor
societies where you know it's about you
know you know sticking up for what's
right and you know if you just take
something from my property that's dis
aunt you dishonor to yourself
we moved into the kind of classical
liberal era where where it's really
about the individual in relation to the
state and the liberties that they have
right and now we've moved into post
sixties an ethics of authenticity where
your individuality is defined by your
ability to have self-expression and to
realize your own unique butterfly aspect
to yourself and I think a lot of
identity politics especially in sex and
gender is a manifestation of that
conception of the self as one's total
uniqueness and inherent self-worth via
that authenticity to your uniqueness and
where that were I think that's
problematic is the way it misses the
more communitarian aspects of our
identity right it's not just that I am
you know Canadian is I I belong to a
thing called Canada right like and in
that belonging to a larger group is
these more corporate identities is I
think what's really missing today where
we we think about everything in such an
individualistic way that we miss the
ways in which our our identities are
formed and collectives and not simply
because I am part of the alphabet soup
or you know or this or that or that or
that ethnicity and even something like
intersect intersectionality is kind of
like the step beyond once you once you
are you know defining individuality as
your own authentic self-expression
the next obvious next step is to
subdivide that the identity such that
like you know you would
would think that the individual was like
the the bottom you know you get the from
many to one but actually can subdivide
that one into even more and I think this
is this is all in a weird way
you know hyper individualistic and and
and this I think also goes to my point
about like have a lot of this is
derivative from Protestantism because
you know one of the you know the whole
point of the process
Reformation is to say you know I am in a
position to interpret God's Word and I
don't need you to interpret it for me
right and because I have you know a
level of authenticity and able to and an
able to form my identity individually
right and and these modern
manifestations of it are are just sort
of a next stage and evolution
Jonathan hated somebody that I think
that you respect you so you cite him in
rippner and talk about his books quite a
bit and I think he's argued that we went
from an honor culture to a victim
culture is that how does that jive with
what you're talking about a victim
culture which is you know I know knows
all my conflicts I appeal to Authority
etc no I think that's I think that's I
wouldn't put that in that way because I
think it's a loaded term but because
again I'm not trying to make a political
point like I don't you know I don't
really don't write a culture really at
all I do use my own right I'm personal
or just having a conversation yeah and
but you know I think the the
quote-unquote victim culture is a
symptom of the the deeper ethics of
authenticity that I'm describing where
we're you know in in the in the prior
age like the classical liberal your your
individual insofar as you have equality
under the law and you have these
liberties that that left that that that
defined human dignity and respect for
human dignity as a kind of relationship
a kind of institutional relationship
with the state and with with your own
personal liberty the the new the in an
age of authenticity human dignity
becomes defined as recognition do you
recognize that I'm a special butterfly
and if you are lacking that recognition
even if you know you have basic
liberties
so on then in some ways you are being
maltreated right and I think a lot of
what what identity politics the bad form
of identity politics is is a kind of you
must recognize me dammit right it's not
it's not just tolerance it's it's
acceptance and and even in celebration
which you know in many cases might be
may be really good and positive lit but
it's it's it leads to a political
impasse right because you can't force
anyone to recognize things that they
don't want to recognize right there's a
lot of political impasses and even like
the the so-called white working-class
like a lot of that you know is a crying
out for recognition like the if you feel
like political system has a hasn't
acknowledged your existence you've lost
that sort of mutual recognition that is
fundamental to you know what
civilization politics is right like this
is a deeply like a galleon point right
like the master-slave dialectic is one
in which the the master comes to
recognize himself in the slave and the
slave recognizes himself in the master
and that's what what polls but that's
what leads to the abolition of slavery
is this recognition of mutual sort of a
level of social equality but if if we're
not talking about master and slave
instead something totally unique
intersectional idiosyncratic between the
two people or the two groups then it's
not clear how you produce a synthesis or
how those two things merge what is the
synthesis between the elites in the
working class
what synthesis happens there what but in
this case I don't think there's the
issue of synthesis the issue is
settlements right to have some set a
settlement yeah like like political
settlement like there has to be
institutions in which disenfranchised
working-class people of all backgrounds
they can have a seat at the table
right and
now one of the other big big issues the
striving this is just the the decline of
religion right like you know there the
the Trump's base you know they might be
identified as Christian but they have
some of the lowest participation rates
of in history for for American
Christians is that specific to drum
space or just specific to Christianity
in general at the moment in general yes
but you know the there is this this kind
of secularization on two levels on the
level of what people believe and what
they say on surveys and on the level of
just the crumbling of community and
participation and and to the extent that
culture is empty or void without some
like objective instantiation in the
world without you know a religion that
doesn't have a congregation isn't really
a religion it just becomes a a it's just
become Hollow
right and the culture a Christian
culture is isn't really a culture unless
it's embodied in some physical form and
so like the paradox the not the paradox
but the one of the one of the impasses
is this fact that you know you do have
people who have religious beliefs but
they have no way of channeling that into
or mobilizing that into into any kind of
power because they are you know like a
man on an island right yeah very
interesting interplay between the church
congregation Christianity itself our
culture identity politics world trade
global trade class mobility the identity
you know all of it right now and and I
was I was bar mitzvah'd and I celebrated
Christmas I grew up as a Jew and a
Catholic but I didn't take either one of
those into adulthood and I never really
claimed to be like in hardcore militant
atheist I always thought it was very
difficult to explain so I was a
skeptical
but I have to say and in the last year
or two in seeing what's happened what's
happening in America as we remove
certain guardrails and certain that the
non political institutions in the
country leaving seemingly like a gaping
hole that was once filled by the church
I can see much more today the value and
the more I learned just about science
and space and time and technology and
everything I become even a little bit
more and more attracted to the notion of
some sort of faith this is another way
where like identity matters and having
multiple identities matters right like
the the hyphenated part of a Canadian
identity is like being in Canadian means
we you know I watch hockey and you know
and I'm afraid of moose but it also
means I have all these thick thicker
identities so like where I grew up in
Nova Scotia you know its majority by far
a white population but it's we don't
like you can tell the people's last name
whether they're German or Scot Scottish
or French there's even schools that
teach Gaelic right so there's there's
still robust sort of segmented
communities there in a way that they
haven't like totally assimilated into a
Borg so I you know I think that
institutions matter in this in this
context because they're what are provide
like the binding the glue the adhesive
that keep these identities together and
when you have when you have multiple
identities and identities that are
defined in terms of a group not just
your own authenticity then they also are
useful for cognitively right that they
they make it easier to go left when
everyone else is going right to give you
an example so you know with the by far
the most free thinking you know Trump
ambivalent part of the Republican
coalition right now or are you ton's
right and it's partly because you know
they are not just Republican they're not
just conservative they're also Mormon
and they have that splintered identity
and and that the institutions around
that the strength of the LDS Church it
provides them you know it gives some
traction to to actually be for your
thinkers in some sense right right what
do we do we not have examples where we
have imported or we United States have
exported political systems and tried to
map them on to different cultures and
how has that worked out and in studying
that would we not be able then to
understand what would happen if you
imported a population into a political
structure and how that would work out do
you follow me
yeah if they're a mirror image of each
other yeah or what what pulls what
creates which which creates which I mean
has it worked for the United States to
export its version of you know politics
yeah so you know in in the tryna shock
paper hey we made it back how you made
it back well I think this is all you
know this is all related right right
because really the China Shock Doctrine
what it's saying is there's the gap
between theory and practice
right and and in the last section I give
I give the kind of dichotomy between
this this debate and economics between
the Austrian school and the historical
school this is this is where the
emergence of the Austrian School of
Economics came from where the where the
historicists largely German they
maintained that you know history and
context and path dependency are our
starting points we start by looking at
reality and seeing how its embedded in
history and then making institutional
reforms that way whereas the Austrians
with karl menger and and you know those
guys like they they're they were a kind
of positivism in the sense that they the
school emerged because they rejected the
historical school and said no there are
these universal laws to economics you
know demand curves slope down supply
curve slope up and humans act proposal
ii and like these axiomatic laws of
economics perfect information also well
yeah that's that's sort of the
neoclassical version of it and and and
there's truth to that like
that's theory right that's theory is
when you take something you see in
reality like something in practice and
abstract it right and make it so it's
decontextualized right and theory can be
very useful because if something over
here is related to something over here
if you have a theory that explains the
one maybe it also explains the other
right but to the extent that that
Austrian that positivistic Theory first
view became sort of the norm and
neoclassical economics more generally
then you end up in a situation where you
feel like it's easy to just go into into
Russia following the collapse of the
Soviet Union and impose a schema that in
principle or in theory is like the
optimal way to structure an economy and
instead what ended up happening is you
know Jeffrey Sachs and the Harvard
voice' go you go into Russia they you
know they privatized they lift price
controls they open the country up to
foreign investment etc etc you know the
industrial base collapses men at much of
it scattered around the hinterland in a
way that didn't make much economic sense
because it was the product of central
planning that all collapses you end up
having you know a an alcohol epidemic
because they privatized the state liquor
monopoly and in people's lively life
expectancy declines radically and over
time you end up having this backlash to
globalization and support for an
authoritarian and then Putin who is not
just an authoritarian but somebody who's
whose modus operandi is to try to build
a new historical myth of Russia right to
say that no we are a products of our
Orthodox Eastern Orthodox history and
and and and that that's where he gets
his foothold by Rhian ejected history as
opposed to these just purely theoretical
free-market types that were that used to
run the country and and the point of
this is that like shock therapy as it's
called like going into a place and
radically reforming it
it's not an indictment of the model like
the model might work somewhere else but
you can't just take Hong Kong's model
and put it on to Indonesia because Hong
Kong because Indonesia has a totally
different path dependent history and and
where this is maybe different from the
immigration argument about like oh if we
import people we import their culture is
it's less about culture than is about
institutions right so you know if you're
a if you're in India or Indonesia
there's going to be a large informal
economy maybe it has you know it doesn't
have normal legal system but maybe it
has you know pseudo legal systems to
have different institutions that
regulate commerce and you can't just
come and blow that up but if someone
from Indonesia comes to the United
States it you know it's not that they're
did that they're bringing their culture
of course but they're also but they're
not bringing the the institutional
scaffolding that that culture lives on
and so I think the the worry is that if
we import a bunch of Indians we're going
to get Indian institutions or
what-have-you or Mexicans are going get
Mexican stitute is way way overblown and
also just doesn't you know empirically
doesn't hold up it's interesting hey
I've heard the institution argument
consistently beat over my head a million
billion times was at Georgetown School
Foreign Service and we're talking about
these same sort of shock therapy
treatments that were given to various
states in emerging markets Latin America
as well and you know the key to their
success was always all gotta have
institutions got to have an
institution's gotta have institutions
but the institutions come from somewhere
and they come from the people and they
come from the history that's why they're
called institution yeah they're called
institutions and you can't create them
you can if you are Pinochet
right like and this is why the model
like it kind of presumes a kind of
dictator right right it requires it
almost right and so that's another
reason why it's problematic but that
doesn't mean that reforms not possible
it just has to be endogenous it has to
come some level from within like we you
know you can have outside support but if
you impose the theory without without
trying to shape the practice at the same
time then you get this disjoint right in
that disjoint means that the theory
doesn't actually work the way you think
it does right I I do like the way that
at the end of the piece you did talk
about the difference between the
Austrians and the historicist sand and
you said am I saying that right
historicist and it was really the
difference between whether or not
something's gonna work in my little text
book or a we can look towards history
see we'll see what worked and then try
to work with that to improve it and to
move things along I think you should had
a graph in there or I see I saw
somewhere where it's yeah sort of like
the squiggly upward sloping line that
bounces up against the guardrails of
institutions in history and would you
call it path dependent yes a dependency
yeah history matters and it matters not
just it matters and it to our norms as
well like our norms our products of
history they evolve like morality
evolves it doesn't necessarily bend
towards justice or something like that
like that's that that's a backwards
reconstruction of what's happened but um
you know but like to the extent that you
know America had much different cultural
attitudes in the 50s and 60s you know
just to to them in the present we look
across the sea and see countries where
you know they're their culture attitudes
are even more retrograde than the
fifties and sixties right then we demand
them to you know why you know why isn't
uh you know gay marriage legal in in
China
well like you America you only legal gay
marriage you know like after oberfeld
like it just happened like right come on
like you can't force this normative
change because normative nor normative
change like more moral change is
something that lives in look in the
people and lives in the culture and
lives not not as an individual not as an
individual but in in the group and the
peers and the way that the norms get
embodied in actual rules right so I mean
I know you just just dismiss this
argument but it seems to me that in that
model you
just presented there that if the inputs
changed and the outputs would change to
right if your input of your people into
your communities than your norms to
change then ultimately our institutions
change and look I am I am only exploring
these issues I like I said I was raised
to believe totally open-minded you know
I don't see race don't see gender
whatever you perform if you fit into our
American you know dream a vision then
it's all good and let's all just work
hard and stuff and it's only just in
these last like five or ten years where
you just get beat over the head with
race and culture so many times you have
to start taking a look at it from the
other perspective and again I'm
reluctantly having these conversations
but they're right but they're out there
and they're like being four they're
being forced on us and so I'm trying to
explore but various happen in the same
way that you know the Paul Krugman trade
strategy of hiding the nuance backfired
and gave a mean and ended up giving the
ammunition to the barbarians like when
when when certain topics are off when
certain things are off topic or not
you're not to talk about them then it's
only the barbarians who are going to
talk about them right
not just called me a barbarian well no
there's a spectrum you know I think
Steven Pinker made this point to it the
all right which is like you know if if
we can't talk about group differences in
genetics or gender differences if
there's some taboo some elite taboo
around that topic then when people go
you know go to college and hear this and
then they're like that's insane and then
they go back to their computer and they
look up go on YouTube and they're gonna
find the the most polar opposite
interpretation of the facts and - you
like - when discussion gets shut down or
when things get off topic or closed
right um whether it be about trade and
globalization or about race identity
gender etc then I think that actually
ends up contributing to polarization
right because you don't you have the
official narrative and then you have the
counter culture that that feels in some
way that they're lied to
and then end up adopting like the most
radical mirror image of what they've
been told right you probably consider me
me to be some sort of radical but I'm
coming in I think of you as a moderate
as a matter
yeah I'm coming I'm coming at this from
a I don't know if I hesitate to use
words that have actual meaning beyond
casual use but like as a reaction to
things like I'm focused mostly on gender
and gender identity and rolls right
masculinity and femininity and the
reason why is evidenced by things like
the American Psychological Association
coming out last year and basically
saying that all characteristics that
make up men are toxic and need to be
pathologized and need to be you know
treated out of the the population so
like that's that's a very concrete
example of our institutions that feed
into our professional and health care
system that are gonna have a very direct
effect on on people that I think are is
gonna be negative yeah I'm not denying
that what I'm saying is that people like
Jonathan Haight who you have who who
make some of these same points you know
they have more power more more social
influence and a healthier kind of social
influence then the men's rights activist
who goes all the C's misandry and
becomes misogynist rightly well to be an
anti misandry does not necessarily make
you a misogynist let's make that person
know exactly the whole point yeah yeah
well you know there's there's a lot of
issues and we're we've been at this for
about 90 minutes and there's there's
certain elements of the China shock
thing I really want to get you know 90
so we're all for it
so let's circle back to the China China
thing so 1990s China gets a you know
there's a big push from everybody in the
United States in the world to get China
into the World Trade Organization
normalize trade relations with them
which means we can send products back
and forth and of course all the
businessmen in the
politicians in their pocket were just
chomping at the bit to get into that big
giant market and sell all their cars and
everything over there in China and
nobody told regular Americans what was
going to happen and we ended up getting
a carving out of the Rust Belt and other
industrial areas that you can look at
the map the last electoral map and you
can basically see where it was right it
was the degradation of Hillary's blue
wall and you know Michigan Ohio
Pennsylvania those are the three and you
know States really helped to turn turn
to the election for him on a very small
thin margin now is the FBI 70 oh yeah I
don't know we don't know each other just
yet so you know 77,000 votes across
those states really turned everything
and all this was based on this notion of
comparative advantage and I remember
being taught as a kid in economics I
have a Tyrian economics comparative
advantage like the foundation for all of
our trade policies and for all the
reasons why we should trade maybe you
could just explain what it is and then
explain how maybe in whatever your take
is I think I have an idea on how it
actually translates into the writing
world and the pros and the cons and and
what had happened and maybe you can
couch it in terms of race to the bottom
and these sort of things that they're
also thrown out there during the
protests as well too yeah so I think the
easiest way to explain comparative
advantage is with a more micro example
so you know the you learn about this in
in trade books when they talk about you
know wine and butter guns and butter or
whatever but a better example or easier
to grasp example might be you know a
lawyer and his secretary or her
secretary or their secretary check-check
the bio to make sure so you know a
lawyer might be it's obviously good at
lawyering but might be even better maybe
might be better than any secretary like
at being a secretary like they can
answer the phone like no one's business
but it still makes sense for them to
hire a secretary
because being specializing and become
and being and just focusing on being a
lawyer
is their highest value activity right
and so and they in the lingo they have
an absolute advantage in both secretary
and layering but they have a comparative
advantage in being a lawyer and so and
so comparative advantage describes the
theory of specialization and trade so in
lawyer specializes and and then hires a
secretary who specializes in being a
secretary right and and and that ends up
being you know ends up creating gains
from trade that exceed what what's
possible if they both try to try to just
do things all on their own um and this
is like foundational theory this is like
bedrock stuff that all trade theory is
based on right yeah and it goes back to
David Ricardo who's a classical
economists it's been been around for 200
years so it's an in its some level it is
kind of just common sense right like I
don't try to make but I don't I don't
make my own bread you know I I get the
bread from the baker right because the
baker specializes in making bread right
right and it's level of international
trade there's similar patterns like you
know I get my t-shirts imported from
Bangladesh because they have a
labor-intensive economy they're lower
wage and so if there's a labor-intensive
process they can specialize in that and
do it at lower cost and they could if me
a economist tried to you know start a
cotton mill or okay and so and so it's
the level of international trade we
often talk about sort of factor
intensity factor abundance right so like
America is abundant in high school labor
Bangladesh is abundant in low skilled
labor and so they should do things that
don't require a lot of skills but maybe
require a lot of just raw all aber input
and we should do the things that are you
know more capital intensive you know I
press a button and the robot does the
job for me
or or more knowledge intensive that
require years of education and and
that's the basic theory behind
comparative advantage right that sounds
all groovy
sounds like perfect hey we should just
you know follow that every
and go exactly wherever it leads right
well the way I've put this before is the
the main part that comparative advantage
is false it's that it's static right so
econ there are different out there are
different conclusions and economic
models if they're a static model or a
dynamic model meaning that they have
time as a variable and static as a
static model of course I found you know
I should hire secretary and the
secretary should specialize it being a
secretary but what if that secretary
wants to become a lawyer herself one day
right then you start off being a
secretary but you go to night school and
you train your you build new skills you
build new competencies until you have a
comparative advantage in being a lawyer
right and so when you introduce the time
dimension suddenly things change so in
the case of you know America and
Bangladesh you know when Bangladesh
liberalized and that they they followed
the kind of World Bank neoliberal advice
they specialized in labor intensive
low-skilled labor and at first it was a
success I get their GDP took off they
they've if they've had declines in
poverty and so on
but at the same time by specializing in
things are labor intensive you know the
the binding factor there is wages and if
you specialize in being a low-wage
country it's hard to stop being a
low-wage country right like and so to
this day you know even though they take
off growth you know Bangladesh and China
begin liberalizing around the same time
but today Bangladesh is GDP per capita
is a third of that of China's right and
the reason is because when it comes to
economic development development whole
countries you actually don't want
specializes you know specialization at
all but you want is diversification
right and diversification you know
linguistically is the opposite of
specialization right so what does
comparative advantage in the context of
China the World Trade Organization and
free trade free capital free people what
does that do what a specialization due
to the United States
so the flipside of low-wage countries
specializing and labor-intensive goods
is that we have have increasingly
specialized in knowledge intensive goods
so we call this knowledge workers at the
creative class and and and that that
trend has coincided with you know the
rising premium for a college education
the clustering of college-educated
people into a handful of superstar
cities cities that are integrated
globally the you know escalating rents
in those cities and the the relative
neglect of people with lower down the
human capital scale right so the way I
put it in the piece is that you know
human capital you know we think of it in
and you can eat in economics we took we
measure human capital just by like years
of education right but that's a proxy
like years of education it makes it seem
like human capital is a linear spectrum
from low skill to high skill in fact
human capital is as diverse as physical
capital right like a factory is a
different kind of capital than a
computer and we can't just call both
capital K and you know we have to we
have to disaggregate and in the case of
human capital you know a plumber an
electrician
might have might might fit in the exact
same you know middle skill or middle
high school bracket but they have
incredibly different kinds of human
capital and all trishing can't do the
job of a plumber and vice versa right
and so it recognized that recognizing
that heterogeneity I think is is
incredibly important because and I think
that's also important from like the
perspective of pluralism that have been
talking about like we we need an economy
that is diversified enough that it
captures it maximizes not just GDP but
but human potential more generally right
like you know we an economist that just
said we shouldn't focus on GDP that's
amazing no we should focus on GP in a
sense but what
what I'm arguing is that actually when
you take this dynamical perspective of
perspective when you add time and you
add heterogeneity it's actually gdp
maximizing to to focus on those other
people in the big as a consequence
alright like yeah exactly to focus under
diversification in the exact same way
that you know the lack of
diversification of bangladesh means they
are still stuck in that sweatshop call
centre equilibrium they could be richer
they could have higher GDP so but but
but they're maximizing a function that
doesn't have time in it right and and
that's the the problem right and so in
the united states what we did is we
exported low-skilled low-skilled jobs
but then but then we also begin to do
something else we began to export like
medium right we you were saying in this
piece that we have lost our ability to
complete this sort of manufacturing
chain right and there's actual really
significant significant consequences of
that right right so you know the
expectation with trade liberalisation of
china would it was it was gonna be like
bangladesh all over again right like
we're gonna since then you know the 90s
we've been importing cheap cheap toys so
that's great like more more than more
the merrier we're not going to make our
plastic toys the issue is once once
china had the certainty that they're
going to be in the WTO they began rap
you know engaging in development policy
industrial policy they made massive
investments in their export sector they
not just stole technology but but you
know you learned forget about whether
it's theft or not they they tried to
learn what other countries are doing
sure they send him to be the head of
departments at harvard and then after
did you hear about this i mean the guy
was a head of a department herbert just
got arrested for Chinese espionage so I
know I'm just throwing out a tangent and
this is something that every country has
done in history so America America
during the Industrial Revolution and I
wrote about this in the pieces well the
a guy went over to Britain studied their
textile factories committed it to memory
right they didn't he didn't have at the
ability to actually write anything down
he but he understood how their cotton
mills works and so on and came back to
America and created created the mosque
the Boston manufacturing company which
still exists right and so like learning
by doing is not immoral it's not wrong
every country should do it because we
want every country to be rich right but
but what we've what we've what we've
done what the United States has done is
you know for years we sort of had a kind
of Strauss in relationship with art with
art with free trade where we said you
know the right thing to do is liberalize
and have a lazy fair economy right
meanwhile we have you know DARPA and NIH
and agricultural subsidies and and so we
were hypocrites right but we we kind of
ended up drinking our own kool-aid and
forgot that we are being stressing that
whole time and end up applying that that
sort of World Bank new neoliberal
doctrine on ourselves right and and the
consequences of that are you know when a
country like China doesn't follow that
rule book and tries to invest in human
capital and build new skills and new
comparative advantages you know they
don't they go from that labor-intensive
thing to middle-skill jobs that are
competitive with what the United States
is exporting right it's a way you've
what what you saw I think was in the
piece you can please talk about it it
was like one of the key elements that we
have lost it's not just a guy on the
factory floor doing rivets but actually
higher up the value chain in machine
tooling and small small manufacturing
things like that that then by not having
this ecosystem of engineers workers
manufacturers and the design right all
in the same sort of place with the same
language and working together and
iterating together that we've had a
severe loss in innovation yeah and a lot
of wasted human potential right because
it was called it is called like an MBA
textbooks and stuff like that the open
innovation model
right and the idea behind the open
innovation model is kind of captured
when you look at your your iPhone box
and it says you know designed in America
manufactured in China right the idea is
you know America is going to specialize
in the the hard stuff we're going to do
the R&D we're going to do the design the
marketing and when it comes to
fabricating we you know Foxconn can do
that for us right
so we we do the innovation they do the
fabrication the fallacy behind that is
is that actually a lot of Technology a
lot of innovation isn't captured in R&D
right like the cost of solar panels has
been following exponentially not because
they're spending a lot of money on R&D
they're spending with less than 1% I'm
nerdy it's because as you scale a
business as you scale an industry you
learn things just by doing it right like
you you learned that there's a different
way I can organize this production line
that actually gets efficiencies and and
and actually I don't need that that
mineral to you know in the in the in the
photocell I can I can substitute that
was something else and and that drives
down costs and is a form of innovation a
really critical form of innovation but
you you learn those you you discover
those innovations by actually engaging
in the in the production process itself
right and so you know you have these
Apple is a bit of an exception because
Apple makes it a point to be very
embedded with its suppliers right so you
know there's a very direct line
communication with Apple and and its
foreign suppliers or they they are
trying to avoid these problems but the
fact that they have to do all this work
to avoid it is is sort of a testament
that is a problem because if you are
instead a you know you design something
for Kickstarter and then you then you go
in Alibaba and find a manufacturer in
China that will build it for you
you get bet you get back something that
looks nothing like what you wanted right
and then if you want to fix it you have
to actually work through translators and
that that level of segmentation is
really destructive to the technology
cycle and it's not that we are trying to
prevent China from becoming rich it's
more that for trade to be actually
you know positive-sum when when you know
you know China can that that you know we
can invest in ourselves and China can
invest in ourselves and we can actually
both come out ahead but if we are
unilaterally saying no we're not going
to do anything
well someone well another country
engages in aggressive industrial policy
then that's essentially like laying in
the fetal position while you're you're
being beat up and that's what we've been
doing yeah and going back to what I said
sir the beginning the podcast it's also
just bad you know it's not an indictment
of globalization per se it's an
indictment of a particular approach to
globalization that only captured half
the benefits right it captured the
benefits of the thing that the other
country was selling but didn't capture
the benefits of how that competition
could actually allow us to move workers
into higher productivity fields in the
same way that that you know we moved
workers from agriculture to
manufacturing we can take workers that
were once making furniture and you know
they have a lot of tacit knowledge a lot
of skills that are not explicit that are
are like you know like a basketball
player has skill but you can't write it
down
we could have repurposed that knowledge
and in some way to do something even
more high value but instead that person
is a Walmart greeter or on disability
and that means that we've in the sense
we only get half the benefits because in
the process of in the process of that
disruption we miss out on the creative
side right like what you know Joseph
Schumpeter called it you know creative
destruction and just crave instruction
is absolutely essential to a dynamic
economy but we we didn't we didn't not
to having a nice life and you know
Pennsylvania well no I think that's a
think that's why that isn't really curry
obstruction that's just destruction
right like the point that's the point
I'm trying to make is you know Germany
had
a smaller version of the China shock
denmark did as well very open economies
but what did they do well because German
workers are you know in trade
organizations and have a lot bargaining
power that their job just didn't get
offshored and they were you know tossed
the curb instead you know they work
within the company to develop a new
product line that that maybe China
doesn't know how to do yet or is even
more high value more precision
manufacturing and and then then you
still get the benefits of globalization
China can still produce things that at
lower cost and then they can but at the
same time they're moving their workers
in human capital into even a higher
level of you know self-actualization so
again the elites back in the 90s they
failed they failed to just put put this
type of thinking into the conversation
and there was an adequate resources
allocated to helping people shift both
industries or types of jobs or within
organizations themselves it was just all
thrown on the altar of free trade and
open trade and and let's get into the
Chinese market and make some money and
whether irrespective of whatever you
think that the policy should be moving
forward I think that we can agree on
what the impact has been and the impact
in many cases has led to urban-rural
polarization the diminishment of the
sort of middle worker economy in favor
of the creative info class economy and
to me even as troubling or more so is
the loss of innovation in very specific
industries that have national security
implications right like can you talk a
little bit about that I mean what is the
u.s. capacity in more making or national
security air defense and has it been
eroded as a result of this loss of
innovation from the
you know the the iterative process of
the middle manufacturing in the creative
class etc oh I think you know absolutely
this is not you know at my I'm not
expert on on this issue at all but you
see this playing out now with you know
the one area of precision manufacturing
in the US has retained namely
semiconductors right semiconductors are
the brains of everything it's it's and
and the US has a lock on that right
Silicon Valley is called Silicon Valley
for a reason the the skill involved in
creating semiconductors is a kind of
machine tooling precision manufacturing
skill the kind that we lost across other
sectors of the economy to China and and
but semiconductors are kind of unique
because for the same reason that you
know the Huawei issue is kind of unique
it's one thing to import you know toys
another thing to import the network
infrastructure for you convert your your
the network in competing infrastructure
for your economy so I think that is one
of the reasons why some of the biggest
China Hawks and the US government are
our national security folks right and
the people of commerce who who are sort
of most in favor of more a sort of
industrial policy see this through the
lens of national security now I think
that the national security argument is
true but it's even without the national
security argument there are a great a
great case for a more sort of public
investment and quote-unquote industrial
policy right so for for people who
supported Trump or at least to get the
general thrust of where he's coming from
I think that China ascension to WTO
hollowing out of the manufacturing class
the reduction in some of our national
security capabilities around this a lack
of innovation and the constant
of wealth and resources and
opportunities in the cities those cities
and being introductive interconnected
globally has created the new oral urban
divides and then then you add to that
the financial crisis 2008-2009 total
loss in faith and confidence in our
financial industry the government's
ability to manage these types of crises
how are they going to respond who are
they going to assist is it going to be
saving AIG and Goldman Sachs or is it
gonna be saving the lady that took out
three trusts and a grant in order to buy
her first home who's now losing it and
and you know I think these things sort
of add up and to people being very
disgruntled with the way things are and
I've read another I read an article I
can't remember her name now but she was
identifying that the real class struggle
that is going to have a permanent and
lasting effect is actually the intra
elite competition and the intra elite
competition is happening amongst the you
know the top 2% to the top you know sort
of 0.9 percentile of the economic sphere
and what's happening there is that this
specialization that has come out of a
result of our trade policies is that the
two things that were best at making
these days are financial financial
instruments that fund tech companies so
and and and a lot of those tech
companies aren't even designed to
actually do anything super productive in
the long run and so we've got this whole
new economy of just people making paper
and getting money to give to other guys
to do things that aren't really helping
anybody and those people are capturing
like an inordinate amount of the wealth
and opportunity and it do you see any
connection between that and all this
stuff because I mean I hate to lay it
all on the foot of WTO but there does
seem to be sort of a straight line that
one can draw yeah that's partly why I
called it the trash talk but I think it
is was it a you know it's not the sole
cause of her woes but it was a kind of
epoch whole shift right a new era right
and and you know to the point what the
intra
like intraclass war you know someone
like michael lind he is he writes very
in his vert in a way that's very
assertive and self-confident and and you
know hold no bar you know but a very
someone like Richard Reeves at Brookings
writes about these exact same issues
I'll be in a more mild-mannered way but
the way he describes this as the dream
Horner's right the dream hoarders are
not that the 1% or the point 1 percent
they're the really the top 10% the
people who own their home and and and
make sure it doesn't it's zoned that no
one else can move there that have beefy
401ks and tax preference to college
savings accounts for their kids the
people that you know are sort of a sort
of Lee mating with other people from
their college class and you know you
know preach the gospel of equality but
are themselves doing everything to make
sure that they pull the ladder up behind
them right right and that is a very real
thing and I think you could call it the
upper class you could call the dream
horror class we call it the the people
who you know really benefit from the
state and local tax deduction class
right like those people in many ways
have more power in politics than the
billionaires right like they like the
the extent to which the Democrat the
current Democratic Congress has tried to
reverse the repeal the the cap on state
and local tax deductions is really
telling right like it is something that
their donor and voter base really wants
when no one in the bottom 90% you know
makes enough money to and pays enough
federal taxes to ever really benefit
from the state no tax deduction and
moreover people like Jeff Bezos it it's
a you know they don't care at all it's a
drop in the bucket right so it's it and
it's that class and they're they're kind
of they have the ability to live in sort
of tacit denial of their class status
yes and and that's part of what the
inter class warfare is about is you know
if we can shift the discussion to the
billionaires then then we sort of you
know remove the attention from us right
like and in some cases this is very
personal because maybe maybe you were in
the same Harvard class as Mark
Zuckerberg right right but you went into
a career and nonprofit management or
writing for a left-wing journalistic
outlet or something like that and you're
maybe you're you're pulling back you
know 70 grand a year meanwhile that guy
that used to be in your class is one of
the richest people in the world and
you're like well what what gave him the
right how is he entitled to that I'm
doing something for my community I'm you
know I'm working and you know I'm
working for Greenpeace or whatever but
like but you're that person that latter
person is still in the effort they're
still incredibly privileged right like
right and so just keep that in mind guys
when you hear people you know the AO C's
of the world being being pressured into
talking about the billionaires the
billionaires billionaires it's really a
distraction isn't it yeah and I offered
a kind of analysis of this in the
context of other countries that have
high marginal tax rates so you know a
lot people don't know this but but
Sweden has more billionaires per capita
than the United States and if you break
down if you you can look at Swedish and
American wealth inequality Sweden has
much higher levels of wealth inequality
and and even probably similar or close
to equal levels of income inequalities
the United States once you factor in the
fact that everyone's hiding their income
in Luxembourg right if you adjust for
that
um the but you know Sweden still has a
relative you know they're they're more
compressed than the United States but
the fact that they have high marginal
tax rates one of the functions that
serves is to make it very hard to create
a new wealthy elite right there's it's
very hard to accumulate the wealth to
displace the incumbent right and this is
this is part of a bargain and in Sweden
Sweden is a you know a constitutional
monarchy they have they have a literal
noble
like a literal aristocracy people with
noble names and stuff like that and and
they they inhabit that top 10% right and
um you know having high marginal taxes
isn't just about helping it you know
redistribution rush to the poor
it's also you know making it so if you
have one great year where you made you
know five million dollars seventy
percent of the first of the last four
million gets taxed away well that makes
it very that makes it harder for you to
break into that noble class is this a
good thing or a bad thing um I think
it's mostly a bad thing right because it
is your house I can say or you know
earlier to our discussion about the kind
of equality that matters if you think
the kind of equality that matters is the
avoidance of a new aristocracy or a new
caste system or something like that they
don't you then it matters less that
people have more than others and more
that that there's a churn and turnover
in the system that that people don't
sort of settle down into their privilege
and pass it on intergenerationally right
all right on that note we're gonna take
a quick break for my advertisers of
which there are none but we will be
right back and we're back okay so all
that has been fantastic I think we
actually covered a lot of the notes that
I had that China the China shock therapy
piece if you haven't read it I've been
pumping it out to my Twitter feed
basically for months and I Hotel telling
people not only to just read it but
actually just study it because there's
so much in there that we can learn from
and I think we covered a number one of a
number of the topics within um there was
a couple of other things I wanted to get
to here before we start to wrap this up
I was listening to an interview with
Tyler Cowen and Eric Weinstein the other
day and Tyler attributed a lack of
innovation perhaps and dynamism in the
American economy to what he called the
feminine ization of the economy are you
familiar with the argument that he heard
that podcast as well oh you did okay
what did you think what did you think
about what did you think about that
podcast in general and then what do you
think about that because I would have
liked for Eric to really have drilled
down a little bit deeper on that yeah I
mean I follow Tyler Cowen sworkit I've
been
since high school I thought that was one
of the one of the better conversations
he's had just because well I think it's
out to Eric Weinstein for being such a
generative person himself that he can
come up with you know interesting topics
and and and minds a conversation that
you know Tyler probably doesn't get into
a standard news interview or something
yeah yeah but what do you make of this
sense that that there's been a lack of
innovation within the American economy
they didn't talk anything about the you
know erosion of the supply chain as
leading to that lack of innovation in
fact they focused very narrowly on this
idea of feminization do you do you even
know what they mean by that because I
actually did it I was under you know
wondering if maybe you had had to take
on a given year experience at George
Mason and no surprise that you've been a
reader of marginal marginal revolution
for quite some time
I think it's an inflammatory way of
putting things but I think the I can try
to explain what I think the what he's
getting at yeah please do
so you know one of my honors thesis was
on the commerce of religion right and
and my thesis was that religious
organizations are basically sort of
pseudo social insurance providers right
if you're if you blow into a church you
you have the community safety net that
comes with that and potentially the
expansion of the welfare state across
that out right one of the things I
discovered in researching that is that
there is a very historic gender
difference and risk preference because
this is this is you know kind of obvious
that you know it's men who died in
motorcycle crashes it crashes and
they're jumping out of planes right and
as in general right and on average and
you know to the extent that some of the
trends over the last 30 years cultural
trends like the decline of sort of free
range parenting the fear of stranger
danger the the kind of flight to safety
the kind of
it's a kind of de-risking of society in
some way alright and that that is you
know one dimension in which you could
describe that as a kind of feminization
I wouldn't put it in those terms because
I don't think the feminization is what
what you know I don't think the feminine
part of it is what matters it's it's an
for for Tyler you know he's very you
know my read of him is he's sort of he
still has a kind of countercultural side
to him growing up you know and in the
60s that he values nonconformity right
he values the out-of-the-box thinker and
being himself sort of meta rational in a
way that he doesn't get caught up in her
herd mentality right and apply to the
economy like Silicon Valley and its best
was a is or was a place that rewards
that kind of heterodox nonconformist
mentality where you know everyone out
east saying X is the only way to do
something we're gonna show them that's
not the only way to do something right
and and to the extent that that is a
driver of economic innovation and also
the Rowling's to take risk the
willingness to fail the willingness to
be disagreeable and the Jordan Pederson
put it yeah like all those things are
essential and and there has been this
broader sort of de-risking and there's a
great book is looking around his office
everything in the book but if there's a
book about by Mark Levinson about the US
economy since the 70s and a lot of the
you know a lot of the a lot of the
pathologies of our economy seemed
somehow connected to the oil shock and
the 70s right and the oil shock was a
very traumatic event it it shook up a
lot of our institutions but it also I
think in some abstract sense like moved
America's risks preference right it it
made us feel like we were Valen
right and it made us you know make
things like you know oil oil and energy
independence and and stuff like that or
the expansion of sort of environmental
regulation to de-risk the environment
made all that stuff a higher priority
and it became less about you know JFK we
can go to the moon
let's take big bold risks let's think
outside the box
let's celebrate the eccentric and became
more about safety right and and even in
the sense of like consumer product
safety right yeah and the the kind of
you know the kind of idiom is you know
if you are worried about a you know
minimizing the worst outcomes you might
accidentally cut off the best outcomes
right crap yeah and so I think that
that's I think that's what they were
getting at but didn't go so far and Eric
and Peter teal have had conversations
about the lack of innovation in physics
and in other areas of science and they
both danced around this sort of topic
the de-risking is a very nice way of
putting it the feminization makes makes
a little bit more sense to me and will
to my audience because we're very
well-versed and sort of the general
gender differences in terms of risk
preferences and aggression and
competition and such and such and I
guess you can see it as its impact in
the American economy as we're as you
said sometimes you have to be
disagreeable to get things done
sometimes you have to be aggressive
sometimes you have to take risks and and
there's then been a shift in the
corporate America also too as anyone
who's engaged with an HR department can
attest away from deep risking everything
and every interaction in every element
of what's going on without no regard to
the actual product and that you're
supposed to be creating or the bottom
line and I just I wonder what the
long-term
the actual the real long-term effect of
this would be I don't know that you
people would argue against us but the
American American ethos seemed seemed to
have been masculine you know let's land
on this country you land on this
continent take all these risk go crazy
expand gone yeah yeah I suppose I
suppose and and that energy propelled us
forward and that energy is being shifted
around a little bit and towards de-risk
orion feminization and i wonder what the
long-term implications of that would be
what i'd add to that list is is
vulgarity right like you know Trump's
locker room talk like well I think one
of the things that that appealed to or
spoke to was a kind of masculine
tolerance for vulgarity like you know
maybe people men in on their own don't
brag about sexual assault but they they
are you know mmm you know much less
they're impolite less but yeah in a way
that's jovial and friendly and in to
some extent like the secret sauce of
America is that nonconformist culture is
also a more vulgar cult culture right
like you know there might be snooty
Europeans who who look down on us
because we're you know we're not you
know refined and genteel but the fact
that you can you could move to Manhattan
and in between getting people you know
five people flipping you off and saying
it you get out of here I'm driving yeah
yeah like all that is actually that that
level of vulgarity in that little level
of sort of sort of acceptance of like a
low trust or navigating a less less
tight-knit trustful environment is
actually super conducive to to
innovation but and and but also
assimilation like the right the good
kind of integration because you could
you could you know if you if you are
Chinese you can move to to New York and
you didn't feel like you have to adopt
some New York culture you you know
you're all walking around flipping each
other off that's that's the S to the
United culture and to some extent
you know you could think about like how
Manhattan has turned into a shopping
mall as another another form of
feminization that you know I I still am
reluctant to put it in those terms
because I feel like you know I feel like
it's reifying something that that you
can describe note and in other ways like
I know there's the kind of you know
order chaos yummy and stuff that that
that has lots of truth to it on the
other hand you know I don't think it
necessarily advances or I think you
might end up losing you can find lots of
ways where that where feminization might
fit but if the theory isn't perfect or
is if we're not getting the right term
for it then we might be missing some
higher level description that maybe we
need to embrace your sense of all
Garrety there to then just go for that's
there you go that's how you find the
answer sometimes American vulgarity as a
virtue of innovation it's a that's
interesting and you know we I definitely
use vulgarity as a signaling in my
social media or as a way just to be like
look if you this bothers you then you
need to go because you're not going to
be able to have some of the other
conversations and such that we want to
have to right and I think to the extent
that the the decline in vulgarity or the
acceptance of or political correctness
what everyone call it and like it is
incredibly stifling you know in the case
of sort of science and academia it's
it's harder to be that eccentric a sort
of crude professor like you know you
know I think I think I think a turning
point in in science an American
scientific you know progress really was
like the reprisal of James Watson who
helped discovered the double helix
structure the DNA okay and who harbored
reactionary views about race right right
and you know long after his career his
academic you know career had peaked like
you're never gonna have another high
like that you know I kind of career just
just last year or maybe 20 teen you know
there's a New York Times sort of a
massive sort of revisionist look at his
life just you know portraying him as you
know as a despicable person and I think
that is you know like I don't do we care
if you know Tesla was anti-semite I
don't know if he was I don't mean to
defame that the Tesla family but but but
like some level like you know Henry Ford
right Henry Ford perfect example like
probably probably was probably was and
you know there's difference if there's
someone this that's part of their like
what their project is but like you know
but like to the sent that like or like
James to more gets kicked out of Google
because right he writes pretty anodyne
memo on on gender differences and
engineering stuff like that I'm like
that that has a chilling effect across
broader willingness to to deviate right
or engage in science of all kinds or
discuss scientific ideas or just look at
where the data is taking us and and that
cool James to more chemical memo thing
was was huge huge for me and for people
in my audience and in our world because
these were the issues that we had been
talking about for years right and then
all of a sudden a guy at Google actually
puts it out there and it's got the up
footnotes and it's based in science and
it's very credible and he just he just
gets killed for it
and bigger than what had happened to him
individually was what it revealed about
Google and Google's culture and about
began kicked us off thinking like okay
well how are those viewpoints working
their way into the algorithms and into
the search into the information control
and information flow and then it just
was sort of a Pandora's box into just
really exploring
what information is being withheld and
what information is blacklisted and what
can you talk about what can you talk
about and it's these sort of things
where you're not allowed to discuss the
basic generalized differences between
genders that lead to lead to things like
toxic masculinity as being a pathology
and masculinity needs to be shamed and
eradicated and you combine that with the
intersectional philosophy and social
theory and critical race theory and such
that says that all societies have been
oppressive and all oppressors are male
and male powers masculinity and you got
to you know attack the root of male
power if you want to have freedom for
everybody and so you'd start putting all
the stuff together and we start trying
to create a new worldview and to sort of
try to evolve what we all thought my
guys what I thought was a very
reasonable rational loving empathetic
view of the world in the 90s it carried
that same view forward into 2020 and
somehow I'm on the other side of this
culture war I'm a back I'm a bigoted
racist I've been called a racist I've
been called a Nazi I got fired from my
job for being called a Nazi because I
wrote an essay questioning the sanity of
sanctuary cities and what does it mean
for federalism and what does it mean for
our government and you know the budgets
in Montgomery County I mean I literally
got fired for just talking about stuff
like that I mean it's crazy so there's a
whole sea change afoot and you're trying
to your China papers and some of your
other writings also I can weave them
together as part of our our story when I
say our I mean my audience and such and
in researching very a variety of the
things that you wrote I saw that you had
written a couple pieces for American
mind all right yeah yeah so that's the
Clairemont
sort of blog or you know whatever
journal I guess yeah sorry guys blog it
mean to diminish it but you know they're
very interesting very interesting group
and I've been learning more about
Claremont and their evolution and
they're thinking what have you noticed
out of them in terms of their change
like the most recent sort of big
statements I've been reading from them
about
is if they have basically decided that
multiculturalism is an existential
threat to the American Republic and by
multiculturalism they don't mean having
a bunch of people from different
countries in their country what they
mean is identity politics political yeah
alright just call it monocultural ism
because that's really what it is like to
the extent that culture really means
like different beliefs yeah it's not
multiculturalism it's monocultural ism
right right and you know I I don't I
know the Clairemont people they know
some of them I don't know
always what they're up to because they
have a kind of esoteric way of reading
and and and I also don't so this goes
back to something I said very early on
but America being sort of host to more
radical thought and wider spectrum of
thought even amid this relative level of
cultural modernization and so I'm I
don't know like where they fall on that
spectrum sometimes you know I have
libertarian friend I know people who
work on Capitol Hill who are
anarcho-capitalists right and they work
for Republican offices and you know they
don't you know trying to you know
privatize the government because they
don't have that power but it's still
striking that you know the conservative
movement is full of and in the and the
progressive movement are full of their
own respective kind of kinds of radicals
the thing that makes me weary is you
know that America unlike Europe still
has a very strong Christian movement
right and and I more so than you see in
other countries
there's openness to a kind of Christian
radicalism or dhimmi ilysm stuff like
that you know you know it's the extent
that you know there were people who want
it the Iraq war because I thought it
would hasten their and Iran war and
their right brain
the you know the second coming of Christ
because that's prophesized as Isaiah you
know that stuff like kinda weird to me a
little bit and I always know how to
interpret it because often it's wrapped
around different arguments or not stated
explicitly right the case of Clermont
you know my impression of them now I
know them as sort of the West Coast
stress in it like they're they have a
you know but but sometimes I find it
hard to entire because it's kind of
contradictory you're right like the
there's a version of the kind of Henry
Jaffa West Coast air sea and stuff which
is like you know the East Coast dressing
and sink there there is no god but we
got pretenders God the West Coast drones
are one little above that and say well
actually there is a god right and
actually that's the big secret that
actually there is a God we and part of
that God's mission is like somehow bound
up with American nationalism and that
nationalism has to hew to the
Constitution the founding vision of the
Constitution because something something
that we literally think that this was a
you know inspired by our Creator and we
don't talk about that explicitly but you
know I think there's in the same way
that I feel like there's a risk from
from having theory to detach from
practice I see the same thing on the on
the right you know you know originalist
constitutional original lists you know
even if they can make a good
jurisprudential argument but that's the
right way to apply a constitution it
would be a shock therapy of its out if
its own if we were overnight forced to
go back to the interpretation of the
Constitution from 1776 like there's a
lot has changed so there's a level of
social evolution including in the way we
interpret laws and you know a there's a
if your agenda is that you know the same
reason I reject look at the kind of
grover norquist agenda that you know we
got a polished income tax abolish the
IRS get us back to you know the pre 1913
you know there's
I'm too much of a temperamental
conservative to to embrace those kind of
their kind of utopia is like
backward-looking utopias right and and I
think that can often be as dangerous the
what I love about what Claremont's doing
now is you know they're they're opening
their open to very different points of
view right they end you know that you
can next my next question for you yeah
you get courtesy urban writing for them
and you've got you know around a pervert
and there's so I think like have you
read Bronze Age mindset no no Michael
Anton didn't know I don't know no Anton
but yeah you know take something like
the flight 93 flexion essay right right
I don't know if that helps like like
that's what I don't think framing every
single election as existential like
turns down the heat and there's you know
there's right-wing acceleration as to
thought I think we don't want turnout of
heat we want want things to get worse
before they get better and we want the
you know the internal contradictions to
multiply and I don't think that works
out well for the same reason that you
know it turns out that when you smash
the state you don't get a narco utopia
you end up getting Libya and Venezuela
but right like like there's there's a
level of um yeah so I just don't quite
know how to pin them down in that and
that sometimes it confuses me more than
anything and I know people there who and
I know people written for them who like
you know I probably share
90% of my thought with but then there
are other people who you know make it
sound like everything since 1913 is
unconstitutional and the we got to you
know deconstruct the administrative
state and in some ways like NOAA the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency
less constitutional than ice because
it's like well actually we still need a
weather service and like I don't know
you know we can't we're not getting rid
of the administrative state like for
maybe we need to reform it maybe we need
to bring back some level of you know
genuine executive power rather than the
the administrative state being a power
unto itself but that's very different
from a view that says we got to roll
this back right and and and so I I never
quite know how to place them and one of
my one of my deep philosophical views is
that you know theory and practice can be
reconciled right like like we don't have
to live in and esotericism and and keep
things hidden from people and I feel I
feel like sometimes I feel like my big
critique of you know the the you know
naive neoliberal free traders is also
that critique if they're like implicit
stressing ISM where they're trying to
hide things and I don't want people to
hide the ball like I don't hide the ball
for myself
and and so I'm just left you know
scratching my head about what it is that
they're actually what their actual
project is right right I think well I
think it's a undergoing a state of
transformation right now for sure but
they definitely came out with a number
of pieces that outlined their their new
perspective on multiculturalism being
the existential threat they compared our
circumstances what does that mean what's
existential about it like that that
carried forth it would lead to the
destruction of the Republic but what
does that mean right yeah what does it I
mean I don't I don't have there I know
there's there's a broad like broad sort
of um so stylized fact right that that
the older populations are less conducive
to civil unrest right like one of the
reasons the 60s was so tumultuous were
there you know bombings every day and
everything else was in part because the
baby boomers were you know at their most
peak testosterone ages right and we're
living in an aging society
anything I feel like things have
mellowing out you know going back to
some of the de-risking discussion and
and I don't see destruction on our
frontier of what I see is the but I
think is the the pessimistic vision is
stasis right that the things just don't
really change that much and that we
continue having these same debates
because there are political forces that
make it impossible to you know climb the
mountain to a to a better equilibrium I
would think that Clermont would say that
this 19 air sorry 2020 is like 1850s and
that the it's about competing theories
of justice right and their perspective
there's perspective is that the the
social justice Left multicultural
warriors whatever you want to call them
have a theory of justice that is in
conflict with the theory of justice that
our nation was founded on and that the
Republicans at that time were the ones
in charge of maintaining the Union and
they are again today in charge of
maintaining the Union and it is these
same forces that just had to have a sip
different system of justice for
different people and that is those are
just fundamentally incompatible I think
is the foundation of their argument yeah
I mean I don't know if you've read Chris
Cole balls new book the a gentleman I
didn't get an advance copy so it's a
it's a I read it because it was in the
airport so I didn't read read in depth
but you know one of his big critique and
it's a kind of conservative reactionary
critique is of our thesis is that the
civil rights era
represents a kind of new constitution
and there's these parallel constitutions
now you know I I am you know as a
Canadian as someone who's outside the
kind of American experience he doesn't
know in other countries we don't frame
everything in terms of you know what
black and white literally like right
race relations stuff like that you have
a different
affective on things and it's and you
know it's even you know going back to
this the lament of the nation and the
Canada's constant anxiety about
Americanization right in some ways the
race debate in America has become the
metaphor for everything right like you
know Canada has a has you know questions
about its how to treat its indigenous
population or integrating new immigrants
right those are big topics in Canada but
they're becoming now more and more
framed in terms of race that rate
racialization right and and whether you
know a Sikh is integrating culturally is
not a it's not about race right it's
it's it's a total wrong metaphor or the
issues the the injustice is that were
felt by the indigenous community are not
analogous to to slavery right and it's
it's just there's been weird there's a
weird thing where like you know people
in Australia record you know not
officially not officially but like they
recognize MLK Day right and there's so
there's part of American cultural
hegemony is how how that has been export
that that framing that frame of
reference that that way of that ontology
right has been exported to other places
of different totally different cultures
and frames of reference and I think that
is a big problem I'm not sure it's an
existential threat to the United States
though like I think there is this
tension between the US Constitution the
Bill of Rights has originally understood
and you know the Civil Rights Act which
which changed which created new vectors
to for for new kinds of law that that
are kind of pseudo constitutional but
are upheld for prep because the
President and and for me like I
the best scenario I think if you spent
too much your time focused on that you
might put off vibes that you're like a
true reactionary that you think that you
know maybe we should black people
shouldn't be allowed in my store and
stuff like that whereas I think there is
a version of that debate that tries to
moderate it and say look if we there's a
there's a version of history where you
know we we acknowledge the the unique
and deep historical impact of slavery
but we but the goal should to aspire to
be a kind of post-racial society one
where one where we don't need these
special preferences when we don't need
these sort of special pseudo
constitutional legal protections and and
I think that would moderate things
because what you're basically saying is
look we're not we don't want to go back
to Jim Crow we want to become more like
Canada or other countries that don't
have the same history and therefore
don't have this other extra extra
constitutional framework that sort of
crudely pasted on top right well that
book last I looked was like number one
almost in all of Amazon number one in
politics number one in government never
in philosophy I think it's gonna be read
by a ton of people I mean it's just sold
a ton of copies I think but I was
familiar with the general argument but I
will definitely pick that up I just want
to ask you one more question before we
go what is your take on ubi universal
basic income overrated overrated okay
that's it that's all you got yeah I mean
I so someone like Andrew yang you know I
if I could vote I'd be in the anging
okay but that's partly because I think
that Yang's got the he has the right he
is a broadly right diagnosis like I
think you know when he talks about
automation he's really talking about
offshoring it's sort of a quibble about
the edges but I think his orientation is
to say let's transcend a dandy politics
because that's alienating
and he's able to do that in part because
he is is a asian man right math star and
and to say no we're focused on economic
issues and we're going to focus on
future the future right like we're going
to need to orient our agenda to the
future and part of his also I think is
part of his agenda is sort of rebuilding
American state capacity to actually do
things to respond to crises like the
opioid epidemic to - you know innovate
in new areas and I think that is where
the country needs to be focused so I
don't necessarily agree with the UVI as
a specific policy because I think a it's
too expensive and be and kind of
misunderstands social insurance like
social insurance is about pooling risks
so you know you if your house burns down
you get redistribution from from people
whose houses didn't burn down right
there and the same insurance pools you
and there's all kinds of things like
that in social insurance if you get
unemployed you have an unemployment
insurance it's not about a flat transfer
and in fact like you can't reduce
everything to a flat transfer that
doesn't mean I'm I'm not for things that
are like ubi for example I do a lot of
advocacy around child allowances I might
go and be my last question right and I
think that in that case it's a child
allowance is a bit different than ubi
because if you think about it you know
the market doesn't care if you're a
parent or not you get the same wage for
the same job and but you have an
additional mouth to feed right and so
there's a kind of market failure with
parenting because you know the economic
system is doesn't is unaware of
fertility and being a thing right then
we have these we have this biology that
we can't actually overcome like this is
who what humans are humans live they
have families and give birth and they
die that's what humans do and going back
to like the metaphor of like molding
institutions to the hand you know the
you your most fertile years are also
relatively low income years right like
your peak fertility your peak earnings
are in your 40s and 50s and so there's a
gap between when you have the resources
to actually
family and when when you're able to
start a family and interesting and the
fact that it's a flat a child allowance
just a flat sir like a ubi for kids it
that that structure makes sense because
you're basically creating an income
stream for that extra dependent that you
have right well if you started catching
as ubi for kids I think it might get
more traction actually it's not a bad
way of putting it it's kind of traction
yeah people who people would understand
that okay we have covered just a
tremendous amount of ground here I
really appreciate how gracious you've
been with your time I won't take up any
more of it but I do hope that we could
pick this up again sometime in the
future it's been I was gonna ask you at
the very end you know who would you vote
for and you already came out you would
say you would be in the yang gang well I
know you got to go but I want it to just
like like challenge you on why do I
support Trump like I understand D so
there's this thing called the fallacy of
mood affiliation fallacy of mood
affiliation right so like for example
there's a pro environmentalist mood like
I I'm the kind of person I want to
affiliate with that mood that I'm for
the environment but you know being
against littering or being for more land
conservation totally different topic
than carbon tax right like global
climate change is is a kind of
collective action problem like for you
know that requires some solution you can
be for carbon tax but not necessarily be
for the Endangered Species Act right
like so the moot but the mood because
there's a pro environmentalist mood is
if you're for one you tend to be for all
the things in that movie right and I
think there's if any if nothing else
Trump it sort of represents the kind of
aesthetic right he's defined some kind
of mood right and and that mood comes
with a lot of Association specific
policies that are all get lumped
together that I think you know many of
them are are in the right direction and
and and Trump himself his man is
manifested because of a lot of the
problems in society that we've been
discussing yeah
does not mean that you know just because
I'm pro-environmental doesn't mean I
have to you know line up behind Greta
throneburg right like there's there's a
personality and with a personality with
specific policies that he's enacted that
is in many ways totally you know in
conflict with the kind of mood that he
represents which is this you know this
masculine to user terms and this
repudiation of the establishment and
everything else and you can be for all
that right but still take exception with
you know the tax cuts and Jobs Act or or
or think that well I think that his
maybe he is you know corrupt or doing
damage to international relations and
stuff like that like there's there's
ways where you don't have to fall into
the the tribe mentality you can try to
try to stand out and this is what I try
to do and this is maybe why I'm able to
have these conversations being someone
who's relatively moderate and liberal
with people on the left and right is
because I I try to reduce that
propensity to just fall into these moods
and and then that helps me you know sort
of pick and pick and choose in a way
that might be more actually more
consistent right right well you bring up
a couple of questions one would be why
did you support Trump in 2016 versus do
you support Trump in 2020 versus do you
agree with all the policies and and and
legislation that he's passed and enacted
those are all different questions in
2016 I'm more with the Anton crowd
flight 93 that if Hillary Clinton had
won that the there would be just an
unrelenting march through our
institutions of a liberal
anti-enlightenment anti reason anti
rationality anti science thinking that's
focused on a new morality and a new
religion of intersectionality which has
at its core the white male as the
oppressor by definition no questions no
qualifications and that everything
that's happened bad to everyone in the
world in the United States is
specifically related to this society
that the white man created and the
oppression that comes through through
masculine power and the patriarchy that
philosophy and that religion whether she
knew it or not she was dragging it
across the finish line I understand that
but that what you described is a kind of
aesthetic disgust right like you didn't
you don't like that aesthetic right like
what are the actual things that she
would do is she maybe rejoined the TPP
you know there as a concrete example
maybe title nine in enforcement would
have been increased and expanded and the
civil rights of men on university's
campuses across the country would have
been further abridged and the Trumpton
anything absolutely one of the first
things that Betsy Davos did was rescind
the Dear Colleague letter of 2011 or
title nine and they put it open for
public debate and discussion which Obama
and Biden did not do they sent out that
DCL in 2011 and in 2013 without any
public debate or discussion whatsoever
which then in turn changed the face of
American universities and colleges all
across the country based on
pseudoscience activist surveys and a
bunch of other that created
this whole sense an idea of rape culture
and that all men are predators and yada
yada yada but I mean those are very
common policy actions that I that I was
rooting for in fact that was one of my
number one policy I think you can list
it you're gonna you know bring up a list
of things that have changed I just feel
like adding them all up it's really not
nothing has really changed that much in
some ways I feel like in some ways I
feel like Trump is a he is conservative
Inc but with all the aesthetics of the
anti conservative I know he's becoming
so I mean I wouldn't be alone in saying
being very critical of the fact that
he's failed on a number of things right
Paul Ryan tax cuts huge omnibus spending
programs you know the the there's a lack
of follow-through on a number of the
issues China China I think they just
released the currency manipulating
status so like hold on hold on you
there's a difference between ydy did you
support Donald Trump in an election
versus Hillary Clinton that's one kind
of question the next question is is do
you think that he delivered on on his
promises the answer to that would be in
many cases absolutely not
right but I think he's done the opposite
I think he's been co-opted by
conservative aying not just co-opted but
some of his policies that are obviously
his policies including the trade war
yeah you know have tangibly harmed
people that you know the working-class
that we've been discussing it may it may
have but you know I would say in that
regard and I appreciate the challenge
here and I and I hate the fact that I do
literally have to go soon so I will cut
this off in a little bit but this whole
conversation that we had around trying
to Shock Doctrine is about a failed
China strategy grand strategy and
anything that we can do to start
deviating separating ourselves from that
failed you know China strategy I think
is helpful have there been has there
been negative impacts from the tariffs
on on specific sectors in the American
economy yes have there been is it been a
boon for others somebody in my extended
family runs like a metal tubing you know
manufacturing plants all over the
Midwest and around the world and their
business went through the roof you know
when there were some specific you know
tariffs put on place because there was
they were one of the few people who were
able to take on the additional demand
for their very specific manufacturing
capability and do I have all the the
details on exactly who who was benefited
from the tariffs and not know I don't
but do I appreciate a sense in taking a
more antagonistic approach towards China
or at least beginning to understand that
they have held an antagonistic approach
towards us through this entire time in
which we've been operating is a very
open open liberal economy they've been
operating is almost a mercantilist
economy from the old days and what
happens when those two kind of things
interact with each other bad things
happen right they end up acquiring all
the money we owe them all the money they
have all of our manufacturing skills
they have all the things all these bad
things that we've talked about and how
do you get to reshaping that alignment
without maybe taking some dramatic
I mean Trump was a weapon and a
manifestation of of energy and feeling
that was bubbling up through the country
and I and I wrote a 300 page book all
about this and apologized about why this
happened I think this is the best the
best argument for Trump strategically
like something like Slovak support of
Trump because he thought he'd be a means
to a more radical left-wing
right you know there are different means
to the ends arguments right that's
different than supporting the
administration or the person himself or
you know and this is why I mean by mood
affiliation like there's the kind of
Peter Taylor game in which i think is
actually the probably the most
defensible argument which is like
there's all these forms of consensus in
American politics that that Trump has
usefully blown open like asking you know
why why do we have a NATO countries
freeride or what why you know why are we
letting this sort of neo-fascist
authoritarian state take a lot of jobs
and so so he served a purpose and
blowing open you know what sometimes
called like the horizons of possibility
like thinking beyond our horizon so I I
converse in window or whatever yeah over
the one and there's truth to that but in
this is where the mood affiliation comes
back in and it's like well the people
who argue that also don't think he
should be impeached and and and it's not
that the arguments for impeachment are
clear-cut
is that there's a grouping a correlation
between what you believe like why should
a Democrat believe in the state tax and
pro-choice like they have nothing to do
with each other but these moods cause
people to group and what I want to put
out to your audience is just you can you
know you can try to step outside these
dynamics and and that's what the the
genuine free thinking is and I think you
know to the to the discussion we were
having about you know the monocultural
ISM other left like what that really
threatens is is a kind of group
mentality and and the value of being an
individual heterodox thinker and there's
versions of that who are Trump adjacent
who are who are and I'm not saying in
the kind of lame and Shapiro sense room
I'm gonna just call balls and strikes
you know
that that that's BS I'm talking about
having a level of meta meta rationality
of being being a little Zen about things
right and and and and and not trying to
not not inadvertently creating a kind of
mirror image of the the thing that
you're you're critiquing right right
well I we had this conversation maybe it
was before we started recording but I
understand that the power the presidency
is limited and I understand that the
nature of our government is to slow
things down and to end up in some sort
of gridlock and that that's great
because that means that if things are
gonna really change that there has to be
really far-reaching support for that
kind of stuff so I never thought that by
electing Donald Trump were we gonna all
of a sudden have some massive radical
shift in policy and everything all
across the board and we're gonna have
Nazism and go to war and you know kill
everybody no I didn't think any of that
what I wanted to do was change to the
conversation and I wanted I wanted there
to be very specific emphasis on things
that I mentioned like title 9 for
example I mean that that is such a
far-reaching and powerful just stroke of
administrative action that that Obama
and Biden took that was based on on fake
science that has now rippled through
every one of our other institutions as
those kids that were raised in that era
are now working for Google and working
for a New York Times sitting on the
board the editorial board at the New
York Times people that make jokes about
like kill all white men and all kinds of
 like that
it's everywhere and it all started back
in that same time period that that title
9 DC Isle changed so much because it
ignited and it and it and it took the
intersectionality model and religion and
it just it just expanded it and it put
it into every element of our
universities ok it's like you go to
orientation and they're like what is
your pronoun and you know the things
that you say aren't to be judged by
whether or not they're truth or they'll
be judged about by the way that the
recipient feels and if you feel like
anybody's harassing you we have a secret
hotline that you can call it a stop on
we'll come and get them kicked very
school Oh
that started right around there but do
you think trunk like on the cultural
level I think there's a plausible
argument the Trump has reinforced that
that trend you know he might have had
some policy wins here or there through
Betsy DeVos but I think there's also a
narrative that he's reinforced in so far
as the people who are pushing you know
diversity and inclusion and equity sort
of agendas at the campuses are able to
now say well look this is what we're
talking about like if we don't have this
again but that's a poor argument to me
about don't take action because the
people you're going to take action
against are gonna say look this is why
we have to keep doing were doing well no
I think I think you have to like model
their reaction function how people are
going to behave rightly what I think is
I don't think if if if Trump if Mitt
Romney had been elected in 2016 right I
don't think CNN would have had that
democratic debate where everyone
announced their pronouns right like
there's a sense in which the the
negative partisanship right-
partisanship means you you end up
supporting the opposite of what put your
opponent supports so all of a sudden
Democrats are Pro trade Pro immigration
anti-russia
like the in and it's and and that that
that kind of mirroring has you you can't
if you want to step outside like the
system and analyze things rationally
have to say well maybe maybe let's say
if you're anti-immigration
like if you're if you're a restriction
is maybe Trump wasn't the best person to
have not just because he didn't really
do pass any comprehensive immigration
reform but because you know now all of a
sudden when the Democrats get in the
power they're gonna have license to be
open borders right well III think that
that's an interesting approach I think
it would take a very sophisticated
finessing voter to to be able to predict
into the future you know five steps
ahead here but you're talking about some
sort of like Ford for DHS yes before
tea-chest so like where for Niskanen we
advocate for carbon tax when we try to
get Republicans to endorse a carbon tax
right it's actually harmful the green
New Deal is actually harmful because if
you pare climate action with you know
a myriad list of progressive goals from
job guarantees to universal health care
like your you're coding that in a
partisan way that makes it harder for us
to get bipartisan support right yeah and
I think there's there's something
analogous with you know a lot of the
stuff that gets done in Congress the
things that the things that actually
pass are the things that no one's paying
attention to right because they haven't
been coded right right well to me if I
had to go back in and change my support
and or reconsider 2016 all over again
absolutely no brainer
no question whatsoever there's no way in
hell I could have advocated for her
supported a Hillary Clinton presidency
and there's no way I could do the same
thing for a potential Joe Biden
presidency and and while I do think that
Bernie Sanders does get some of the
populist talking points right I don't
know that I can put my support behind
him either so there would come up you
know I'm a pragmatic guy so I'm like all
right well what is there to do could I
you you said that you would have voted
for Garrett you know Gary Johnson in
2016 it was it's a joke cause he's
Canadian and is it it's a joke anyway
but but the point is is you know Jill
Stein these types of protest votes which
is what they are don't actually do
anything and you're in a position of
power where you you do generate vote
collars regular votes don't do anything
well of course it is irrational to vote
we know this right Bryan Caplan beat me
over the head with it when I was but
just an undergrad telling me how voting
was a completely irrational activity to
do because the expected outcome is zero
and the investment in order to do it is
very high so it's totally irrational but
you know somebody's got to do it and no
right but I think there's a lesson here
which is you know if your vote doesn't
matter because there's so many people
you have to find your source of leverage
right so in my work you know I do a lot
of advocacy I work on the hill you know
I work you know I work in intellectual
debates but there's intellectual debates
are ultimately about driving some kind
of wedge that lets me get actual things
done right so you know my leverage is
not about joining team a or team B right
it's about trying to step outside that
so I can actually navigate the
coalitions that let me you know pass
legislation that
has more impact than my vote right right
it's weird that I can have meetings of
senators by now I devote right and I
think you know in in the general public
there's all kinds of ways you can find
leverage well this is my leverage this
is my way no and I totally agree with
that like having a podcast doing media
that that is a form of leverage I just
yeah you just you think I'm wrong no I
think that you know I think someone like
Eric Weinstein is a model for how you
can save we're gonna be heterodox around
challenge things but I'm not he's not on
Team red or blue you know well Eric Eric
Weinstein is in the process of becoming
magnified he just has an admitted it yet
and his very public transformation has
been excruciating to watch because he's
in he's he's identified virtually all
the same issues and we've identified
it's excruciating because you're saying
he has similarity with you on mood but
he hasn't made the leap into the tribe
right and that's and that's because he
won't he won't take that action he won't
take that he but he still believes that
you can reform a Democratic Party from
the inside and I just I cannot see that
as possible do you I mean to the extent
that the Democratic Party looks
radically different than it did 10 years
ago it could look a radically different
than it does 10 years from now right it
is immature the Tea Party radically
changed the Republican Party before that
they're you know compassionate
conservatism they're these things you
gabby has never just a you know linear
extrapolations right right well I have
seen zero evidence to show that the
Democratic Party party of 2016 is any
different on the trajectories that I
care about in 2020 in fact they're all
it's all negative I'll read all red
lights for me the APA action all red
lights when you're pathologizing
masculinity and teaching parents that
boys who take risks and our
hyper-competitive are bad and they need
to be treated these things are bad for
America it continues the feminization of
the economy the de-risking and trump
represented a ream ask Yulin ization of
america which i don't think is a bad
thing in fact i think it's a good thing
and I think that that's mainly one of
the reasons that I supported him and
supported that the general vibe right it
was about a general vibe and
about a possibility for opening up new
conversations new and new directions
Trump the president is totally different
than Trump - candidate I think a lot of
people that voted voted for Trump or
supported the Trump the candidate would
are sorely disappointed in a number of
different ways but I was less what's the
word optimistic I guess or idealistic I
I knew going in then he'd be severely
limited and if you wanted to do this
over here he's got to pass this budget
bill over here and if he wants he's got
it he has to play the game and and and
they are gonna get to him and and that's
just that's just the nature of the
system as far as I understand it so I
didn't have any revolutionary
expectations in fact I wrote in my book
that if he took an action on title nine
it would be all worth it to me and he
did and he did and I see that as a
really a seminal event in American
culture and it hasn't just making these
simple changes or that they're proposed
to the title nine DCL stuff is not going
to remedy what has already been put into
practice for ten years that's going to
take some more time and so at this point
man I'm still 2020 2020 a team Trump for
sure I see no other productive viable
outcomes that are gonna get us to the
place where I want to go but again I was
a Democrat my whole life so I'm very
socially open-minded you know when gay
marriage came off the table that's when
I opened up my mind to Republicans once
that was settled law as a proponent
myself as of gay marriage whether that
was settled law I was like whoo that's
one less thing I have to be worried
about and when Trump candidate and end
president has come out and in high favor
of marijuana or cannabis legalization
that's another thing that was off my off
my table right or off the list of things
that could that specifically precluded
me from participating in Republican
Party and I would argue that a number of
those social issues have already been
decided and so it's now now we're able
to sort of look at some other issues and
and that's where I am and I appreciate
being challenged and I really wish I did
not have to go but I seriously have to
go get my on so we can take him to
baseball this has been almost three
hours here which I really appreciate him
I have to chop this up into a couple but
serious thank you very much I appreciate
the pushback I need it because you know
a lot of
I don't get that either from guests or
from my own readers or listeners so
thank you and thank you for this very
winding sprawling conversation that's
covered a million million different
pieces of information and and I think
has been enlightening for everyone I
know it has been for me can you tell my
guys where they can find you like what's
a what's a good way to you know on
Twitter what's your handle etc Twitter's
ham and cheese ham and cheese got one
word like the sandwich yep the stuff on
manufacturing income development that
all goes up at struggling regions calm
okay
and then the niskanen Center is sort of
my home base awesome so and just
searching Samuel Hammond you can time us
you can find a ton of because I
know I got neck deep in same Hanuman's
bylines over the last couple of weeks
there's a ton of them out there and I
find it very worthwhile and worth
reading which is why I wanted to come
down here and talk to you I like your
approach I love the way that you write
your fantastic writer I have a little
writer Envy and and especially your
ability to put everything into contest
context historically and to into advance
the conversations along their natural
lines and to give context for everyone I
appreciate that so how the feeling's
mutual stuff well thank you very much
sir I appreciate it and hopefully we can
do this again agreed all right thanks
you