welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
well welcome to another session of the
dark stoah these are events that have a
decent probability of blowing your mind
and maybe inducing some existential
horror they tend to deal with heavier
themes and you can think of it as a
negative visualization for what might be
coming around the corner for Humanity
our speaker for this series is the
infamous Pat Ryan who some have called
the most dangerous man on the internet
and he's got quite a treat in store for
us tonight so buckle up there's gonna be
a talk and so gather some questions as
as packages talk and then there'll be a
second part where we get to ask those
questions to Pat so without further ado
I'll hand it over to you pat thank you
again Daniel howdy folks thanks for
coming back some of you weren't scared
off by the CRISPR talk and you've made
it for a round three which is excellent
there was a great comment made about the
CRISPR talk for use for those of you who
don't know it was the discussion of
applying hyper consumer behaviors and
marketing to CRISPR resulting in some
Tower of Babel moment for our brains and
it's just all gonna go bad one person
saw the existential horror immediately
and asked well can we can we reverse
entropy and I was I was one I was
floored by the ability to grasp the
essence of the problem so quickly and I
said well yet you have to be able time
reversal you have to deal time symmetry
and the vote the collective vote was
that we should probably discuss what the
two of us are talking about in full and
so what this particular episode is
designed to not get rid of the hope that
time is reversible but actually
introduced the hope that we may have
gotten our math wrong the entire time
and I'm going to preface this because I
know that there are some in the audience
who I am about to step in their domain
and all over it
and about as reckless of a manner as I
can without the proper formalism and
without the proper rigor letting you
know I'm that's what I'm going to do I'm
gonna ask you to give me a little bit of
patience as I do this because I'm not
trying to go to the rigor I'm actually
trying to introduce a concept than so
I'm gonna skip some dependencies for the
sake of time like I'm gonna go into the
Riemann hypothesis for example and you
know damn well like you can't go into
Riemann hypothesis about like three
years of freaking linear calculus linear
algebra beforehand and I'm not gonna
dedicate a whole episode to that there's
plenty of great YouTube resources for
that kind of thing so I'm gonna skip
through these concepts to get to the
primary concepts so I beg your
forgiveness as I as I mangle your craft
but there's a this would be interesting
I'm sure and there's a there's a little
flaw that I've detected and I'm curious
if it's valid on that so without any
much more preparation here we go okay
all right so entropy remains undefeated
you can't win you can't break even you
can't even quit the game that's that's
entropy folks and it's sponsored by a
little BP and this company that I found
that somehow found what I was saying
interesting I can hide behind quantum
computers it can't be quantum leap Oken
so if you're interested go ahead and
click on that and have fun okay so we're
gonna get started with I'm gonna start
as much to the beginning as I can
without going full ancient Greece so
once upon a time there's this guy named
Rudolph second here's the Holy Roman
Emperor the sixth
hundreds you thought that sorry you
thought that Catholics and Protestants
were pretty cooled and the Jews are okay
but boy that occultism was something
else so this guy named Michael Mayer was
the court Alchemist for Rudolf and he
wrote a whole bunch of stuff that was
influential in terms of what we would
consider Gnosticism and occult magic of
the 1600s specifically that time period
which is unique to that time period and
they got along pretty well and he did
all kinds of stuff including looking
like the guy who made John McAfee which
is an interesting feature but he also
wrote this thing called the fraternity
of the roads across roads across as you
know is a is a conspiracy oriented
secret society kind of thing but it was
derivative of the time though it's a
1600s it was about a hundred years into
the printing press and what the internet
is doing to us now the printing press
was doing to people that so anybody
could write books you can introduce
yourself to all these ideas you get
these like little information cults all
over the place and and people kind of
fragment their information landscape
aggressively so the internet is the
second time we're doing this in books
with the very first time and these
characters were a part of that face and
driving it's very good this guy in
particular was driving a good chunk of
it he found the whole thing fascinating
so Mathias comes along he says yeah
Rudolf is kind of a dick I kind of want
to get rid of him
so he gets rid of him that's it so
because he knocked off his his patron
Michael Meyer decides to run screaming
and says well I'm done with this part
I'm going to now travel the rest of
Europe and teach when I know about
things of course when one good knock one
one good knockdown King appears another
one appears as well ferdinand ii decided
to come along and says hey yeah I like
that throwing B shame if something
happened to you
Malthus was basically saying I'm just
gonna repeat whatever this Cardinal says
that was the wrong answer the right
answer was Protestants in case you
were wondering he decided to go on a
rampage and wipe out all kinds of
Protestants which unlock the
call the 30 Years War this did not go
well for most of Europe this was a
terrible terrible time and I mean plenty
of reference to it throughout all the
podcasts that I've done all of this then
leads to the formation of Isaac Newton
Isaac Newton actually had a copy of the
fraternity of the rosy Crossin it was
heavily annotated see the thing about
Isaac Newton was that he was an
Archaeopteryx
before he was a mathematician before
anything else he was mining the books of
the Renaissance in ancient Rome in
ancient societies in Europe to find
secrets about reality but just to put
this in perspective the Romans to the
Europeans were about as equivalent as
aliens to us they were heavily organized
they had great technology their
infrastructure was amazing they they
spoke different languages at different
religions totally different cultures
they just marched all over the the
barbarian Europeans at the time
especially the Germans so when the
Romans just up and disappear slowly
because they just can't maintain their
society anymore they leave these roads
and these ruins and these books and this
technology everywhere you have a bunch
of these forests cave people just
running around today what is what is
this alien debris all over the place so
there was actually a pretty serious
demand for archeo cryptography and Isaac
Newton was definitely one of them okay
any he's the inventor of calculus by the
way and these two things are very
related as we'll get it so anyway that's
how calculus is born we're wondering so
that's an important part because
calculus introduces a concept that we
don't really deal with anymore it's
called the infinitesimal I'll get into
what that is as soon as my so start with
differential calculus so this is an
actual quote from I believe this is from
Newton's waist book where he's writing
down his ideas as he's coming along and
he says what is x and y in one moment
will be X plus infant essa Mille and y
plus infinitesimal in the next when he
was describing as the ratio of the
velocities
this infinitesimal baton this is a hack
this is consider well hold on this is
widely considered a hack and it turns
out that Leibnitz relied on
infinitesimals to a degree as well when
he was going instead of trying to figure
out motion he was trying to figure out
the area of curves and he also relied on
infant Testaments so they both came to
the same conclusion about this thing and
everybody saw the infant testimonals
like this is what the is this thing
what do you mean an infant Testament so
an infinitesimally close to zero without
being 0 so like zero point repeating all
the way down to like 1 right so like
nine billion zeros to the right and then
like a one at the end of it so that is
that's an infinitesimal it is so tiny it
almost doesn't matter and this was
bolted on because of the because he's
dealing with ratios so by default you're
dealing with division what happens if
you divide by zero uh-oh well the way
out of that problem is this both the
fake-ass number on to it son uh you got
around the problem so that's basically
what happened and he was doing this to
describe the tangent as it rides through
different curvatures of motion and the
reason why he was focusing on tangents
was because they had to use these
mathematical constructs to represent
motion it's not like they had cameras
and like lures and like I'm going to sit
there and measure everything as I drop
of all they couldn't do that so they had
to use the limited mathematical
constructs they had at the time to
represent motion in a in a in a semi
predictable manner
and so they would utilize tangents
because that's the limit of their math
basically a lot of them to do so if
you're wondering why all this stuff
feels alien and doesn't make sense in
the era of the computer just kind of
roll back to the 1600s and pretend that
the only way to explore math math was
like by five different shapes and that's
all they had so it makes a lot more
sense when you kind of looking at that
way so again as I described if you're if
you're dealing with ratios and you're
hitting zero then you have some serious
problems but this is the very nature of
the infinitesimal introduces to prob
one you know you can't divide by zero so
you need the infinitesimal but because
the infant s Amell is not zero you can't
ignore it
the whole way this equation happened was
you would do go through the equation
build ratios and the way it was
structured was at the end you would then
shrink the infinitesimal and then
eliminated from the result so you get
the actual number that you're looking
for but this again that seems like such
a hack this is like what this is
this come on man you take me for a ride
here right so that was not enough that
was this first pass that that just
wasn't it so he was forced to describe
what he called was deflection his way of
trying to make sense of time varying
quantities and it didn't work so yes
everyone's favorite degenerate gambler
helped but even with that help it didn't
work very well in fact this is another
actual quotes Newton where he cannot
proceed with the explanations of luxans
now I have preferred to conceal it busts
 gibberish like a caesarian
cipher actual quote right so not even he
had like a firm grasp on it cuz the info
testimo problem was was bothering him
too and he had to be like obviously
wasn't honest about he was trying to
hide the fact that he just know and
that's an emissive to the Leibnitz so
they're both just like trying to figure
this into testicles were problems
basically it's what I'm trying to convey
to you right and we know what it is from
a quality from a quantitative standpoint
we know that it's infinitely close to
zero without being zero but what does
that actually mean what does that look
like well there's one critique to Newton
at the time that was actually pretty
damn good and the more I look at it the
more on point I realize it is I don't
think the guy actually intended this his
name was Brian George Burkley and he
basically described in fantasmas as
ghosts of departed quantities now that
sounds like some pretty good pros and
the more I think about that phrase the
more I see why Newton had such a hard
time with infant testicles
and I'll be able to explain that in a
later slide and and what he was trying
to say is he was saying that the church
is one thing logic and reason is another
so if you're gonna bolt infant s
emelle's on to your supposedly rigorous
logical mathematics then you can't just
bolt them on and we just take them by
faith yeah otherwise it's no different
than Church is just spinning up miracles
to keep consistency in their stories so
what you're saying is this infant
testimo is equivalent to a miracle and
thus it's equivalent to a ghost and
therefore we should just get rid
of all and that was the critique that
actually launched this and and
everything else and this kerchief would
last it would stick for centuries but
there's something else in here that that
phrase the ghosts part is the most
interesting part of that phrase so I'm
gonna iterate toward that infinitesimal
x' as you can imagine not only pissed
off the church but also pissed off the
internet you can see you may have
noticed this meme at some point a couple
of years back where a point nine nine
nine nine which is an inverse of n to
test of all equals one you might have a
memory of that sort of trick so these
things are just like problems across the
board these infinitesimally you bring
them into something and it just causes a
mess everywhere they're also like I said
there are also holy wars so there were
so much so that there are some clerks in
Rome that just straight bandim you
couldn't use them like just get rid of
them you they caused too many
arguments then you have again Bishop
Berkeley was the one who launched his
very good attack in his work called the
analysis and then you have the Lords of
autism canter in particular it was a
walking human-computer there's no other
way to describe him they go on this holy
crusade to eliminate infinitesimals from
mathematics entirely and then you have
philosophical people like Russell and
and Carnap they come in and they say
yeah let's get rid of intestinal smiie
everything can be quantified and
everything's on the grid it's all it's
all measurable it's all it's all
computational based then you had a
couple people who say well we kind of
want to keep infant Testaments they're
useful even if we don't have an
immediate
these guys were a heavily mocked these
guys were attacked by every conceivable
mathematician you can think of and it's
it this this license plate the 1632 like
this is that's how long this fight has
been going on and it calls its holy wars
there's no other way to describe it
eventually Kirk Godel comes along and he
basically says it is embarrassing that
mathematics has abandoned infant
testicles
it's just outright embarrassing because
at some point in the future we're gonna
look back at these things what the
were we doing well we know what the
we were doing Bishop Berkeley said
religion and logic cannot be using the
same tactics because ones at war with
the other so he fragmented these things
to say infinitesimal czar identical to
miracles and so therefore we should ban
them from mathematics and in that little
action he doomed mathematical research
for 300 years
utterly doomed it and it didn't it
didn't it took the efforts of gödel
whose last name I can't pronounce cos
I'm not German it took his efforts to
say this is an atrocity this is this is
an embarrassment all in the name of the
post 30 war disaster so let's get into
the next part so that's impetus right
impetus or these these argument points
these sticky things they introduced
problems when you try to calculate for
zero they introduced additional problems
like dividing by zero for example why
can't you even do that you're always
told you can't do that it's like you get
slapped math police come and kick your
ass what happens well you you can't
divide by zero because if you divide 10
by 0.1 you get 100 and then point zero
one thousand the closer you get to zero
the bigger your quotient and that's why
you can't divide by zero so again if
we're starting dividing by 20 then 15
then you know the closer we get
infinitesimally close to zero the
quotient becomes infinite so again
infinitesimal x' appear and they
everything up so whenever infinitesimal
sneak their way into a process everybody
just loses their Wow it's it's
telling my my ability to predict my
ability to quantify right because we
think of math is purely a quantitative
thing we don't think of it in terms of
other aspects although that's changing
very recently doesn't computation so is
it infinity is anything divided by zero
infinity because because of the nature
of incontestable swell the answer is no
and the reason the answer is no because
just because you get close just get
close to infinity by dividing by
infinitesimal doesn't necessarily mean
when you get to zero you get infinity so
it's equivalent to infinity but it's not
infinity I know that's a hair-splitting
stupid I'm sorry but that's a bet I call
it unbounded so it's infinity like it
has all the properties of infinity but
it's not necessarily infinity and to
give you an example what that is that's
an example would be in hyper reels there
is a concept called Omega so what you
can do is you can take a an infinite
series of numbers and you say all
infinity all infinite series of numbers
are equal according to its properties
but with omegas you can both on these
constructs afterwards to differentiate
between infinities so I'm of the opinion
that this makes more sense in hyper
reels than it does in our number systems
but again I'm probably speaking
gibberish and I apologize what I'm
saying is there's a math system where
this concept of an infinity like is
feasible so that's why I say it's
equivalent to infinity without being
infinity because just because you're
using infant testicles and the trend of
behavior is that you're getting to
infinity it doesn't necessarily mean it
will be when you get there so that's why
this is such a sticky problem and so
they just say don't do it right so again
we're striking infant essa muls from
math the holy war continues but what is
it but what we're actually describing
here is a super task so what's a super
task everybody here is going to do a
super task right now the definition of a
circle is a line
has infinite curvature meaning a circle
has infinite points on it so because it
has infinite points on it how can I
Traverse a circle there I just did a
super task look at that Wow
I'm traversing a circle oh my God look
at that I'm crossing infinite points
with my finger right so there's a
disconnect between infinity and actual
work so this bridge is concept called a
super task it is how you complete a task
that is made up of infinite actions
that's that's probably painful but as
infinite actions hacking
how can you finish it well that's why
it's going to super task because it's
super so it's so again if if a task is
made up of infinite actions then it's
made up of infinitesimal units right so
it goes on forever so again now you're
starting to see why this is so much for
problem like how how are we making sense
of infinity when when I when you can do
a task made of infinite steps so now the
church has a problem with it
mathematicians have a problem with it
now you probably have a problem so you
this is this is tough stuff okay I'm
gonna do my best here there are these
things called prime numbers I'm not
gonna get into not gonna get into it as
a to function is I'm not gonna get into
rhyming what I'm gonna say is that we
have a mechanism that allows us to
predict where prime numbers appear so
that's where I'm gonna start this and
I'm just gonna go from there so just
this is this is the methodology to
detect where Prime's appear in a
quantity line that's all you need to
know so this is just we're finding
Prime's right but we can only apply this
when we're dealing with if this value is
greater than 1 and for its reflection
and negative 1 which I'll get I'll be
able to show that second so let's say
this is my formula this is what the this
is equivalent to what the the Reimann
zeta function is I plug this into this
and then I represent
and all of this on a grid like so right
so if I say 2 plus I it's gonna go here
and then what the subsequent result of
this is going to be this motion
all right you follow me so far so we're
just gonna look at that right so again
if I move my dot here I get this motion
and if I move my dot here I get this
motion so as long as these dots are
beyond this line to the right
everything's going just fine but what
happens if I put my dot here or worse
here well it doesn't work the equation
becomes infinite the answer becomes
infinite becomes 1 plus 2 Plus 3 plus 4
plus 5 all the way infinite so you can't
put this in here so again we're having
problems with infinitesimal x' yet again
and this is the infinitesimal space
right here so as we approach 0 we start
having problems and this is showing up
here as well and by the way if you solve
this there's a million dollars for it so
anybody wants to try and try handle this
there's a million dollars in solving
this problem and what's most interesting
is that with some finessing there is a
way to take those limitations that were
in this slide here and say ah wait a
second with a little bit of twisting
work I can use those limitations to
predict where prime numbers are coming
from and here's roughly what the
equation looks like so here's what it
visualizes says this is that space we
were talking about where you put the
yellow dot and you get the pretty little
curves and stuff like that with
something called analytical continuation
which I don't think I'm pronouncing that
right you can apply this to negative
numbers too what happens is if I start
taking ok if I take this equation I put
something here could be any number and I
follow these steps if there's something
here results in 0 it will always show up
on this line
okay so if I so if I was to like if my
dot represented zero here my red dot
where I'm at right now and I decided to
scroll to the left and it was changing
the value that was in that S you would
see the following structure so this is
me at zero and then as I'm increasing in
time T T time right here and I'm putting
T into my equation the output starts
looking like a spiral a corkscrew
that continuously intersects with that
half line over and over and over again
and it is this motion that allows us to
figure out where prime numbers are which
is wild anyway that's why this guy's a
freaking genius but this is purely in
the infinitesimal space so now we have a
case where like oh okay in this in this
weird zone where we've seen three
problems previously that the church had
and that we had and that the internet
had you see a little bit of ray of hope
really oh there's something there's an
additional property about this space
that is unique to all the spaces and I'm
going to come back to this in a moment
but this is basically if I just to recap
I take that function and I apply I
continuously add the value that I'm
putting in the function and I get this
motion of behavior and this motion of
behavior is indicative of a prime number
which is a key part of encryption and
all kinds of so that wasn't that
was a weird thing that was found and
this is confirmed up to a trillion of
these loops so we've been able to figure
out we can take these loops from here to
a trillion and we can find them and we
can predict up to a trillion prime
numbers based on this structure alone
but we're still not confident enough to
say that this is a proof and it's true
in all cases still not quite there yet I
don't think we'll ever get there either
but is this a super task that I don't
know that is the outstanding question I
think
because if this is a super task where
you're taking an infinite number where
you're taking action and resolving
something that has an infinite number of
operations if it is made up of
incontestably more in operations then
isn't this a super task and if the
answer is yes then we might have an
answer to this the answer is no then we
got to figure out why I'm gonna dump
like this is confident this is
complicated I don't blame you if I lost
you on this but I'm gonna I'm gonna jump
back I'm gonna make this more
entertaining this is like the hard stuff
this is this the only hard stuff so
let's get into the fun stuff let's get
back okay so this called the mikowski
hypersurface of the present and this is
supposed to be the fun stuff my
apologies right so what this means is
you are here at all times
your eyeballs your life is here at this
dot and it never leaves this done so the
future happens to you and then it
becomes the past and however the future
modifies you so you turn your head it
will then rotate that cone or if you
move somewhere else in the hypersurface
this whole thing being my hypersurface
it will rotate that cone and move where
it cone is so this is how most of
calculations about how time affects
people and observers this is the model
that's used for almost all of it the
idea is that the now the future is some
infinite thing the past is some infinite
thing and then now well what is the now
is it zero is it zero time no it's not
zero time it's an infinitesimal
how can I say that how can I say that
now is an infinitesimal because every
conceivable metric of applied linear
time contains an infinite number of
these infinitesimally slices how do i
know that because i can divide time by
two forever i can get to the
infinitesimal space when i define time i
can say that you can say that a seconds
made of a thousand milliseconds okay
well how many nano seconds is that how
many Pico seconds is that you play the
game all the way down at some point it
is an infinite number of slices and so
what this model is proposing is that we
are moving through these slices of
transitioning through these slices at
all the times so every second is
actually a super task you are completing
an infinite number of actions every
second and that's what this model relies
on so now we're now we're starting to
see that Oh infant s emelles actually
haven't have an impact that's actually
time and now is the impetus and there
are infinite numbers of them per second
and this is what we've been using this
entire time to make all of our
cosmological and quantum projections but
as you can imagine there might be some
problems here so let's explore but first
let me make one more posit here
mathematics has been trending
anthropomorphic ly towards the idea of
treating time as an infinitesimal slice
and the reason we've been doing it is
because we can't stop seeing causality
we see it in everything we do we can't
actually stop ourselves from from we
can't suspend our disbelief from
connecting in an action to another
action if if I'm hungry I go eat that's
causality if I'm if I want to be
somewhere I'm gonna walk somewhere
that's causality so we have this linear
perception of cause and effect and the
way we justify that in math is by
treating now as an infant asthma
meanwhile in everywhere else in
mathematics and contessa moles are
effectively bad so we have a we have a
model problem here and I'll explain why
this is a challenge and this is this is
exactly the example that I'm talking
about
you know physicists are just straight-up
inventing and assuming stuff
specifically the symmetry part this is
where all the trouble starting that I'm
describing at least so now I'm going to
go back to Zeno and we're gonna say each
one of these slices of now the
infinitesimal now what's going Toa time
slice as these time slices accumulate
over time the ball raises so we are we
are representing motions one slice at a
time one infinitesimal at a time but
unfortunately it's Greece they don't
have statistical correlation they have
no way of relating these time slices
together so they say that motion is
impossible elisee noted of course Euclid
came along and says but I have legs
though of course motions possible right
so this is the heart of the problem
right here we have never resolved this
problem we have come up with band-aids
and tricks and Fuxi know and then
you clean I don't care and we've we've
just extended upon this argument because
we are obsessed with the idea of time
being this linear construct because well
Euclid decided we have legs and that was
the end of the argument it stays this
way for a while
then he gets a Newton again who is now
coming with the ratio of velocity
different times means you can predict
future motion future motion he was out
there trying to solve the motion of
celestial bodies planets and as a result
he used ratio of velocity to come up
with this he wasn't just predicting the
time slice of now he was stitching
together these time slices these
infinitesimally into a prediction of
where the infant essa Milles would end
up now the problem here is that if you
do that not only do you you don't just
end up with future projections of where
the time slices are going but if you
pump a negative number into your
equations you're implicitly going
backwards in time to so anything that
uses that tries to predict the outcome
of infinitesimal
always ends up in time symmetry and
Newton saw that and that's why he was
able to conclude at least thought that
time was absolute there's a absolute
ticking of the clock every whatever the
infinitesimal is and it's always
happening and for a long time this was
how people perceive time the clockwork
Empire of Britain for example is all
derivative of this work really running
with it but this again it's still
stitching together at a time and the
artifact of that stitching is that you
can you can see the future but there's
no way in which by by modeling the
future you are also automatically
modeling the past and so what you're
doing is you're creating this incorrect
construct of time symmetry and you're
allowing it in your mental space and
you're allowing it in your calculations
and so it kind of implies that time is
reversible so you get these weird
suggestions in your head and you're like
I don't know what's going on here well
then Einstein comes along and he's like
well let's that's not true there's some
experiments I can come up with to show
you that it's not true and the way I'm
experiment the way that that Einstein
looked at it he said that all events
were happening at the same time there
was no past present or future or
anything it was all happening at all the
time it just dependent where you stood
to see it so an example that would be
like looking at a star you're not
looking at the star right now you're
looking at the light from it that
happened about a million years ago a
billion years ago so if you stands
somewhere else you're gonna see that
light at a very different perspective
but they're very different time and if
you're moving at the speed of light then
it's it's gonna change how you look at
all this entirely so your your velocity
as you're moving through this space
determines what you see so you can't
make a statement about time being
absolute or being able to predict how
events move through time or how they
correlate the only thing you can say
with confidence or at least as a
byproduct of of your of this approach is
by saying that all events are happening
all the time of course this leads
directly Heisenberg who comes up with a
much more axiomatic observation and
says well let's just look at these time
slices let's look at these
infinitesimally say I just have a
snapshot of it I can't tell you anything
about where it's going I just I know
where this thing is right now at this
infinitesimal I couldn't I don't know
where it's gonna go next so he basically
found a way to reinvent the
infinitesimal argument by putting infant
s levels in the impetus holes and all of
these no matter how you cut this it all
leads to the same thing the illusion
that time is symmetrical now whether the
mathematician keeps the discipline
involved and says oh well you know I'm
not going to let that implication
influence me or not sure okay
individual discipline aside but all the
models allow for a reversal of time so
this is one of those weird byproducts
and this is entirely because of the
infinitesimal representation of time
that we've been doing because of that
hyper surface present of now where the
future happens to us and past goes away
and we're just sitting at this little
plane so how do we how do you reconcile
this but first you have to reconcile it
because time isn't symmetrical time is
asymmetrical meaning when the thing
happens it doesn't roll back in time and
we have five examples of this we have at
the subjective level our actions and
decisions affect the future but not the
past we can all experimentally prove
that at the electromagnetic level we
send signals to the future but not to
the past if we could send futures to the
past and we'd all be rich because we
hacked the stock market so there you go
right that's out thermodynamic isolation
low entropy when it comes to things
heating and informing organization
things tend to get disorganized as time
goes on you can't put that can't put
that back in the box
so we see time asymmetry there -
cosmological universe was small on hot
and it's getting large and cold it's
turning into a real bad marriage you
know and so that's more evidence of tiny
asymmetry and then the CP violation is
some physics nature saying here's
reasons why there's more matter than not
matter so we have five examples that are
pretty hard the disk
about times asymmetry meaning time goes
in one direction but not the other
it goes positive but it does not go
negative so when our math structure
tells us that time is symmetrical and we
can deal with it symmetrically this is a
byproduct of dealing with time as an
infant testable without coming to grips
about infant estimates so we're making
some pretty big mistakes here and
because it's an infinitesimal we just
write it off it's like I like point zero
zero zero zero one we just drop but
we're still shrinking the infinitesimal
just like Newton did we've just come up
with these complicated mathematical
constructs to explain why it's okay to
shrink it without actually addressing
the nature of the infinitesimal itself
let me yeah it's probably the most
fundamental time arrow so time arrow
meaning direction of time as I was
describing and then we have H theorem
which is Boltzmann so H theorem means
gas atoms trend towards normalization
normalized speed distribution meaning if
I have a box right this it's a box I
fill it up with gas atoms and they
bounce around each other like billiard
balls all day long eventually they're
just going to cool down and so they're
going to reach a normal distribution of
speed between them instead of being hot
all the time so this is where things get
clever and if you've been following my
argument what I'm about to say next is
going to get me thrown off of a building
but I do my best so
now it first I'm getting the
visualization I want to say I'm getting
visualization I mean let me get you a
point of reference here so this is
minecraft just box of box so this is
your life in 2019 we do one orbit swing
around the Sun this is your life in 2020
this is entropy this is things that are
organized becoming disorganized and all
you need is time to do this why is that
the case something wrong with the blocks
no there's nothing wrong with the blocks
blocks are fine its equilibrium meaning
this thing is stable in an unstable
environment and as time goes on the
unstable environment wins how can that
be
this thing's gonna bounce into that and
that's gonna bounce into that and that's
gonna then vibrate this and that's gonna
bounce it in that before you know it you
have an equal velocity between all the
elements here another way of looking at
entropy is to say that it is the process
by which indivisible x' are reformed
meaning everything breaks down to its
one state that cannot be exceeded okay
so when I talk about age theorem and the
cleverness of what that white paper said
we have to look at taking our
infinitesimal time slots of this process
of chaos II we're slowly getting towards
chaos over time in each one of these
time slices our math tells us that this
is reversible because our time slices
are reversible according to the
mathematical constructs nature says
you're stupid that's not
possible
everything's asymmetric so this is the
heart of the argument when it comes down
to it this is what the beef is all about
and because time slices are
infinitesimal were still at xenoverse
Euclid we haven't actually left it so as
a result because that remains unresolved
entropy remains undefeated you can't
reverse entropy because we're treating
time is Invitational slices has nothing
to do with the system where the physics
are anything you can find an entropy
scale invariant you
everywhere you find that information
you'll find in chemistry atoms you'll
find everywhere at every light that
planets life itself so it's not it's not
the composition that entropy is
commanding that's the problem it's it's
the way we represent time is
infinitesimally without addressing what
an infinitesimal is so this is the
clever argument I saw when the person
asked me can we reverse entropy the
answer is no with a caveat and here's
the caveat this is going to sound so
 bizarre if my projection of
entropy is wrong if I analyze these time
slices and I'm incorrect about the chaos
distribution or whatever I'm or the
distribution of whatever it is I'm
measuring whether it's velocity or
temperature or whatever whatever
dimension if I'm wrong about that then
the wrongness is equally equivalent to
time reversal
and here's why if a my if I project that
this is going to form a brick over time
then I can't tell the difference between
me being wrong and if actual time
reversal took place it's
indistinguishable
and that's that is entirely a byproduct
of this and that's entirely a byproduct
of this so if we continue to treat time
like in Contessa moles then error rates
and projection of entropy are no
different than time reversal and that's
why this is such a big problem and
somewhere a mathematician is probably
having an aneurysm about that I'm sorry
in advance so
if we're going to deal time as in
Contessa moles then we have to talk
about dealing the time as a super task
which means anything you're using to
measure action to go through your your
hyper present your hyper your hyper
surface of the now anything that crosses
that boundary is engaging in a super
task of infant testicles and we do not
have the mathematics to represent that
which is why we end up in the problem
where we can't tell our air rates from
time reversal and why they're equivalent
so this leads us to all kinds of
unresolved questions mr. potestas moles
resolving the hits of prime distribution
found them to and the Reimann zeta
function which if it is then holy
that changes everything
do hyper reals interfere with the
critical zone if you start plugging
hyper real numbers and with account for
in contessa moles and you put them in
the RAM instead of functions then you
get the craziness that I'm talking about
his nature's asymmetrical handling of
time reflective under underlying
cryptographic processes and Newton was a
archeo cryptographer in cryptography
there are certain types of cooktop
cryptography that are unidirectional
there's a it there's an asymmetry to
hashes to md5 s and sha-512 so is time
intrinsically cryptographic do can be
even come up with a mathematical system
and where time is asymmetrical
permanently and does it have
cryptographic properties was the alt
system written right all along to buy
some VPN service what do you want that's
all I got and I'm sure that was pretty
pretty heavy heavy stuff if you don't
have a serious background of math I do
apologize but please ask questions and
Wow
you so much for that Pat all right
everyone throw your questions into the
chat and I can share I got I'll use my
discernment to pick which ones we should
share but I'll get a couple started so
in the beginning of the presentation you
referenced how Newton was actually
working on a different project before he
got into calculus and he said how that's
gonna be relevant towards the end I
think I may have missed that can you
spell that out a little further
yeah the he was an arc yo crypto
cartographer so he was obsessed with
trying to break what he perceived as
cryptography everywhere basically he was
a conspiracy theorist
so he was trying to crack encrypt from
wherever he saw it whether it was stego
whether it was hard encrypted herself
encrypted and if what he was describing
as an infant essa Mille as a byproduct
of time which he did in his equations he
said you had to put in Contessa milles
in there initially the world made fun of
him for that but he wasn't wrong
he had put you had to put the infant s
holes in there to get it started to
start that seed what I'm proposing is
that that infant s Amell is a byproduct
of a cryptographic asymmetrical process
so it makes sense by a cryptographer a
person who's coming from a cryptographic
background would append to that in there
as an exception because when you're
dealing with cryptography you are driven
by exceptions most often than not and so
I think that's the relationship which I
permit in spell out so well hmm
follow-up question is emerging what
implications does this framing have on
the simulation hypothesis all of the
simulation hypothesis needs to explain
how time runs through it in order for it
to be examined and tested so if I was to
say the simulation is whatever whatever
thing a lot there on the air on say
that's the simulation I need to answer
is time relative local is it calculated
as cryptographic what are the properties
time itself is that a line is it a
quantity we've been treating time like a
quantity for a very long time
only recently we're starting to look at
time as a as a set of ordinals but
that's not the only possibility as time
can be a living function and that's we
haven't even gotten quite there yet so
it's it's in order to figure out what
your simulations clock is you got to
start poking and prodding what the clock
isn't and then it could get down to it
and so what I'm proposing is that if
infinitesimal ZAR byproduct of how all
of our maths are dealing with time then
perhaps we can test to see if there is a
simulation doing the same thing mm-hmm
it's one final question for me I don't
know if I fully appreciated the
implications of mathematicians using
models of symmetrical time if they're
just kind of assuming you know using you
know in practice using discipline to not
assume you can go backwards in time what
are the implications that are still
bleeding into all the other downstream
effects of using that as a model yeah
you get all kinds of dumb cultural
artifacts guess like the multiverse
so uh come on like give me a break you
start getting these weird constructs to
represent stuff cos like oh you get
these like these regret wishes or I wish
I could go back in time and you dead
point to a magnet say that's it maybe
that's good for time for recruiting
mathematicians right so there is some
function to that when they're kids
whatever but it's yeah it is all
derivative of basically making fun of
Newton that's that's what it boils down
to you said your infant essa moles are
garbage and he may have been describing
the nature of time itself and people
just weren't ready for it
cool I'm gonna start picking questions
from the chat
Peter Wang would you like to ask your
question yes hi so very interesting
exposition here in all of this I think
there's still a metaphysical frame that
time is this thing that can be sliced is
this sort of your point right that we
can treat as inevitable
I think forest
and I myself sort of came to this kind
of in a different way but since card
revelation to talk it for slander the
first time about this but this idea that
and I come to this as a physicist right
so our assumption or metaphysical
assumption that that we're just okay
with Zeno's paradox right we really
haven't broken out of xenos problem we
sort of elide this as a supertastic
saying well you know don't worry about
it
but but my comment earlier about you've
really not talked about the concept of
energy at all right because even when
you talk about Newton and you look at
the tangent and and the differentials
and all these things it's a kinematic
it's a description of the thing but but
really I think the idea that you know we
basically said let me try to say this in
English asked my question asked an
actual question the question is
would you what do you think of this of
this view that if there is something
nonzero to time we would try to pin time
down on the same static cutting board
that we put everything else static and
physical space we thin slices
infinitesimally and here it is and now
we're kind of screwed because we can't
tell if we're going one way or the other
way in time what if we say you know
it that's actually there is a
thing of time that does move forward
obviously and is irreversible what we've
just simply done with the car
metaphysics is we squished all that
dynamism to something we call energy
potential or kinetic its energy so if
you actually go and say you know time is
not infinitely sliceable
it's thick and the thickness of it is
actually energy now you have a
completely new metaphysical frame for a
new kind of physics that says no no you
cannot just do simple decomposition into
static objects with some thing
you call potential energy that's
infinitely devised divisible right
anyway you say I'm going so we see I see
exactly where you're going and I didn't
want to go there and the reason I didn't
want to go there is cuz it leads to a
very uncomfortable conclusion and I
think I'm gonna have to share it I said
I wouldn't Daniel before I did this I
think because you're there I have to the
more I look at this and I'm already
batshit insane enough and I'm about to
take it I'm gonna take a exponential
step into greater batshit insanity by
saying this the more I'm looking at time
and the reason I didn't go into energy
is because I wanted to focus primarily
on the infinitesimal nature of time it's
and how we're treating it the problems
of in Testaments and what that means to
entropy because if you can't tell you a
difference between an error rate and
going backwards in time then there we've
hit a problem so the way around that was
to start dealing with what's called
non-standard analysis and I'm gonna lose
a lot of you I'm sorry I got an answer
Peter I apologize non-standard analysis
deals with model theory and it deals
with things called hyper reals and hypo
complexes which is a way of saying it
found a way to put infant testicles in
the number line in a number line so you
might have to pack them in your number
line and you can make sense of them
using a notation and then you could
start formulating there's a convoluted
way of applying arithmetic to those
hyper reals so you get the
convertibility between normal number
systems and that but unfortunately it'll
leads to the very uncomfortable concept
with what you're calling energy it's
starting to look like numbers are alive
and that's where I'd lose everybody by
saying that so you're calling it energy
but in mathematics in hyper-real land
these it's not that it's a number on a
line it's not that it's a quantity or an
ordinal 'ti it's that the number is
continuously reasserting itself over
time and that's how they're able to do
oh yeah now that actually makes total
sense right it's very much in line with
Wolfram's sort of it also it also kind
of gets the heart of why Wolfram is so
impressed with his work on iterating
agents right it's like anytime you apply
discretization to a thing that is
fundamentally alive and constantly
dynamic you're gonna end up with magical
things that fall out of the room are in
the residue yeah because you squished
all of the dynamism out of it including
emergent things yeah okay interests yeah
and so that's yeah so the hyper real
basic long story short the time is
implied and part of and that's wait wait
a second yes with time isn't this like
thing that we bolt on or measure against
it's actually implicit into the number
that's like I said that's why I think
that's why I say when I say
numbers are alive I'm talking about that
particular aspect which is like a
20-year talk after this one mass so
that's a great question thank you for
bringing it up thanks for the answer
yeah
all right Alexander Lee do you want to
ask you a question so well in light of
the last conversation now I'm just
thinking about that but it seems like
there's there's a way to sort of map
numbers and functions together so I was
wondering if you care to comment on the
intersection between information entropy
and thermodynamic entropy especially
with Schrodinger's negentropy and maybe
see well whatever I'll stop there that's
a big one no please continue it might
help me out okay well so rather than
talking about entropy as is it well well
you can see entropy sort of as different
so you have microstates and you have
macro States and so the point which
should have a gradient or you have some
straight difference is where the
microstates are readable in some
configuration compared to the macro
state so you can sort of see the
infinitesimal you can see quad attorney
on do you sort of see complex numbers is
different dimensions of storing
functional maneuvers within the real
number line so you can sort of see
functions and numbers like controlling
it that way and so you could sort of
also then come to the conclusion of
seeing thermodynamic entropy as a
specific class of information entropy
and that then becomes really a way of
understanding entropy as a function of
measurement you're getting in the Planck
time so yeah so then then so then I was
just wondering do you think time is an
artifact of how we process information
and how we measure things because no
point is there a true zero like with the
Eakins cut you can sort of put zero in
any particular position
the point sort of then can sort of
branch out and become you know
logarithmic route for example which is
why numbers on the Riemann zeta-function
can have some predictability as to
what's not prime because you know Q and
a 2 n plus 1 and 2 n plus 3 okay so for
I'm going to deal with the one statement
where information entropy is a subset of
classic entropy entropy the bridge is
tougher than I think there because the
most obvious bridge is gonna be
Maxwell's demon that's probably the most
obvious bridge how you can get from
chemical entropy to information in
Maxwell's Dean that is probably the
bridge for that and for those who don't
know Maxwell's demon it's the ability to
basically break the thermo break the
balance of a system to get more energy
than you thought possible that's a very
simplified way of putting it but there
are ways to do it in an information
space but it's still energetically
expensive so it's still the questions
kind of out whether you can do that or
not so because information entropy is
measuring surprisal versus equilibrium I
think it's important to say is there is
surprisal itself in equilibrium is the
question you probably want to start with
excuse me because because the idea of
information entropy the biddin the
flipping of the coin that yes or no or
it's a human of surprising because you
don't know what the thing's gonna do so
in from a lot of information entropy is
derivative of that construct the bridge
is a bit of a challenge I haven't done a
lot of effort on that but I know that
Hawking had done some effort on that
regarding black hole atrophy Blackall
thermodynamics and that's that's where
the bridge he found was the idea that
information is included in the black
hole and therefore you can use that
functional process to then make the
bridge to traditional thermodynamics
right so is it a class
yes I think maybe you are you familiar
with Edward Schrodinger's book what is
life I'm not so I think you need sort of
negentropy as as the understanding of so
so you can sort of see negentropy as his
explanation for why things are alive and
so you have the structure of matter that
uses that can be configured in such a
way as to limit degrees of freedom of
end of energy and that processing that
direction of matter creates a
constriction that is available for work
si and so that's that's his concept of
negentropy so that's how he explains
life so you can sort of see the the
pulses of a submarine underwater as sort
of like it's it's the way it processes
energy in a rhythmic way that is
predictable make during the regarding
how all this affects time yeah so like
so with with information entropy you
need a reader like you need something
that is able to sort of read the
difference hmm and so you have to have
some basis for that reading so that
basis then sort of becomes zero so with
entropy you know things have you seen it
can as a scenario where information
entropy is reversible is there a time
asymmetry there - yeah I don't think
that's that's really possible I think
that's that's because we can't really
you can't really because negative
numbers are sort of imaginary they're
sort of just a projection
oh I sort of get to that we sort of have
to start at a different basis maybe so
each basis that we start at is sort of
like what we've considered to be like a
container for the microstate and so it
it becomes statistical right I mean it's
sorting that because we're saying about
the stock market but it is it is
something that can be predicted through
probability but
it you know you just you just have too
much too much information like how long
of a stock market run you need in order
for a bit for it to start repeating is
it election years or whatever and then
le le Chi I don't know how to say his
name but he's saying no it's actually a
different sort of ontology it's a
different kind of metaphysics so when
you put it in the container of
probability you sort of you sort of
constraint like how you can understand
what's actually happening and then we're
for you to predict the stock market you
have to sort of consider the
relationships from the present and not
use the past or the future so there's a
one scenario there's one thought
experiment that comes to mind about this
because when you talk an information
entropy everything's discrete
infinitesimals emerge as a result of
statistics in that type of space they're
not in Trinity
you start getting too high clock rates
so for example as as our clock rate
becomes infinitesimally you have imagine
flash light bulb over it over t1 it's on
and then four point one it's off in that
four point zero one it's on that four
point zero zero one it's off so as we
see as we get closer to zero the light
bulb is flashing it's it's as if it's on
and off at the same time when depending
upon what resolution you're looking at
if you if you're way off it looks like
it's always on but there for example
there's one technology that does that
it's able to transfer binary technology
through differential shades the way of
amplitude of its light so the lights in
your house actually become Wi-Fi
transmitters not by using that technique
so the question is resolution of your
clock mm-hmm and that's where you start
to get the infinitesimal problem all
over again it's an even information
entropy you can still get them it's
still still bound the time yeah I guess
I don't quite see that the relationship
of the intrud Testament of time it's
kind of seems like oh I mean there's
definitely time in entropy
and it would be you sort of have you
need them the microstates sort of to be
in a configuration that's not readable
and so I can see the connection there
with entropy only fantastical as being
those particular microstates yeah you're
dealing with discrete time when you're
when you're talking about information
entropy and so what I'm saying is it's
not the discreteness at the time that
matters it's a resolution will be
observer that's interesting because it
connects to to Elaine Meadows cheek that
limit Cardinals are a different kind of
ontology when you jump from real numbers
to the Cardinals or Arnall numbers or
you go the other direction towards
infinitesimal a little smaller so it's
like a different isn't it it's a
different dimension of interaction and
the logic that is that each level is
different and so the formation of the
new logic that it appears is what we
call the advance interesting what's that
called I'm going to take that one that's
a good one yeah being in time after this
beat I'm gonna give it to David sweat
low who seemed to be tracking this
conversation before it happened in the
chat if you have anything more to add
excellent oh is that you can you
conviction reach exam you could reach me
in private you know
so actually Nicholas was saying
something similar so the one of the
questions is Donald Hoffman's idea in
the case against reality the notion that
space-time is really just a data
structure and that we don't really
perceive reality as it is but there's
something in that if I think about it
correctly then something like negative
II is possible due to a living thing
doing a super task effectively the
infant estable is something that is we
we experience it even though it's not it
doesn't it's not alive in space-time
it's something it's not alive in the
projection that we have of reality but
it is alive in some real way and so
something like tracking Maxwell's demon
as the addition of that's impossible and
to be prohibits that if the dema is
controlling an outside door because of
something like that but if the door is
internal to the demon and is basically
the cell membrane then the demon may be
alive and doing a super task that
actually allows for something like a
distinction between it could and it
should like there's some there's some
gap there that I can create that almost
creates the reversal of time window that
you're thinking of that I can project
forward and backward a little bit a gap
there enough to kind of effectively
reverse time and and and do something
nigga tropic it's from a constructs
standpoint yes I'm going to introduce a
cheap hack and I apologize this is the
hack against Rene Descartes
about his concept of the home oculus so
if we if we treat Maxwell's demon as a
quantum homunculus who is making
decisions in these types of spaces and
at some point we can make that argument
recursive and say there was an oculus
for the Hawkins for the mock ulis all
the way down until we still haven't
resolved Zeno's paradox we've just
changed whatever infinitesimally so it's
it's you keep
if there's a decision-making process
than their Telemachus I mean that's
that's basically my counter and what
we're doing is were 400 a admittedly
there is possibly a good take way here
we will be reframing our infant esta
Mille to a decision as opposed to a
concept of space so that would be a
benefit I think putting it putting our
infant s amol of time instead of as a a
hyper or as a hypersurface of the
present breaking it down to a different
structure might be beneficial and I've
seen some clever stuff talking about
that exact process you're talking about
them there's it's a transactional tan it
was a called transactional want to
trigger the next phase but it was anyway
I'll get it to you later the idea is
that if if the Maxwell's demon is there
doing stuff and things are reversible
this particular theory was trying to
describe the blending of the future in
the now as a transactional process so
where it's going back and forth so it's
doing exactly that technique you were
describing so the the amplitude comes in
from one photon it comes from the past
it then hits this feature photon and
then what it will do is it will
negotiate like a handshake like a tcp/ip
I I got a tcp/ip packet and I will say
hey you want this you want this quantity
and the other one says sure I'll take it
and all the other ones say no I don't
want to take it so result that's the
wavefunction collapsing it then takes
the quantity and then the energy
transfer happens so there is a
decision-making process being done in
this theory of time collapsing so what
it's taking it's taking the
infinitesimal that's it's all floating
it to the decision making process
instead so that I have seen something
that does what you're talking about
we're what we called Maxwell's demon
there is something that does
Nick I'm gonna give you the last word is
there anything more you want to add with
your last comment Thank You Daniel
so yeah I know justjust on the same
topic of Donnell Hoffman's into
interface theory of perception I'm
actually not quite sure where this this
talk of Maxwell's demon fits and the
possibility or impossibility of
negentropy if we assume that
consciousness gives rise to a user
interface that is comprised of
space-time so that space-time is just a
construct that allows us to be more
adaptive from an evolutionary point of
view it's not really a question it's
more I just want to throw that out there
I don't know if you're familiar with
black bacteria and if you know that if
there's an impact of infinitesimals on
that are you talking
correct I see well in that case I go
back to the same person who criticized
Newton about infant testicles and this
is actually poetic I'm gonna
read the bishops actual words in his
criticism of you there once there was
it's in the form of a limerick there was
a young man who said God must fight it
exceedingly odd to think that the tree
should continue to be and there's no one
about in the quod he reply dear sir your
astonishment odd I am always about in
the quad and that's why the tree will
continue to be sincerely observed by God
so it's very us we've we've gone full
circle to exactly what the criticism of
Newton was and and you just what a great
aesthetic ending thank you so much Pat
and thank you everybody who joined in
for that ride I'm gonna hand it over to
Peter to plug some events
we close up yep Thank You Daniel
Thank You Pat everyone's favorite genius
bad boy is gonna be here at 5:00
Friday's at 8:30 p.m. and maybe you
should see the poetry night Pat next
time just report read for the whole hour
your little spin to the dark dark Stella
so just to plug a couple events there's
a bunch of the website code so at CA the
chat one I'd like everyone to consider
is the mediation campfire with Jason
Schneider and Jared James and myself
that's every Sunday at 3 p.m. Eastern
Time we talked about mimetic mediation
how to mediate the culture war it's been
very very interesting or the liminal war
that we're calling it now and and Nick
you have an event it's not post on the
website about tentatively called coinage
game maybe you can talk about that
briefly all possible so running it
through functors is kind of transmuting
boxes to grow our toolkit with which to
make sense in the world so basically the
alchemical art is interesting to you and
join me possibly next Wednesday where
that sounds awesome Nick I look forward
to that all right everyone just one
final note the store is a gift and this
is Pat's gift to you this is our gift to
you and if you feel called to give a
gift in return you can go to the link in
the chat and any any sort of gift you
feel to offer and return to the store
there's an opportunity to accept it
there so thanks again everybody for
joining and we'll see you next time