[Music]
welcome you found the portal I'm your
host Eric Weinstein and I'm here today
with my guest David Wolpe who was the
rabbi of Sinai temple here in Los
Angeles
David is often thought to be one of the
most influential rabbis currently in the
United States has been named so by
Newsweek and finds himself in various
lists of important rabbis welcome to the
portal David thank you happy to be here
so you and I improbably met in Belgrade
Serbia yes exactly and we shared a bus
sorry and that bus ride has been on my
mind in a way that it probably hasn't
been in playing through your mind but I
wondered if we might begin this podcast
by deciding that we would avoid certain
well-worn tropes I don't want to get
into does God exist or doesn't he right
and the question that I want to begin
with is for our listeners who have been
searching for some kind of spiritual
outlet but are also frustrated with
being very analytic intellectual in fact
oriented what is that God versus no God
conversation crowding out that needs to
be more present in the public dialogue
that is its that is a wonderful question
and I think that the the pot what the
public dialogue really needs very
desperately is how do you create
community and interdependence that
people take seriously and is lifelong in
the absence of some particular kind of
transcendent belief and and I think that
that's that is the most valuable thing
that religion gives its adherents and
it's even more valuable in some ways
than personal meaning because you and I
both know that that religion used to
think it had a monopoly on the
possibility of personal meaning but a
lot of people live their lives without a
religious sense and would not say that
their lives are meaningless but they do
need community and community especially
in such an atomized age and especially
in modern America is very hard to create
and to find and this transcendent share
transcendent idea gives you community
but in that absence I don't know how you
construct it but that doesn't mean there
isn't a way we we need to learn how to
do that or at least to start talking
about it and one of the things that I
would hope is that people in religious
communities and people outside of
religious commune should talk about to
that and how to do it without letting
specific beliefs wreck the conversation
so this is always tricky for me because
we have these various concepts to try to
keep our religion and our scientific
belief separate right we have questions
about should I abstract what was
previously concrete so that it remains
relevant in my current life and there
always feels to be a bit of a cheat in
all of this yet if we don't make these
kind of cheats or half measures or
accommodations we find very
uncomfortable outcome which is that most
of these religions had their ancient
texts written well before we had as much
detail as we currently do about the
scientific world and we're happiest
where they were abstract and we're most
troubled where they were concrete it's
true look there's a lot of passages that
in in my own tradition that I explained
exactly the way you do which is this is
the creation of an ancient culture and
and there are things about it that we
have grown beyond and and I don't have a
problem saying that although many of my
co-religionists would hate the idea that
a rabbi would say that but I don't have
a problem saying that however the result
of
the result of adherence to things that I
find objectionable I find admirable in
other words there are communities who
believe things let's forget Judaism for
a minute forget my own community all
right there are other communities that
believe things that I think are
objectively either untrue or just wild
or even I can't imagine how someone
could believe that and yet they lead
admirable lives and have admirable
communities and have values that I think
most of us would share there may be
add-ons that we wouldn't but they
managed to do that and so the question
is is it possible to create responsible
interdependent communities without those
kinds of beliefs I I don't think we've
answered that question yet but I think
it's becoming more and more urgent so I
think we should just say something a
little bit about our own intellectual
backgrounds now I think the last time we
were together in Serbia I let you know
that I really identify as an atheist and
what's more my family has somehow been
atheistic for four or five generations
yet always with Jews marrying other Jews
in keeping Jewish traditions going and I
shared with you a mystery in my life
which is that of all of the five or six
rabbis that I've gotten to know well
enough to ask the question do you
believe in the God of the Old Testament
as is literally talked about none of
them reform conservative or even
Orthodox believe that that character
actually exists so there are there are
at least two things to say but I'll
start with two one is for those of your
listeners who are Christian or who grew
up with no belief but in in a Christian
not not in a Jewish context this may be
a mystery that I can unravel how someone
could be a fifth-generation Jewish
atheist because Judaism is not a
religion Christianity is a religion in
the sense the
if tomorrow I believe in Jesus I'm
Christian if the day after I don't I'm
not but tomorrow if I say to you you
know Eric I all those things I said on
the podcast I don't believe any of them
anymore I'm still Jewish and that's
because Judaism is a category that
doesn't exist in modern America I would
use the word tribe a tribe has negative
connotations today so let me say so
who's our podcast novelize podcast note
adaptive tribal behavior is normal so we
make a distinction between add a fare
and a mal adept I'm gonna say
nonetheless to to avoid any
misunderstanding that it's a religious
family you're born into a family in the
same way that you're born into Judaism
unless you choose another family you're
part of that family
and so Jews have forever I'm at least
for a long time without leaving and
going to another religion at which point
they're effectively written out of the
Jewish forget what Jewish law says
they're effectively written out of the
Jewish community they've said look I
don't believe this that or the other
thing and they're still Jewish so that's
why Jewish atheist is not in fact I will
tell you a story several years ago I had
to give through someone that I knew it
doesn't matter this how I got there I
was supposed to give a blessing at Carl
Reiner's 90th birthday party so I get up
and I start to give a blessing and
somebody calls out from the audience why
is there a rabbi here Reiner is an
atheist
so he said Mel Brooks no it could have
been but it wasn't actually he runs up
to state to the stage stands next to me
and says I'm not an atheist
I'm a Jewish atheist and that's
different and he's right because there
is a culture to adhere to Christianity
doesn't have that kind of comprehensive
culture which makes and here are the
advantages and disadvantages it makes
Christianity much more portable because
you can keep your culture in every way
so you can go to the Congo you can have
a completely different culture but if
you believe in Jesus
my work here is done but Judaism
especially because of Jewish law it has
many more cultural implications and
therefore the advantage of Christianity
is that it's portable the advantage of
Judaism is that it's familial so when
the Soviet Union was persecuting Jews
back in the 70s and 80s they were
persecuting Christians too but there was
no worldwide Christian movement to save
Christians but there was a worldwide
Jewish movement to save Jews because
there was that sense of familial I've
always wondered why we put up with
Christian persecution well I think that
part of the reason is because there
isn't that oh my god that's my brother
or sister being persecuted on the part
of Christians
it's whereas for Jews there is this
adaptive tribal behavior so both of both
systems have their strengths and
weaknesses right but they are different
well and then there's the very weird
aspect that I believe that in large
measure what we are as Jews rides on a
Christian substrate that if you think
about Christianity is our like one of
our two main spin-offs right yeah then
American Judaism really in some sense
benefits by riding on the substrate that
it's spin-off developed and being
something of a counterweight but also is
showing some sort of relationship to
that is that I think that's perfectly
fair and I think that look what
Christianity gave to the world that that
Judaism and and Islam could not and I
have a I have an explanation for why
that is is the invaluable gift among
many other things I mean I don't mean to
restrict Christianity's cultural
contributions to this but among many
other things it gave the separation of
church and state yeah that was a news
huge and Jews couldn't have done it and
and and and Muslims couldn't have done
it and the reason I believe this is my
theory but it sounds really sound is
Christianity arose in the Roman Empire
so civil law literally yes render unto
Caesar
actually the civil law was taken care of
but if you're creating religion as
Muhammad and Moses did in the desert you
need civil law and religious law alike
so Islam and Judaism didn't make that
distinction between civil and religious
law Christianity had to because he grew
up in Rome and so we that gift that has
been given us has been given us by
Christians well and so you immediately
get to a very dangerous and also very
interesting area which is the unbundling
of a religion so when you ask a question
about what is a religion and you say
well it's a certain amount of it as is
faith certain amount of it has to do
with technical explanations for the
world around you certain amount of it
has to do with law and you can break
that up into the civil and criminal
another thing that we were dancing
around is is the Judaism is effectively
a breeding protocol there's a very
strange moment when you sign up for
23andme and you spit into the tube and
it you get a result that tells you had
Jewish you are now you know I have I
have Chinese friends or you know holed
up there the results that says look I'm
128th Jewish
likewise for me I was I was almost and I
just didn't anticipate being told that I
was plus 98% Jewish as part of my
genetic information and so ok so you
start to bundle all of these things
together and then you have this very
weird question this goes back to a
little bit of Sam Harris's struggle
where he says not all religions are
created equal we have a very
uncomfortable treatment of religion
where we pretend not to unbundle that
means we don't want to be judgmental
right but you can qualitatively say this
this religion has a legal structure this
one doesn't
right this legal structure is attenuated
in Judaism the way that we get out of
this law I mean let's be honest about
some problems that we have Deuteronomy
says something like if somebody says
worship ancestors that are not known to
our Father set upon them with us
stone yeah there's some harsh there are
some harsh things in the Hebrew Bible
well right and it's been very important
and I struggle with how to say this I
always find a biological analogy with
regulated expression there are certain
portions of the Jewish code that it's
important that we not run in modern
times it's not clear that that ever ran
so far as I know the Jewish stonings of
apostates right but the way we get out
of it as we say as long as the temple
isn't built we can't convene the
religious courts that would meet out the
punishment and therefore nobody's
actually gonna get prosecuted or
something like so yeah well when you say
we not you and I that's the waste a very
traditional understanding might get out
of it
some things by the way we're already
effectively eliminated by the rabbi's of
the Talmud too high an oral torah so
well as a writer an oral torah as well
as a written will say with that world
tour is because that might not right so
judy you can be a jewish literalist but
you can't be a jewish fundamentalist
because a fundamentalist by definition
thinks all the answers are in a plain
reading of the text and judaism never
believed in a plain reading of the text
it always said the Torah means the tower
here being the Hebrew Bible the Torah
means what the rabbi's say the Torah
means and sometimes their readings sound
to us very forced very creative very
open and expansive sometimes restrictive
depending but no rabbi will ever say
when you come to them just go home the
answers all in the Torah it's in the
tradition so Judaism is an exegetical
tradition and therefore a lot of things
over time get interpreted out of the
tradition and that's legitimate
that's not considered like how could you
make that move that's not okay it's a
legal tradition and therefore things get
changed along the way
now like any legal tradition it has
elastic boundaries but they snap
unlike rabbis who would say call
themselves on the right wing of
Orthodoxy what I would say is modernity
is a snap
the tradition and so there are things
that I don't believe intellectually
honestly I can say that the tradition
endorses but I nonetheless endorse them
and and the example the best example
that I can give is gay marriage I know
that some of my colleagues have tried to
read gay marriage into the sources I
think it's forced beyond what you can
actually legitimately try no matter how
acrobatic your exegetical skills my
answer is that we see the world
differently and we shouldn't deny that
we see the world differently and the
question is how do you create a modern
Judaism that is authentically modern not
just that is in full fidelity to sources
that as you say have to be unbundled so
just because I've never actually uttered
the word exegetical you want to
basically interpretive interpretive so
to do exegesis is to interpret the text
so I will give you an here's an example
the Torah says that you should not do
maloha on Shabbat on the Sabbath and
then it never tells you what melaka is
so the rabbi's had to decide what it is
you're not allowed to do on the Sabbath
and they come up with all sorts of rules
doesn't matter how they get there but
the point is no text is self-explanatory
well so that this is one of the keys
there's so many different ways to go
from this point one of the differences
that I like to point to between
religions has to do with claims in
another spin-off which is Islam that the
Quran is its own exegesis right and
therefore interpretation somehow
pollutes the purity of the text now
there are different schools within Islam
or I think for schools of main schools
of jurisprudence or maybe there are more
I don't know but is that a major
difference between these two traditions
I would say
I I don't want to pronounce on Islam I
would say to the extent that any
tradition says that a text does not have
to be interpreted Judaism will take
issue with that that there is no way out
there is no way out of interpretation of
any text it doesn't matter how elaborate
how long and how literal and how literal
no because even the most literal text I
mean the 10 commit there out nod murder
what is murder how can you not how can
you say that self-explanatory it's not
I'm murderers you know right so I guess
for me one of the problems that I have
traditionally had with like the sam
harris school of interpretation yes is
is that there is a hidden assumption
which is that the literal interpretation
of text as if such a thing existed holds
pride of place right because it is in
some sense the minimally distant from
the text therefore one should interpret
any organization by its texts it with
the minimal distortion from
interpretation whereas my belief is any
any structure any and in some ways the
u.s. plays this role with the
Constitution being akin to our written
Torah and the rabbi's being the Supreme
Court and and the Oh constantly having
to interpret the document I find it very
strange that we would be so caught up in
the text of the document given that we
have to have ways of living with things
that age well my my argument among many
others with Sam was always that if
you're going to judge a religion you
have to judge it by how it's lived not
by the literal word in the text because
it's what a religion produces as opposed
to what it says that matters and
therefore if you want to have an
argument about whether religion is good
for the world based on what it produces
okay
if you want to have an argument about
whether this or that verse is
objectionable don't think that you've
actually scored any major points at
least to my way of thinking against
religion if you find objectionable
verses I can think of a lot of things
for example that my parents said over
the years that were objectionable they
were wonderful parents so it depends
whether it depends whether you want to
take a tradition at its best or at its
worst and I understand why if you're
arguing against it it's advantageous to
take it at its worst but that's not the
best way to argue against it yeah I
thought I think that what I get out of
it is that we have to look at ways of
limiting the damage that come from the
explicit text that these religions have
in some sense aged out of or I would
like to think that they had aged out
because the desire to return to
something pure and let's just call it
the purification impulse where you say
you know we have problems in this system
and the reason that we have problems is
that we've strayed yes so let us go back
to the actual literal world words and a
try try our best to implement them as
literal computer code that it is our
obligation to compile I always I I could
not agree with you more lots of things
came to mind as you said that which is
among other things that the word
revolution has both meanings it means to
change everything it also means to come
around again in a circle and what
purists almost always discover is that
human structures are much harder to
overhaul than they suspected at the
beginning and also I thought of a
there's a beautiful quote from William
Stafford who's a poet about about this
danger he said if you purify the pond
the water lilies die and I always
thought there are you know this was
Burke's insight there are human
institutions grow for lots of reasons
and nobody has a comprehensive enough
intellect to understand if you radically
change
with all the implications of that change
will be so you have to change carefully
not and without without contempt for
everything that has come before you
did you know rabbi Ben Tzion gold I knew
him a little bit and were studied yeah
in Boston yeah so I tried to get married
with slow-mo Sternberg the mathematician
in the Harvard math department
officiating but because he was very
Orthodox he said I don't think I can do
this let me let me send you to a friend
Ben Tzion Gould gave us the task of
rewriting the marriage contract the
ketubah
and we we rewrote it the first time and
he said what is this he says this is
like a poem to each other this is a
marriage contract taken seriously so we
went back to the original text and we
tried to make the minimal number of
distortions and said what like you're
you're living thousands of years ago
this this doesn't have any of the
modernity so we tried then to do
something that was contractual but
honored Madera and he says oh now you've
watered it down I said rabbi this is the
third time we've put a lot of work into
this and with all due respect you're
really pissing me off by not
appreciating how difficult this task is
and he looked at me and he said well it
took you long enough
and I said what do you mean and he said
now you're coming to understand you
wanted to get married in the Orthodox
version of the religion because you as
an atheist have no idea and how this is
done and so you want to do it right what
he said to me then was he said when
you're part of a 5,000 year tradition
you have to realize that there's no way
of being Orthodox you cannot stay true
to the text because times have changed
too much and that every single version
of Judaism is a version of make your own
Judaism because that was the phrase I
was using to make fun of the sort of
reform
impulse do you it do you think he was
onto something oh I think I there's no
question about it in my mind there was a
beautiful essay many years ago by a by
Gerson Cowan who was a historian and was
the chance of the seminary called the
blessings of assimilation
and he says the rabbi say why did the
there's a there's a comment in rabbinic
literature why did the Jews deserve to
be liberated from Egypt because they
didn't change their names they didn't
change their dress and they didn't
change their language and and then Cohen
starts to talk about actually what Jews
did throughout history he said in terms
of names the names in the Bible like
Moses and Aaron and pin class and
Kaufman either all Egyptian names
they're actually not Jewish names or
Hebrew names he said in terms of dress
Jews have dressed in every way that
around them the cultures have dressed
Jews in Arab lands dressed like Arabs
Jews in European lands dressed like
Europeans he said in terms of language
Jews have written literature in every
language the the Talmud which is the
foundational work after the Bible and
Judaism wasn't written in Hebrew it was
written in Aramaic because they lived in
Babylonia and so yes I mean there is no
way to be the only way to be true to the
sources is to change the question is how
much change and that's where the real
nub of modern religion comes is how much
can you change and still not only
continuity yes exactly and and also how
much can you change and still transmit
it generation to generation that's a
question that the modern world has
created can liberal religion transmit
itself and I don't think we've answered
that question well I think I'm very
disappointed in the clergy in the Rebbe
evident I have a crazy theory and I want
to know what you think of it whether
it's so cop I like crazy things like it
could be so commonly known you think you
think that's crazy everybody knows that
at some point I became convinced that
Seinfeld the show was one of the
greatest innovations in modern Judaism
and my reasoning was that what it was
actually was not Jewish humor played
with ethnically ambiguous people but it
was actually Talmudic humor it was legal
humor and each show that you know
there's this discussion of lycra gifting
is it ethical to regifter
so I picked one show at random and I
said I bet I'm confined whatever this
topic is in the Talmud then I picked the
show where there's an argument about
double dipping a chip into some salsa
because after you take a bite you've
you've touched it with your mouth and
now you're dipping it again
sure enough I go to the Talmud there's
two guys two rabbis are eating hummus
one with a leaf and the other with his
hands and the guy who's using the leaf
as an implement says tell me rabbi when
are you gonna stop feeding me your
saliva you know like I think yeah the
guy says oh tell me rabbi akiva or
whatever his name was uh when are you
gonna stop feeding me your filth with
the leaf yeah and this interchange
proved to me that what was really going
on was we were mining the more difficult
parts of Judaism and figuring out a way
of making this commercially viable to
get into mainstream distribution
channels when the rabbi's didn't pick up
on how effective this is for exploring
the ancient texts that nobody has time
for anymore I thought it was an amazing
missed opportunity where are you guys
why are you not making technology in
these new distribution channels why are
we not using the media in particular or
why aren't we giving more sermons about
siphon why aren't you figuring out how
to use mass culture as the substrate for
transmitting the stuff that is I mean
what's special about Judaism is lost
when you don't have time for it right
and I always get irritated when I go to
shul and they say like if particularly
reformed synagogues they say we Jews do
this in for this reason what they're
really saying is you've forgotten what
it means to be Jewish because you don't
have enough time so let me remind you
what we once did when this was a focus
in your life you guys are not making
effective use
mass media to do ecology you may well be
right that's why I'm on the podcast
trying to make effective use of mass
media back when were bigger right
exactly as often as you want um it's
very hard are you serious about that
because I would love yes to do a
Seinfeld episode with you to get this
ball rolling so absolutely all right
will do I'm on board
all right um it's really hard take to
grab people's attention for Syria I mean
some people my congregation will do
serious study some of them will relate
to Jewish events or whatever but yes it
is difficult once you've taken away the
idea that all of this is a system that
God insists that you do to bring a
countercultural religious tradition to
people and to have them invest in it it
takes a lot of work and and I'm
perfectly willing to say that part of it
is rabbinic failure but I also think
there's a there's a huge social and
cultural tide that we're trying to swim
against well this gets into a very weird
topic but you you'd be the right guy to
talk about it with there are ways in
which the absence of overt religious
bigotry has in my opinion attenuated at
least our group that somehow the concept
of the tiger mom is now much more of an
Asian concept than it is a Jewish
concept but 50 years ago you had parents
pushing their kids really hard to
achieve and under the surface was always
this this issue if you don't if you're
not 50 percent better at least than your
competition because of your name because
of your background you're going to
suffer yes now that we've gotten rid of
that I have the sense that we really
don't have that the same vitality
well image partly at general cultural
you know I don't know how many years ago
Philip reef wrote about the triumph of
the therapeutic now parents many parents
don't feel that they should push their
kids you know they should that that idea
of a parent that ideal of a parent that
somebody who pushes their child I think
is frowned on in culture generally
that's one thing the second is that
there there are dangers to acceptance as
you point out as there are dangers to
non acceptance and while I would not
never say and I think people say this
but if they thought about it more
carefully I think they wouldn't I would
never say that Judaism has survived
because of persecution because they're
forgetting all those other people that
were persecuted and disappeared to
history so it's not that we're here
because we were persecuted we would be
many many more had we not been
persecuted there is something about
feeling the pressure of you have to
prove yourself because you are a member
of this or that group that does
absolutely contribute to a drive to
excellence I think there's no question
about that
and and Jews don't feel that the way
they once did but I think that it's part
of a larger complex of how much Jews
feel themselves part of an identifiable
group that they take pride in and love
so this is in Hebrew there's a concept
called avati Israel which means love of
your people and and that generally is in
the world that for example my daughter
grows up in that's frowned upon the idea
that you should love your people that's
thought of as negative you should love
all people and know people especially
and that's to the detriment I think of
any minority keeping it I don't actually
get this and my sense is that you don't
get this either maybe that would be
something we could explore so let me
give you my version of this and later
you give me give me my my grade on a
report card if you love multiculturalism
you have to understand that
multiculturalism is built on culturalism
yes and culturalism is built on
exclusion
with some amount of permeability yep
so what I always hear when somebody says
multiculturalism is painting with a lot
of distinct pigments and what has come
to be the meaning of multiculturalism is
let's mix all the paint together and to
get the most beautiful rainbow paint
possible and in fact it doesn't look
anything like rainbow paint once you do
this and then in part we are responsible
for caring about our own culture so that
there is something special to bring to
the potluck and what concerns me is when
I see somebody who's going abroad as if
let's say as an American and they're
like trying to be infinitely open to
everything I always think of that as
being very selfish which is you're not
bringing what people want which is your
American background I mean I travel with
a harmonica I play American music on it
and it's not because I'm not fascinated
by the other cultures I actually do this
because that's my that's my legitimate
introduction to say I came with
something that you're interested and I
really want to find out about you know
what's going on with Ganesh all right
whatever um Emma am i off you know I I
think that that's I I mean I would put
that on a banner I think that that's so
incredibly important what Jonathan Sacks
rabbi sacked calls the dignity of
difference which was the title of one of
his books I think that all these
cultures rise or fall on that if you
don't believe that your culture doesn't
have to be better that's why I always
say when people ask me about Judaism I
always tell them I mean it's not my job
to argue its superiority it's my job to
argue its excellence if you don't think
that your culture is excellent and has
things that everyone could learn from
then I think first of all I think that
that's sad but also I think then you're
left with this indistinguishable stew as
you said that loses what is unique about
all these cultures so yes I I believe
however that what
Ultra culturalism has also become is
only these cultures have the right to be
heard and those cultures don't as much
because historically those cultures have
been heard more than mine and so there
is that also to contend with because it
is true that some cultures have been
heard far more than we are a noisy
culture yes and we are a noisy cultures
no questions no questions as my friend
Joseph Epstein says Jews don't listen
they wait yes we're very verbal as a
culture no question about it but I but I
also think we are part of the
Constituent creators of Western
civilization and we have something to
say well this is one of the I do feel
that one of the ways we get into trouble
as a culture is that we are seen as it
as an impurity and going back to this
question about what some cultures do
well some cultures do poorly like for
example I would say the Jewish food not
are not are stronger not our strongest
right now it's a French right now that's
true we have this tradition in our
family where we put two drops of water
into the wine into the kiddush cup of
wine for the Friday night Sabbath meal
and there's always a question of why
this ritual what I always liked about it
was we have an impulse towards purity
that is must be gotten rid of in my
opinion because life is impure and if
you start to try to purify yourself
overly much like an OCD kind of a way
you end up tearing at your own flesh and
and you and you and you do real damage
learning that a certain amount of
impurity has a strengthening effect is
something that that I associate with
that ritual and I was curious if you
have feelings about teachings like that
that we that we need to export is that
an important teaching from our tradition
I think that it is I mean you can you
can make biological analogies to
- about diversity hybrid vigor right
exactly
I I also I understand that let's let's
change the language of purity for a
second I hope that this still captures
what you mean fanaticism of all
varieties carries danger I don't want to
say is automatically dangerous no you
three staying perfectly carries danger
because I remember like this there's a
wonderful story about Isaac Stern the
violinist who after a concert a woman
came up to him and said I would do
anything to play like you would and he
said oh really would you practice 20
years 12 hours a day to play like I
would because that's what I did like the
world does depend on certain kinds of
fanaticism people who are exceptional
athletes and exceptional scholars and
exceptional musicians many of them have
a single-minded devotion so I wouldn't
want to say let's wipe out all extremism
but culturally it's tremendously
dangerous so yeah so let me ask you
assume that I don't have the time budget
right and I don't have the belief budget
needed to sustain an older version of my
culture in my tradition because one of
the things that I want to talk about
here is I'm using religion in part to
stand in for the need to stand up for
our traditions to maintain them yes but
not to become sort of jingoistic about
it so assume that I don't have the same
budget and I'm also living in a very
multicultural world what guidance can
you give me for the maintenance of a
complicated beautiful intricate
tradition that needs has historically
needed more time and belief than I can
afford
so I'm what I what I want to start off
with and I don't know how much time this
takes is that the indispensable quality
to maintain any tradition is knowledge
you have to know something about it and
and honestly knowledge is more easily
available now than it ever was about
anything
so I think that if you care about a
tradition at least you ought to be able
to educate yourself to the basics of it
and and having done that then you can I
think like with everything else you can
give it a piece of your time and
attention that his serious and devoted
because unlike focused attention is our
greatest resource and if you can give
the tradition a little bit of that so I
tell people all the time you know if you
say a blessing before you eat mmm that's
a very powerful thing and if you make
sure you always do that that becomes
part of your life and part of your
ability to stop and think before you put
something in your mouth about your place
in the universe your gratitude that it's
there all those kinds of things so there
are little things that you can do but an
even more powerful version of that for
me is the Chicano right do you want to
say a little bit about how that
functions in our tradition there was a
prayer that you say when something is
new or unprecedented or it's a special
moment or the first in your life or
lease life first time in the yearly
cycle that you eat a fruit or wear a
garment or or any of those sorts of
things and it's an expression of what
what it's it Thanks it thanks God for
sustaining you and allowing you to reach
that moment and and I think expressions
of gratitude are something that religion
does very well well the reason I pick
that is that you we in our tradition set
a bit in our brain that says if I'm
doing something for the first time in
the yearly cycle make a note of it right
and what I find is is that if I were to
do that without thanking God at all for
this that would be in a tremendous
service to remembering like beginners
mindset where I've made it through
another cycle or how sweet is a
pomegranate yeah
can we exploit this stuff so well you're
this goes back to the very beginning of
the podcast which is
can you sustain these kinds of rituals
and awarenesses without the belief on
which they with which they were created
that is can you say the chef Liana if
you don't believe that you're thanking
God and I do and I yeah okay so maybe
that is possible maybe it is possible to
create a ritual structure that is not
theistic I suppose that people do that
with things like yoga and meditation but
in a Jewish way is it possible to do
that now there have been secular
humanist versions of Judaism but I don't
think that they've caught on or I don't
think I don't think they work I mean I
my family came a bit from this tradition
of the workman's circle right just to
try to take social justice and labor and
make that the replacement for God which
is kind of a weird idea yes it is but I
guess what the way I look at it is I
don't think there's anything weird about
going to a movie that is not literally
true like people talk about Star Wars
all the time yes presumably they know
that there is no Yoda well I I think of
I don't remember what scholar of myth
gave this definition but I think of some
of the things in the Bible like the
story of Adam and Eve mm-hmm I think of
them the way this scholar defined myth
he said a myth is something that is not
factual but is always true and I think
there's a lot in religion that he's not
factual but he's always true so let's
talk about the belief part of this why
does belief animate this because the
sense that you're doing something that
is either commanded by or if you want to
originate it below rather than above or
aligns you with the creator of the
universe is much more powerful than the
belief that I'm doing this because it
helps my self-awareness I'll tell you
the part of it that I think we we really
get wrong and this is a point of view
that maybe I'll be scolded for we have
this concept in
Judaism of intergenerational transfer
yes and we explicitly call it out and we
say lador Vidor from generation to
generation my belief is that it is
irrational to be perfectly atheistic for
the following reason
it may be somatically rational that is
most of the bodies most of the cells in
our body are going to die they have no
infinite future in fact if they start to
think they have an infinite future we
call it cancer right the only exception
to that is our germline our eggs and
what creates our sperm and these things
have an immortality plant they can pass
from generation to generation and carry
the information my belief about religion
is is that it solves a very important
problem which is in biology for every
other species soma and germ are tied
together that is if I'm thirsty I know
that I need to get water but thirst is a
proximate the ultimate is starving
saving off of dehydration
yep the great danger in human beings is
is that hunger and starvation or arousal
and reproduction you can disconnect all
of these things and then tsoumas starts
to take over and it says maybe the
purpose of life is to be happy and every
time I hear somebody say the purpose of
life is to be happy something important
and me struggles because I hate I just
it's like I'm dying inside I really feel
terrible about this idea of caring about
intergenerational transfer is the basis
of a society there's no way one
generation could build this right and
this is what religion stops us from
doing it stops us from thinking that the
purpose of life is to be happy it
connects us to intergenerational purpose
and so rather than just thinking about
myself somatically I think about being
part of a lineage in a history that goes
on after my death there's nothing that
stops me from waking up and saying wait
if the perp
of life is to be happy you know maybe
I'm jonas salk but maybe I'm Jeffrey
Dahmer I could be anything that make
making me happy this is a way of making
sure that that doesn't happen that soma
doesn't betray germ is that really the
like I think that's well I would say the
the idea that that religions obligation
is intergenerational to past generations
and future generations is true and and
powerful and the way you described it is
beautiful the one I don't want to say
caveat the one addition is that you also
have a vertical as well as a horizontal
responsibility that is to transcendence
to I would say your soul beyond your
cell line that part of the the purpose
of life is to grow in soul that there is
something that you as an individual you
have a responsibility to lead a certain
kind of life because your life is a gift
and that's a responsibility to other
human beings but it's also just a
responsibility by virtue of the fact
that you've been given this life to live
so from whom well I would say from God I
would say you're cheating what if I'm
right am i cheating well no I just well
look I I'm happy to get into my own
theories about God but my point is to be
able to work with multiple assumptions
so without if you bracket that
assumption then yes I would say what
religion does I had talked also about
creating community right that is
creating community with but it also
creates community with the past and with
the future you know look this is a
wonderful line of Chesterton's he said
tradition is the democracy of the dead
that if everybody who ever lived got a
vote they would vote for tradition and
you're expressing that in a different
way that is that we owe a responsibility
to all the generations preceding us and
also to transmit to the generations
following us as if we're taking and
handing the baton
because we don't see ourselves as an
isolated creation instead as you said
we're part of a chain well so let me go
a little bit further with this my claim
is that just as Chomsky has said that we
may have a pre-existing sort of capacity
for grammar that allows language this is
a facility that we are given with birth
as vert virtue of being human I would
claim that there's something like a
Chomsky and pre grammar of religious
belief and that no matter how atheistic
we may claim to be I mean there was one
time the two times I prayed to God when
I don't discuss but the other when my
why when my wife was pregnant with our
first child I found myself praying to
God that my child would inherit my
learning disabilities because I did not
think I would be able to relate to my
own child and because I actually
believed that all of those disabilities
are the most profound genetic gift that
I was given but it was a gift in
disguise right and I said why am i
praying to something I don't believe in
you know and this is another version of
there are no atheists in the foxholes do
I carry in your opinion a biological
predisposition towards religious thought
so I think that that is very likely I
think that's what and and by the way
people have different gifts in the sense
that there are Mozart's of religious
predisposition they have never doubted
God they feel God constantly fully and
then there are others who have less of a
predisposition so I would say yes I also
think by the way that your idea that
your disability is your gift it's a
profoundly religious idea there's a
beautiful poem from I think it's it
talks about
got into sharp and sudden on some
prayers it's a gauntlet with a gift in
it and I would wanted to say Elizabeth
Barrett Browning but I don't think it's
Barrett Browning somebody in your
audience will google it and no and and
that that notion that the challenges
that you have are things that are given
to you in order to climb higher I I
think that that also is a I don't know
if it's an inbuilt religious notion but
I think in some ways it probably is
because people often recur to that when
something bad happens that I'm gonna
find a way you know I one of my books
was called making lost matter the same
thing so now I wouldn't choose this but
having been given this now I have to
figure out how to use it to climb higher
than I would have had I not been given
this disability so yes I think that that
I I think that it is let me put it this
way I think that your theory has a
better chance of being right than
Chomsky's that is it's more likely that
we have a religious and natural
religious inclination then that we have
a natural grammatical inclination yeah
is that my belief is that it would be
irrational for me to deny the fact that
my brain is that constantly trying to
tell magical supernatural non
materialistic stories of us we do well
but I'm more disturbed by this than you
probably well I I can look I mean I'm an
internal count well the ink the English
essayist Thomas De Quincey said not to
be a little superstitious as to lack
generosity of mind so I would say that
you're just showing that you have
generosity of mine but you have also you
you have a supervening ability to
recognize when your stories are not
rational stories it's unclear you know I
look at well alright let's get in let's
get into more weird stuff you and I
belong to a tradition with I think one
quarter one percent of the world
population right about 25% of the Nobel
prizes in physics or maybe even science
in general actually all right all of
them now assuming that it's not because
and as I said on the Joe Rogan program
that Jews cheated physics we can ask me
why this was maybe there's a genetic
component
maybe there's a cultural component maybe
the fact that we are willing to take our
some of our best people and not put them
in finance put them in dead-end
financial jobs in in physics and in
Physiology and medicine whatever it's
crazy to me to abandon a completely is
assume that we're totally about
superstition magical thinking and
nonsense
somehow that superstitious magical
thinking tradition produced a complete
surplus of reason creative ability to
work within the constraints of the
natural world yes
wouldn't it be insane to walk away from
that saying it's a bunch of mumbo-jumbo
about God that's why I said when I
debated and say well that stupid there
and dismiss the religion that you have
to look at the product of what a
religion gives you in the world and I
think that Judaism has a lot you know
has a pretty strong black ledger balance
we've given the world an enormous
enormous amount and continue to and and
I'm always astonished even though I know
it's true when I turn to the obituary in
the paper and I read about this
remarkable life in this creative life
and sure enough his parents were Jewish
and they came from you know some small
town in Poland and I just think how does
this happen and it's at least as
rational to say there is some special
mission that the Jews have in this world
as it is to say oh it's because of the
medieval training that they got you know
where where some of the some of the most
literate priests became celibate but all
the most capable rabbis had many
children or I had this by the way I had
this conversation I I warn you here
comes a major name drop but
literally had this conversation with the
Dalai Lama because when we went to see
him in Dharamsala in the middle of the
conversation he turns to me and points
at me and says what's this about the
chosen people anyway so apropos of
nothing we were talking about so he says
he's interesting
I don't know so I said to him well it's
true that you think they're chosen I
said but that doesn't mean that other
people aren't chosen for other kinds of
missions and things in the world and he
laughed and he said yes the Tibetans
think were chosen too
and so the other part of this is I think
every people has this sense that they're
special but that's a good thing that's
not a bad thing I was as I was uh just
talking with a black acquaintance
comedian over at the Comedy Store who
said hi to me in a bar in the bar and he
was talking about struggling with being
black and the crime and the some of the
negative parts of the tradition and I
was able to say do you realize that I've
always been in awe of your community and
then I went through with with some
detail because I've actually been
fascinated by the idea you know
partially because of our own tradition
focuses so much on slavery than blacks
embraced the Jewish idea of Moses and
the whole Exodus and so I started going
into black intellectual achievement and
I think there's something about being
curated by somebody outside of yourself
it's why we value de Tocqueville as a
commentator on the American scene we
need to be seen by others and not just
promoting ourselves right I think that
that's exactly right so one of the
things I wanted to talk about is the
loss of insularity and one of my most
dangerous theories which is the the
first shiksa effect okay yeah so I want
to tell two jokes okay one the Jews so
these are internal Jewish jokes one is
negative against the Jews and one is
positive for the Jews okay okay so one
joke is why did God create the goyim
that is the non-jews because
somebody had to pay retail Oh oh come on
you know that you're pretending that you
don't all right
the other joke is what's the only
problem with Jewish cooking seventy-two
hours later you're hungry again right so
in the first case the idea is where the
smart guys who always pay wholesale
right as we know somebody may not need
to get others also there's also an
anti-semitic trope about Jews and money
buried in that joke yep yeah right and
then the other the other one you know
points out that our food is too heavy
because we always were worried that we
had nutritional issues and you might as
well get as much fat in people because
you never know what your next meal is
going to be interrupted
now the first shiksa effect has to do
with the first time an insular group is
visited by somebody bringing in somebody
from outside mm-hmm and so all of the
very potent knowledge and this could be
the Parsees in India it could be the
Mafia it could be the the mate the
Freemasons that the danger of internally
held knowledge suddenly having some sort
of a periscope in starts to attenuate
and so for example my my wife's family
were Jews of Calcutta I think the first
time there was an inner marriage the
parent says oh I'm gonna sit Shiva that
is I'm going to treat this child as if
she's dead to me but very quickly that
erodes because it it's the second person
to come into a family or the third
doesn't have the same effect because all
of that hyper insular stuff gets lost
almost instantly and I think that
there's both something super positive
about that because the insularity causes
a kind of danger towards jingoism right
but there's also something sad about
that which is that some of that was the
most powerful knowledge that the
community possessed any thoughts I this
is an eternal struggle and I'm not sure
that there it is a reconcilable struggle
between the the integrity
and depth of a community that knows each
other relies on each other
cares about each other and can transmit
for generations and generations and the
community that at the same time some
carries that virus of insularity of
superiority of you know all that stuff I
mean I think sometimes when I talked to
students about this exact thing I don't
use the first shiksa as an example but I
talk about when I tell them that it has
to do all with Crest toothpaste when I
was a kid what my - I'll tell you okay
my mother told us the crest was the best
best toothpaste and and when I used to
go to other kids houses and they would
use like Colgate or one of the really
unserious toothpaste so I had the same
like Pepsi - yeah yeah I would think
what's the matter with these people
don't they know Aquifer still good fresh
oh my god
but with a little green strip but the
day that I realized there goes my
endorsement remember that you could use
tom's toothpaste or whatever and and you
could be as smart and as caring and as
intelligent and has learned it as my
parents something changed about my world
forever with Crest toothpaste with Crest
toothpaste because as soon as you know
that actually everything I do is not the
only way to do it or the only right way
to do it it opens up the possibility
that everything you know is wrong and
all of modern culture is this balance
between what do I know that's really
right and worth preserving and what have
I learned from all these other wonderful
people and cultures and exposure and so
on that should change and and it's for
anybody who cares about tradition it is
a constant daily dilemma
that doesn't have any clear resolution I
felt this way with them
who was the Alan Schurman and Tom Lehrer
right Alan Schurman
yeah Tom Lehrer was really important to
me I mean that those songs and the
lyrics and the cleverness culture I
loved Alan Schurman too but I
oh really yeah you're I was at the UNCHR
s10 yeah well when I first went to India
I think I was 19 or 20 and it was a
profound experience and my first
introduction actually was going through
karachi and i asked i had to use the
restroom and i got shown to a room that
had no resemblance to a restroom that i
understood there was no toilet there was
no paper and i progressively and then
went to Bombay I realized I didn't know
how to eat with my fingers properly I
didn't know any of the customs I I was
being sent back to infant hood right and
that the experience that you could do
everything differently was a shock yes
it is a shock and that people are as
happy as you know kind as everything
that this I mean that's one of the
that's one of the one of the advantages
of the modern world the post imperialist
world that is really important is that
the automatic assumption of the
superiority of a culture can no longer
be maintained the way that it was
unthinkingly even 50 years ago you know
and that's a good thing well it is a
good thing but it's also not a good but
it's also a problematic so can we talk
about this from our perspective because
one of the things that's driving me
crazy yeah at the moment 2019 is
self-hating Jews have been a thing it's
a very tough road to hoe if you're
Jewish and there's always this
temptation to turn on the group yes I am
seeing that same thing become
self-hating Christians self-hating
American self-hating Europe no question
about it no one can figure out how to
say you know what I'm not necessarily
against anybody else but this culture is
my responsibility and it would be a
little bit weird if Italians didn't
think Italian food was amazing
yes I I think that the
hmm we have to learn how to use the but
without invalidating everything that
came before it by which I mean you have
to be able to say Western civilization
has done but Europe America so on
terrible things cruel things unspeakable
things violence in all sorts of ways but
it also gave the world its greatest
benefits its greatest blessings the end
of slavery happened in Western
civilization not in eastern
civilizations on and on and on and on
and you have to be able to mean both the
problem is that everybody seems to align
on one side of the butter on the other
that is there I are entirely devoted to
the critique or they're entirely devoted
to the boosterism and and you have to be
able to hold both ends of the pole you
have to be able to say look America does
notable things sometimes and that's real
but on the other hand look at what
America brings to the world and has
brought up a but where did this
polarization come from I mean like all
we do is we struggle and we weigh things
and then it's so it's so I'm about to
swear I'm gonna stop myself it's so
simplistic yes we do not live in the age
of nuance
you know we live in the age of of I'm
gonna disagree with this okay I think we
do live in the age of nuance it's not
it's not that it's that the structures
that used to support nuance where you
could trust that that structure could
hold a perimeter have broken down so for
example I used to read The Economist for
nuance right institutionally it seems to
be under fire now humans that used to
work for the Economist are you know
sipping their cognac saying wow this is
really gone to hell in a handbasket
but it's the institutional prep the
pressures on institutions are different
from the pressures on the autonomous
individual if you are lucky enough right
to have your own source of income or to
have your own wealth and you don't have
to pry
Merilee work through things that are you
know incorporated in some sense you can
have nuance it's now the sense making
channels and I'm gonna specifically
single out like the news organs the
political parties the universities that
have seen this unbelievable crashing and
burning
going from problematic institutions that
probably had bigotries and prejudices
and biases to lost I mean just
embarrassingly law structures that can't
remember why they exist they realize
that they're unfair I feel like they're
monks wearing hair shirts flagellating
themselves for their imperfections well
I think that part part of that I be no
surprise to you is in the age of instant
response people are gun shy about
straying from the orthodoxy of their
team because it's one thing if you're
going to write an article and you're
going to get some letters and some
people will be upset but it's another
thing if you're gonna get slammed on
Twitter and in social media and people
are gonna write Facebook posts about you
yeah you're you get scared okay but
let's say they're for and therefore
people don't venture out of their circle
and so if you're on one side of the
divide you don't see anything nice about
the people on the other side of the
divide yeah but let's talk about what's
really one of our best features as a
culture which is the courage to stand
alone yeah now one of the weird things
in it so I was just came from San
Francisco where I was at the kitchen
which is a cupola congregation of kind
of experimental Judaism and one of the
things that I love in Judaism is when
you're in the standing prayer you take
your time to say you're standing prayer
and you don't necessarily sit down all
at once yeah so you've always got some
people who take longer than everybody
else who are just stand literally
standing alone yeah and I always thought
what a great aspect to have this be
normal to stand alone now I bring that
up because I was thinking recent
about the weird fact that I know all of
the names of the Senators who opposed
the Patriot Act in the wake of 9/11
mm-hmm right because they're all named
Feingold yeah Russ Feingold was the only
guy to vote against the Patriot Act when
it was passed because the country was in
a fever to do something to take away
people's rights and one guy said no
right
I don't remember anybody's name on the
other side of that vote right there's
something about standing alone which is
I think speaks to our best impulses yes
I mean I I certainly understand that the
indispensable quality to lead a good
life is courage and that courage is hard
and you'd see it on display every single
day when in Twitter which is a universe
that you and I both inhabit and Facebook
and other places the I should warn you
apparently I suck I'm an idiot and I
totally don't get it exactly there there
you go to say something that is against
the orthodoxy of the side that you have
up to then identified with yeah is I'm
you know I probably like you I get
attacked from the left and the right and
I have people all the time who tell me
that I'm clearly a conservative and
other people tell me that I'm clearly a
liberal because actually I very in my
realization different right but the
different thing so it's very but it's
very hard it's really very hard and I
remember after after the same-sex
marriage thing I remember saying to my
daughter something really wonderful that
Churchill said after the Boer War
he said it's exhilarating to be shot at
without result it was great and I said
you see all were angry at me and all of
them wrote bad things about me or said
bad things about me because you came out
for you because I came out for same-sex
and I said I would start to do same-sex
marriages and a lot of members of my
congregation and elsewhere they were it
was such a big controversy it was
literally on the front page of the New
York and the LA Times that's how big a
deal it was there were a lot of attacks
and some of them were very vicious as
you can imagine but I wanted her to see
that it was okay to say things that
people I said the people who loved me
still love me and the people who hated
me still hate me and some of them may be
moved into one category or the other but
in the end you know it's not how fast as
this normalized I remember I remember
that it was it took a while I think to
be honest oh you're talking about gay
marriage
well I'm cred up I didn't even call it
gay marriage whatever it is whatever
whatever but like a fast it's nice piers
that six years ago I heard the word a
man say the word husband for the first
time about his partner and I thought oh
I didn't know how that resolved how how
would the words even be assigned right
now it's the most normal thing in the
world and the other odd part about it
the other one that went that fast was
smoking I was like no progress no priors
no progress booth yes you can't smoke in
a bar I know I mean like people true
right okay
those are the two fastest social changes
that I well but it makes me wonder how
many of these things really just require
one penguin to jump into the water and
find out that there's no leopard seal
that can take it before there's a mass
exodus I think right now nobody believes
in the New York Times or fox or CNN we
we know that they're all compromised yes
and we also know that for example the
Democratic and Republican parties are
are worthless they are standing in the
way of our future and what we don't know
is how to get out of these
we're in a we're in a straightjacket
imposed by people we didn't elect it
didn't choose that are not functioning
according to the best aspects of those
traditions I mean I haven't I've I was a
critic of the New York Times in the 80s
it's something different now it's and
these these things are not wholesome
they're not ours
and we need to get rid of them and part
of what the portal is is a search for a
way out if I don't like either political
party if I don't like any of my sense
making organs for journalism how do I
escape this I look I have been a
registered independent most of my life
exactly the reason that you expressed
was I didn't think that either one
sufficiently represented what I thought
about the world for me to be one or the
other and and that is even truer today
than it has ever been in my lifetime and
and I would say that the amplification
of this kind of conversation and the
kind of conversations that you have with
the people in your world and circle
that's hopefully that will start to
spread out it was in the 9th late 1980s
that the first article was written by
Andrew Sullivan about same-sex marriage
so that's an incredibly fast social that
was the first time it was mentioned the
very fast social change this could I
mean the the structures are clearly
under stress I don't know how fast
things collapse I mean the night before
the Soviet Union went away everybody
thought it was going to last forever so
maybe there are structures inside of the
states that people think will be ever
enduring that will transform before our
eyes as a result of the portal the
portal will give them a new image so
give them a new way to or besra flesh em
as we as we say on our side yeah yeah
exactly I think it's good I like that I
look half of my congregation maybe more
is from Iran right mmm and so inshallah
is a very calm well can we talk about
our weird similarity with Islam because
I think both you and I have commented on
this aside from the part that is like
crazy murderous anti-feminist etc etc I
just love it right like I'm very is Lama
philic the strength of the community the
warmth the food the generosity
the discomfort with direct depictions of
the divine I mean there's tremendous
homology between Jews and Muslims and in
fact I think they opened up a kosher
deli in Harvard Square and all of my
Muslim friends were eating at the kosher
because halal was close enough to cut
Schrute exactly what do we do with this
I mean it's really such a weird place it
is agonizing it's agonizing because
first of all the Jews and Christians
have reached a rapprochement that would
have been unimaginable though the
maevius generations and so one can hope
that the same thing would happen with
Islam and Judaism right now so much of
the the focus is political which is also
a problem in general you know when
people have nothing no cultures in
common all the talk turns to politics
and politics swallows everything and
because America doesn't have a common
culture anymore nobody watches the same
shows or reads the same books or listens
to the same music yes sort of that Game
of Thrones thing was pretty big it was
pretty big but my guess it was pretty
big in it even there yeah yeah it wasn't
big like you know like Walter Cronkite
exactly so everything becomes politics
and when politics starts to swallow
everything including relations between
religions it it I don't want to say it
poisons it but it poisons it well I've
been looking to humor in music and I
don't know I want you to check out my
favorite band okay my favorite band is a
band called the Caminos all right and I
think they're out of Boston and I think
the word kameena means like bastards
like the moms errs you know yeah and
they are a bunch of I think Muslim
graduate students who formed something
like this and they started off doing his
la mo punk so they had a song called
suicide bomb the gap and they had
another song called Sharia law in the
USA and their their album
wild nights in Guantanamo Bay they were
so funny and witty
mm-hm and they were actually doing super
dangerous it sounds like right like if
you perform this stuff in Lahore or
someplace you know it's no joke but
because they were you know they were
clearly like witty and introspective and
playing with the dangerous stuff and
doing it in public I felt this instant
connection I think that they've told me
that they're they're not happy with me
I'm sure it's they don't know me or
because I hang around with sam Harris
but I'm looking to boost the signal of
all of these people who are willing to
struggle in public yes because that's
what that is what you need and you as
you said you need those lone voices I
still have in my head about ten years
ago we had a bunch of scholars from
around the world religion scholars they
were graduate students and some
professors who came to a service at the
synagogue and afterwards a guy from
Pakistan said to me you know I've never
been in a synagogue I had no idea what
Jews were like you're completely
different from everything I learned
growing up and the the service is
different and everything is different
and I said just do me one favor when you
go home tell people and he said no one
will believe me no no and I thought no
one will believe you and I mean what do
you do with that we got it we got to do
something better with this I used to
travel in the Islamic world openly as a
Jew mm-hmm and I can tell you I was
treated so incredibly well I always was
concerned that this was a stupid way of
making a statement and I would not do
this now I don't think I would do it
today only one place I ever encountered
open anti-semitism was in Cargill on the
border between India and Pakistan where
it said if every Muslim would simply
dump one bucket of water on the State of
Israel it would soon be washed to the
city or something like this so I did
very often have the experience of
somebody saying I'd never met a Jew
before and I had a completely different
idea of who you would be there is the
aspect in return which is I don't know
what we do
about the problem with some portion of
Islam having become cancerous and being
spread through this internal network and
so much
that is wonderful wholesome and decent
code traveling with this sort of
jihadist impulse you know look we have
our own crazies true but it seems like
in terms of a threat to the world this
is right now the preeminent what we got
to be able to talk we look we have to be
able to discuss this and the thing that
I found I would say my friend group has
probably at its maximum was about thirty
percent Muslim hmm and the thing that
changed my thinking about Islam and
Judaism it began with a lunch and there
were three couples one Jewish which I
was part of one Muslim where we had
fixed them up and then one mixed where
we had also fixed them up one jewel in a
Muslim so the subject of Islam and
terror came up and the table split
straight down the middle with respect to
whether there was a connection between
Islam and terror with Jews on one side
and Muslims on the other and the Jews
were all saying this is a terrible
blood libel that Muslims have been
tarred with and the Muslims said what
the hell is your problem Jews this is a
serious problem in our community and you
better wake up to the fact that this is
something you have to be able to talk
about and it was very strange because we
were each doing the work of the other
community interests I have not had I
haven't had that problem because as I
said given that so many of my members
grew up in Iran they have no problem
talking about what their perception is
and they consider Iran in particular to
be the the great rogue state and the the
leadership of Iran to be as dangerous
virtually anything in the world although
many of them not all but many of them
have a law
confidence in or at least a lot of
affection for the people and think that
they're very different from their
government well that certainly that is
the case but the other issue with Iran
let's be honest is that Persians are one
of the most accomplished people in the
face of the earth yeah
they are excellent game players and they
are a force to be reckoned with and so
there is a certain kind of respect that
one has to have for Iran as a major
intellectual cultural and military
powerhouse and so the part of the fear
of Iran comes out of a reverence for
Persian culture what I what I want to do
is to try to get out of this black and
white thinking so that we are actually
able to talk about different problems of
these communities and to say here's what
here's what's good here's what's bad for
example one of the things that I think
you and I both struggle with is how to
talk about the need that you and I may
feel to support Israel you know in the
context of being somewhat open about
Israel's various failings and brutal
isms of a community that it should not
and does not wish to be occupied right
it's very hard to talk about Israel
these days in any kind of any kind of
sophisticated way because the camps are
so as you said that they're so polarized
and and and also the stakes for the
sides are so high yeah
it's that kind of political conversation
gets overwhelmed by the loudest voices
on each side of the conversation and and
it's just it's very hard and it and and
invariably it doesn't take place in a
vacuum
I mean look even the israel-palestinian
issue doesn't take place in a vacuum
it's part of a much larger picture of
the Middle East in general and I don't
know talk about the Ottoman
Palestinian issue yeah exactly Indian
pals that's right I know which is really
important and and also because what
people don't realize mati Friedman who
is a journalist in Israel and an author
of several really fine books talks about
this a lot is that that half of Israel's
population comes from the Middle East we
think of it as sort of Europe sitting in
the Middle East but it's not the culture
is from the Middle East the music is
from the Middle East the food is from
the Middle East and so it's actually in
some ways he says this to be a little
provocative but it's somewhat true it's
partly a creation of the Arab states who
after all expelled their Jews who ran to
Israel and so there's this larger mosaic
of a struggle all through the Middle
East about what kind of culture will be
created there that makes it not so easy
to just talk about these people are good
in these people are bad it's it's as you
said these conversations require more
time and thought and nuance than we
generally give oh but I I guess one of
the things that really concerns me and
maybe I can do this first with the US
and then take the same lens and put it
on Israel or let's start with the US
Britain and then Israel I am a huge fan
of all three of these countries part of
being attached to these cultures is
being able to talk about the act you
know you use the word piss quits ve'
writes bet didn't know that just like
the dirty disgusting things that each of
these cultures have done mm-hmm and
including in the u.s. context my family
was not treated well by our country
during the McCarthy era for the you know
Jews were going for far left stuff right
some of it dipped into communism and the
anti-communist you know I'm weirdly
against communism and against
anti-communism I view them as twins
Courage's with all my knowledge of this
country and all of its crimes and all of
its lapses and its failure to live up to
its own ideals and the
the transgressions of the Dulles
brothers all this stuff I love this
country and it's not the love of a child
for a perfect idealized parent before
teenage years set that straight it's a
mature love saying I know what a nation
is and I know that they have to lie and
I know that they have terrible periods
in their histories and all told this is
this is really an important and
fantastic place that's how I feel about
England I mean God knows those people
were brutal yes in the colonial eras to
all sorts of people but it's not you
know you see these people in Hong Kong
yeah you know waving British flag that's
right you know with Chinese faces and
you realize it's a much more complicated
situation that in in Bombay where my
wife is from you know you get into
conversations with people and it's very
like here's the good stuff we got from
the Brits here's the bad stuff this is
the same for me with Israel I don't want
to have to say hey you know we're so
moral we're so wonderful we've done
everything perfectly because we have it
right but it doesn't negate the need to
support the state I understand why it is
that I'm in some situation where people
say well don't you realize that they've
done this that and the other horrible
thing so you know you should be against
right yes well I mean this guy I would
say if there's one underlying theme that
has run through the I don't know how
long we've this we've been podcasting
but how our years but but just like in
the desert every single day has been
meaningful but if there's one theme it
is the rejection of absolutism and
simplicity for complexity and the
willingness to hold two sides and say
they're both valid and that's what I
think we have lost increasingly in this
culture is that everybody everybody is a
crusader for for the black and the white
and not for all the shades in between
which is really where all of us
for most of our lives we just don't
apply it to the great issues but we need
to alright I've got two more topics and
then uh let's yeah okay okay first one
is kind of a dangerous one which is that
I'm watching the Holocaust survivors in
my life dwindle to a handful and mostly
they were child right children during
the period yeah I am increasingly
convinced that we are wasting the
twilight of living memory of the
Holocaust by not approaching Germany and
offering a much deeper reconciliation
than we have today that in some sense we
got bound up we Jews got bound up in
German culture obviously British
language is Middle High German of so
yeah infused with yes we benefited a
great deal from Germanic and Teutonic
Fayette and they benefited a great deal
right from having us as a community
attached to them no question we were in
some sense may have been too similar and
caused some problems because if you
think about the German contribution 1700
1800s incomparable yes should we be
using this time before the last who
remember this period to come up with a
deeper reconciliation between the two
cold I'm not sure what that would look
like if you would so for example you
know klezmer the Jewish jazz yes died
out pretty much has a tiny cannon
unrecorded material and it got
revitalized because Germans were went to
pay for modern right so what but but
what did but what would it mean I mean
what are we not doing that we should do
we should encourage Jews to travel to
Germany we should I mean there's a
pretty close relationship of Germany and
Israel for example yeah I'm talking a
more personal relationship I feel very
weird about right about the connection I
don't feel I Drive a Volkswagen I don't
feel really comfortable with it I mean
there's some sort of ceremonial
ritualistic thing of letting younger I
worried about the German guilt in the
whole migration crisis where Germans are
still saying we are not Nazis right and
I'm looking at these people and saying
you know you're maybe something
problematic in the cultural lineage yes
but don't overdo the guilt because
that's going to snap back on
I do remember years ago I went to
Germany as part of a delegation of
Jewish leaders with from the cotton
Konrad Adenauer foundation and it was an
amazing trip and I don't know if they
still do that but I just I think that
you're you're up against a deeper
problem which is that Americans in
general and American Jews also don't
connect to any foreign country
particularly we are so I had a group of
this pass about I don't know three four
months ago Frank Luntz brought a group
from NYU Abu Dhabi so if there were
students from all over the world and
most of them from the Middle East they
brought them to the synagogue and I
spoke to them about a range of issues
and one of them said to me what makes a
merit what what's America's greatest
blessing or its greatest gift and I said
that's easy Canada Mexico ocean ocean I
said more than anything else because
think of where you live and how you have
all these different you know competing
cultures around you I said we have to
really I mean yes we once had a war with
Mexico but we have two countries on our
border that pose absolutely no threat to
us immigration aside I'm talking about
threat threat no the military threat
masked right on the border and and the
oceans have never attacked us except
once in Jaws that was it so the so the
the isolation of that's why Americans
don't speak foreign languages that's why
we don't generally know foreign
countries very well and that I think is
part of the reason why we haven't come
to know Germany better I think it's more
to do with that even than with a
cultural reluctance to do it
that if we don't get to know Germany
better as you say we will not come to
understand ourselves I think there's a
lot of our history I was bound up and I
believe that a guilty Germany is a
danger to the planet and that we release
modern Germans from some of the horror
of the guilt because it wasn't them to
know modern Germany German is guilty I
mean unless maybe they're in their 90's
but well that's what I'm saying last
yeah but anybody under I guess 80 I
don't know that I have to do the exact
the reason that's on my mind is I just
yeah I I had thought that I might open
the podcast with a cousin I had never
met Eva Kor who was a Mengele twin who
forgave Mengele Wow and I just spoke to
her and she said yeah I'll do it when I
come back all right and then she went to
Auschwitz for her annual pilgrimage and
she died in Poland on the trip Wow so
I'm it's very much on my mind right I
will be there actually this year I'm
doing the march of the living you know
what March or April right after I do it
I'm gonna do it this year I've never
done it so and what's the second issue
the last question the lash yes let me
imagine that we were able to learn our
own source code in physics mm-hmm so
that at after this whatever this final
theory might be yeah there was no reason
to keep searching mathematically for a
more complete theory how would that
affect potentially your relationship to
Judaism and can you conceive of what the
kind of shape and nature of such a
theory would be scientifically so that
we stopped asking for further
refinements and to push further so I
think first of all for me to talk to you
about what a final theory in physics
would look like is is it presumption
that all your listeners just must be
cracking up at their bomb that
transcendent signs the sir but I I mean
I like I always liked the Robert Jastrow
image which you may know that he said
when physicists you know climb that
final mountain they're gonna find God
looking at them from the other side I
know your role
your eyes I don't know if people
listening can see that I always liked it
I liked the image come on a little
poetry in your physics oh I am sure you
can I have no doubt about that look I
think that the I have I don't believe
that it's possible and I'll tell you why
I say that I have a deep and abiding
faith in the limitations of the human
mind and by that I don't mean that we
can't do astonishing things but part
when I ask people sometimes this is how
you can tell if you're religious
is there a mystery at the heart of the
world not a puzzle but a mystery because
a puzzle you can figure out but a
mystery is is in principle unfit you're
out of both sort of what I'm asking and
and I really believe that there is a
mystery at the heart of the universe not
a puzzle so that we won't ever have the
kind of final theory that you're talking
about because the world is created by
something infinitely greater than
anything we can imagine
I when I have to talk about God to high
school kids for example and I tell them
look I have I have no idea what God is I
have no idea I said think of it this way
when you were 2 years old could you have
imagined what a 14-year old is not only
could you not have imagined it you
couldn't have imagined what it is that
you can't imagine so I assume that
whatever is out there that whatever is
ultimate is so far beyond anything that
I or any human being can conceive of
that I think our fate is to always
search and be more and more and more
comprehensive but never to achieve the
kind of finality that you are that is
suggested by your question see that's
really weird to me I'll give you two
examples of why it doesn't work okay for
me yes I'm not saying you're wrong the
first is the number of different
phenomena that were encompassed by
Maxwell's equations I can really write
Maxwell's equations in a modern context
in one line doesn't require four
different equations and all of that
stuff about x-rays and
UV and visible light and magnetism
electricity it's all subsumed in this
one damn equation okay so there are
these condensations where you realize
that it's much simpler than you ever
imagined so one I think you're
discounting the amount of unification
the idea that every living thing is
predicated on 20 amino acids and four
nucleotides so far as we know or that
everything that you see out there is
just up quarks down quarks electrons and
whatever we use to stick them together
it looks very varied but the the set is
very pretty small the other thing I
might say is imagine that you begin in a
neighborhood and you're exploring the
planet and every time you walk in a
direction you find new wondrous magical
things you've never seen before yeah
you will incorrectly infer that if you
keep walking it will always be thus and
there you won't see the age of Internet
intercontinental exploration come to a
close
I think you've discounted both of those
things well what I am what I would say
to you is 500 years ago you were in the
position of that two-year-old you
couldn't imagine what you couldn't
imagine the Maxwell's equations would
answer or that I mean look I think about
I think about when I was a kid and we
used to think we're gonna travel around
on jetpacks if I had said you know you
won't travel around on jetpacks but you
will hold all of human knowledge in your
pocket I would said you're crazy that
that couldn't be and yet now we do I
have a great deal of faith in the
unfathomable I think that you're making
the opposite mistake because we have
figured out so much as compared to a
thousand years ago we are therefore
close to the end and what I think is
with every discovery you will discover
vast realms of ignorance that you
haven't yet even begun to tap that will
make the idea of a final theory a
comprehensive theory what a final theory
is there's a question about going down
yeah towards the foundations there's a
question about going up towards the
consequences I will agree that if we go
towards the foundations that tells us
nothing about all the different ways we
might arrange what we learn at the
foundations to create emergence so so
what are you asking me about how I
envision a final theater well I bet it's
math would that it would be mathematical
that it would be presumably they know
we've added my name up with a theory of
everything right when you hear the words
theory of everything I mean I always
think that the physicists who traffic in
that have never thought through the
question of assume that you actually you
know that the dog caught the car yes
would do you have any idea of what that
would even look like because to say this
is complete does it have no biggie you
say unmoved mover the the like there's
no boundary condition I mean you give
you an idea of how crazy this is let me
give you my version of God since you've
given me some indication of yours okay
guys I believe that God starts off being
a boundary condition being a design
constraint completely inanimate
non-sentient and the reason I don't like
the thing about get to the highest peak
and you reach the end and God is there
is is that it mistakes the magic that I
think might happen which is we're
worrying right now about artificial
intelligence we don't realize that we
are the artificial intelligence that
arose in the system and if Darwinian
theory is true right this bubbled up
emergently right and that when we learn
our own source code is that what
effectively creates a meaningful version
of God because it started out inanimate
and that we are that which will animate
it because we are that which arose
emergently within the system so I don't
know
I mean I I'm tempted to repair to the
Asimov story where the supreme
intelligence
you know after it reaches its
culmination spits out a message and the
message says let there be light I don't
remember the name of the story I
remember reading it as a kid but III
think when the dog catches the car it
will discover that it doesn't
entirely understand what the car is but
I don't know I mean it's so far beyond
what I am capable of understanding about
the shape of the theory as it exists now
never mind what the final theory would
be that I can oh I can only take refuge
in theological speculations I don't have
physics or mathematical speculation and
the theological speculation is as in the
quote to quote one of the great Church
Fathers Aquinas that we're like that
that we're emptying the ocean with a
teaspoon well you know the part that I
can agree with you is when people ask me
what's your best guess is to the meaning
of life I always think it's a trap
but like the sentence I come up with
that make sure you don't spill out into
any easy answer is the meaning of life
for me is the struggle to impart meaning
- meaning and that way if you've decided
that life is meaningless or you say that
you really know what the meaning of life
absolutely is you failed because you're
no longer struggling right and so
everything that you're talking about
speaks of this struggle which animates
us and keeps us vital that is a
beautiful sentence on which stand well
rabbi Wolpe thank you for joining us
here give and we return you now back
through the portal you've been enjoying
it with Rabbi Wolpe of Temple Sinai in
Los Angeles
be well
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]