good morning ready three minutes late
said I want to take too much time ready
no notes just like getting out of the
shower and forgot to actually create the
broadcast a forehand side go through
that well right when it was time he was
trying to do it I did all this craziness
up things on Sunday all of the broadcast
this week slow in my mind it's all then
no it's not I do these ones the morning
out otherwise I need to channel fold
like 10 future videos every Sunday the
seventh every day the weekend post it I
guess only 7 really I'm seven on this
one what an idea cafe and so on together
Tech which wouldn't be so bad so today's
topic the workers revolution so I've
been watching this series it's on
YouTube it's in the description it's a
BBC series called the mill it takes
place in the 1800s some point I think
it's the late 1800s and it's
specifically about this small town or
small whatever tiny think it's off of
London but these people on see know each
other their work in a mill it's mainly
underage people work you know and at the
time of workers rights and children's
rights and there's just some really
interesting and amazing characters in it
there's a woman who for Alton's purposes
is like a really wonderful woman she's
fighting the abolition of slavery
fighting for the abolition of slavery
and sees that as inhumane even though
her family owns they inherited some
workers some slave plantations and yet
she's fighting against the children's
rights and it's just a very interesting
the Union if there's the forming unions
and they're trying to fight for a
12-hour workday just like there and and
their pie-in-the-sky ID is a 10-hour
workday and in still six days a week I
don't think we've been asking to have to
have Saturday's off as well to think we
ever a human history that we
at all of us at one point lived like in
a tribal scenario right lived in a
tribal community where together as a
community we managed to get our food and
get our needs met back when we all were
like the vast majority of the world
population was tribal we clearly didn't
have the technology innovation we had
and then that technology innovation a
lot of that was war war and how to mine
things and how to create innovation and
then you think about like London and
Europe there's a point where they
absolutely can't be tribal right like
they until you have agriculture you
can't have a massive population once you
have a massive population then you have
to do things like make trapping illegal
and hunting anything that's that's wild
illegal as well as just cultivating food
on public or in other people's private
lands unless you're paying for it well
interesting this woman specifically
she's a very kind woman who is trying to
do good and in the very first episode
rather soon in a boy hurts his hand
rather severely it gets amputated and
they look after him until he pisses them
off then he ends up being on the street
and it's just because even in that like
they're doing him a favor by looking
after them even though they're also
doing themselves a favor because I don't
want the mill will look bad they're like
no we look after the kids in our care
see the point of it's a very interesting
point in history where slavery is
starting to be looked at in in Britain
as wrong and can't be here and at the
same time there's a point where because
they have all of the apprentices that
are children that get signed on when
they're nine ten eleven and they have to
work for free until their 21st birthday
they lie about some of their ages that
they get extra euros out of that I'm
like your 21st birthday you're basically
an indentured servant until that day but
they feed you and house you and you work
12-hour days and you get punished and
you have to work overtime and
there's a point where they're they
realize basically that it costs them
more to have the interns the children
that they have to pay that they have to
feed and clothe and house and basic
health care and education to become like
it's actually cheaper of course it's
cheaper enough slaves but it's actually
cheaper to employ people who then have
to go out and spend money on food and
clothing and shelter and like they end
up blaming all the boys go one point in
time say relights the girls are better
at the working and there is but they're
forming unions and they're doing they're
trying to fight for having less time
during the week devoted to somebody
else's career and that that was ten hour
days was seen as very lofty and that was
for just the children
the irony of this woman who's like like
what do you mean and there's a point
where these immigrant family a family
comes from a place where there's there's
a family I think it's like Ireland or
Scotland and they have he hasn't like
he's on the side of the factory owners
he's very much we're not gonna take
charity we're here to to work our asses
off is to he lies that one of his sons
because they've now fought for for
children under 9 can't be in the factory
and one of his sons is clearly under
nine and he's like no I know my sons and
she's now nine and he has his sons
working at the factory but there's this
and ever yet all the other England
parents are like like they're fighting
to have their kids not working factories
twelve hours saying sorry how this kid
working effective twelve hours a day and
a lot like you can see how when he was a
farmer
that makes complete sense when you have
your children working on your farm with
you and they're right there and they're
learning in there that's much different
than handing your kid over either as
they're still your kid but they're
working here and getting looked after or
they get taken from the workhouse I'm
still not a hundred percent sure never
had like what what is the different leg
the workhouse was a step down
this has looked at a society needs to
look after you like kind of people
starving on the street so if you can't
look after yourself you have to go to
work house but basically you're like
starving in a workhouse and having to
work and like you can't run away it
makes sense for the children because
they're thought of his children even
though like 20 I don't the whole thing
I'm like we have two happy indentured
servitude to lure 21 if you sign if you
were an apprentice you only live to be
like 30 35 so two-thirds of your life is
in like service of someone without
getting any payment hopefully see you
can start a family and die by the time
your third and your kids are now 10 like
they gotta go in it this is a perfect
cycle but there was a point like the the
rich family who owns all of the mill
owns the mill and where they're cutting
the wages of their workers including
their own wage and like there's a truth
to if these people start a union and
they want all the money the mill goes
under and then no one has a job because
everyone else is either using slave
labor or treating people really badly so
here people are working eight hours and
they're working 12 and yours you still
they still ain't gonna cover their
living right like Dillon be able to have
a roof over their head and food on the
table if you're not providing it and
there's I just it's like the workers
union work fighting for workers right
was very much needed at the time in
society and we still honestly eat it but
there's people advocating for worker
coops as the solution to our current not
current koga nineteen current capitalist
society and how workers don't have a say
right your job gets moved somewhere else
you're they can cut your way GTO you
unless you're in a union you're very
little say in most industries or a few
minutes anymore
but even as Richard Wolffe virtual
wealth is one of the people who talks
about there being what the G is I met I
think through this little stuff there's
two of them that I constantly get
reviews one of them's workers unions one
of them's just an economist anyway even
if we were all in work
first of all that doesn't account for
everyone who can't work or their work
isn't there isn't something that can
really get paid for their highest
Colleen but that's okay that's game a
doesn't concern itself with that
capitalism doesn't concern itself with
that you pick an industry you get paid
for you start but we're not getting
people's highest work in that but even
if my utopian society
isn't is it ever gonna happen anyway if
we had all worker coops we still have
the ridiculous
competitive system we currently have
it's just you're involved in the cuts
Ronis like you still have to decide the
quality of the product how much the
people get paid and you're still gonna
have to compete with everybody else
unless it's illegal to have competition
so unless workers you know like there's
a like a woodworking union and no one
else outside of that union can start it
so we set the wages and we decide what
that is that's not a workers coop that's
a union and that's it's like it doesn't
actually distribute power it doesn't
actually fix our world whereas as much
as I hate the word consumer the user the
member having that feed the coop having
that people at the cooperation lies
instead of like we're already at the
verge of not needing to work for a
living
I brought the verge of ubi be rather
mainstream we're at the verge of
technology taking off so everything's
automated fighting so we all can have
jobs that we can have a say in is like
again if it happened two or three
decades ago then that would be a that
could have been a solution just like if
we included externalities and the cost
of things in capitalism three or four
decades ago we probably wouldn't have
the environmental degradation so that it
could have continued on but now we need
to think outside the box and think of
things that haven't been done before so
to go to the past only had trading when
we had these fake labor movements which
were in violence
I mean people put their lives on the
line for these things because of
children's lives were on the line their
lives were on the line they saw people
die and they were starving to death like
they were their lives were on the line
not only are we probably not going to do
that unless there is something more I
mean
even our level 4 revolt is quite quite
high like we with what is it bread and
circuses we've got a lot of bread and
circuses going on so we are our revolt
is rather low but and that was I mean in
the show they had to have all of the
workers from all of the different
factories all of the different
industries all revolting at the same
time in order for these rights to get
passed basically and the same thing
except that we don't we didn't we don't
need all of the consumers to pour into
the streets and say we're not going to
buy your if you don't change your
ways because rather than alert they're
not really doing it for profit they're
not they're going to if you demand it
and it's gonna hurt their bottom line
they absolutely will change but they're
not actually going to change you don't
pretend to change they're gonna change
just enough so that you buy their stuff
not enough so that it actually helps the
environment actually helps the workers
we this is why I think consumer
cooperatives are the solution are not
workers cooperatives is you only work in
one location ideally I mean multiple
jobs but you work one place where as you
buy things multiple places our entire
economic system is set up or supply
meets demand to maximize profit instead
of where supply meets demand to maximize
purpose that if you create for the
demands you have at the price that you
that people can afford it then it makes
sense it has the biggest impact that's
when the business the entity has the
biggest impact not when we have this
conversation last week in a few of the
the UM the game P type spaces and I used
terminals company as the as the example
they sell neuro drugs drugs to help your
brain like supplements and I've never
tried them I cannot say I think Jordan
Hall is an amazing human being and if
anyone made a good supplement company I
imagine he's part of it but at the same
time anyway this person I was talking to
was taking him it was suggesting it for
my my brain issues like why got
message very long ago that if it isn't
free and cheap or comes with a
money-back guarantee it's not meant for
me like if Jordan is like hey this would
really help you I'm gonna willing to
give you three months supplies you can
try them out
I would absolutely try them out but I
don't the question so this is the issue
is Jordan Hall in business to make money
in order so that he has the money to
help with his vision right a krating
daeng be of doing doing whatever else or
is he in business to help people enhance
their brain because if he's in business
for Jordan Hall to get profit so he can
run his mission in life that's very
different and I'm not going to be a
customer of his brain medic of his
supplement because it's not gonna be the
best right it's not gonna be the best
quality it's not necessarily it's that
he's trying to make profit if his
purpose is to help people be at their
peak mental state then what he should be
doing and as long as his business can
break even as long as he has enough
money to live off of is to price it at
the point where most people can afford
it or it has the biggest impact and
under the I took a minor in economics
earns a point where the graphs for
demand and supply meet and that's where
you set it up because that's the highest
profit point but if you sell at a lower
price point then you have a higher
demand and you run a deficit like you
you can't even make that demand hurts
the profit - isn't that what these
graphs again and remember them but
there's an equilibrium point of if if
there's a million people who need this
what is the question what am I trying to
say here there's a million people who
absolutely need it and could pay 20
bucks a month for it so if you were give
if you were selling it to those people
you'd be making twenty million dollars
if you do what you are currently doing
maybe you're making twenty five million
right you're selling them for a hundred
bucks a bottle
I just say $20 1 million instead you're
selling them for $100 and you have
that's 25 million divided by 100 try to
buy you something makes sense yeah 25
Mille divided by hundred 9 not be able
to get my head right now ok 3 4 5 6 25
million / hey meat see my q1y dubai on
how to it's just it's just take a beam
off to zero so I got alright earning
fifty thousand so instead you're a make
it so if you're your business plan right
now is that you are you have two hundred
fifty thousand customers who can afford
a hundred dollars a month you're making
25 million but you're only impacting and
helping two hundred and fifty thousand
if you dropped your price point to 20
because you make all this profit and now
you're making a couple bucks of profit
on everyone you're making and this is
net not grossest about example what
these numbers that could make more sense
but if you're instead selling for 20
bucks and a million people can now buy
it you your impact is four times greater
even though you're making less profit so
it makes sense to sell the drugs for
Less monies they can have the highest
impact if you're in it for the drugs
right if you're in it so that everyone
can be at the highest mental capacity
its instead you're in it to serve your
mission right that you're gonna save the
starving kids you're gonna cure AIDS and
cancer whatever you are your mission is
then you're in it to maximize profits so
you can maximize purpose in your in your
in your life those are very different
goals and one makes me trust your
company and one makes me trust you as a
human being but then I'm not going to
trust your company right is Bill Gates
creating vaccines to help sick kids or
to make money those are very different
priorities and so if you're if we
together one single individual having
that power right deciding that they're
gonna be a philanthropist and they're
gonna get all this money so they can
dole it out who the are they like
why do they get to amass money
they can help help the world instead of
like just don't amass the money in the
first place
you know if you were amassing it there
wouldn't be starving children except
that of course that's not true one
person amassing it isn't going to stop
everyone from a mass so the fact that
there are people amassing it means that
they're starving people and some of
those people in that scene because
they're like right if I'm not the one
I'm asking it it's just gonna there'll
be no one feeding people so I'm that I'm
going to and there's something very
broken in that model because the
business owner is incentivized to
maximize profit which they then can pass
off as philanthropy but really what they
could do it just fix the
business right like an Amazon to
actually help people they could make it
so their workers are paid properly and
we together as the consumer can find all
of these price points because the the
company because they're not in it for us
just spoiler alert they're never in it
for purpose they're always in it for
profit
even if a game B person creates one if
it's in game a it has to be designed for
profit or your why aren't you selling it
at the lower price points gonna have a
bigger impact if you can still be
financially sustainable at that price
point you're just making less profit
right instead of having something
five-fold increase marked-up you have it
10% increase marked up so that you can
serve more people if your product is
good it's actually helping people then
you want it to help the most people and
that fundamental difference is the
conflict in our society from between
business owners the people who own it
and are selling you the and people
wanting to buy it the consumer and the
owner that's where the conflict is and
yes there's coughing between the workers
and the the people who own it but that
is like a workers coops somewhat solve
saboteurs and actually solve the
competition in the economy so that we
can find more efficient ways to create
Goods and price them at a level that has
the biggest impact and because you've in
that system right if you are actually in
it for purpose and you make a drug that
helps people brain work at peak and
you're selling it for a hundred dollars
that means rich people get to think
about her well if you have it at the
highest purpose and now you've priced it
so that most most people can afford it
you're never gonna practice ever but
most people can your your impact in the
world has been went up now there there
enters a competitor
they are pricing there's cheaper and
their drug is the same in game a you
want them to go to business you want the
profit it's your customers it's your but
in game be in an omni win society if
you're actually there for purpose it
doesn't matter if your company goes
under because if they're able to better
impact people's brains if they're able
to create something better or on par for
cheaper then why wouldn't you want your
customers to have that but of course you
know want to start or if you don't want
you know what I mean like you don't want
your employees to starve because now
they have to be unemployed so it makes
sense to fight for profit and to fight
for financial sustainability even if
it's hurting your actual purpose because
it always will it will always hurt your
purpose together as the consumer as the
user the purpose is our highest mission
not profit we do care about how much it
costs right I think when when the
fast-food workers were fighting for $10
$15 an hour and then fighting for a
while he we never give it to them
when you look at the actual cost to the
consumer so it costs 10 cents extra for
burgers most people would be ok with
them most people be ok with 10 cents
extra in fact of fighting it the fact
that all that now means then it's
probably only 15 25 cents burger they
need to make it look like it's expensive
so they're gonna rough it raisin $2 per
burger they can see that it's ethical
like there's all of this hidden politics
and hidden that we can't react to
so anyway I'm not the point we the
consumer seen transparently how the
price is created right if we created it
$100 for this neuro drug only 250,000 of
our members can make it can buy it and
so it's only going to impact what's
250,000 if we are able to create it at
the million scale we can create it so
that we can solve it for 20
do we have a million people who want it
can we like is do we have enough demand
to make that supply once we like what
scale do we need to make this on so it
brings the cost down further and further
and we're spreading it instead of the
entrepreneur taking the risk and getting
all of the reward and then having even
if they have an amazing product they
have to be in the ecosystem in the
economy with all these people who are
lying and how do you know who is true
and how do you know who Kenny oh who's
in there for purpose and how do you know
who's in there for profit they're all
just you River Bravo we can just assume
that but at the same time there are some
that are better some that are that are
less bad guys right I would trust Jordan
Paul's product before I would trust any
other ones on the market because I know
Jordan Hall I think he's a good human
being
and so and that's fair for me I'm like
right I want his business to succeed
because I think he's gonna do amazing
things with with whatever money and
whatever power and privilege he has at
the same time I'm not gonna buy from his
neuro company because he's in there for
you know it like he has to be there for
profit and not for Pervez in order for
his Jordan halls purpose to be there so
unless you're working in your purpose if
you're if his job was actually neuro
enhancing drugs that was actually his
calling on this planet then the purpose
would be to get the most impact out of
it and get the most right now the most
people taking it if it's actually gonna
help your brain and have it so that it's
not just the rich taking it cuz there's
also like classism involved like the
rich get the best nutrition you know
they get their brains enhance now they
get like if it's not effective I don't
want it and if it is effective actually
have more of a problem it's like more of
a problem at the same time maybe it
costs fifty five dollars to make it and
that's why it's sold for sixty bucks a
month right so there's like no profit
there and this is where transparency
hurts us because we can't tell profit
versus purpose we can't tell if you're
here for profit or purpose unless you're
transparent about your finances and
where it comes from and together
the point is together if we actually
needed neurological drugs we actually
needed supplements we could do that
science or rather our scientists
that science and open it up to the rest
of us and we can see yeah okay so we
want I don't know what's in it stuff I
can probably read the ingredients list
but you know like we need say Cobalt
something rather yeah that's probably
not right whatever helps your brain
can't believe you go stuff that's bit
don't help your brain and all these
other other things we could manufacture
a drug at the cost it takes to make it
so if we have 250,000 people signing up
for it we can offer the price of 50
bucks a month if we have a million
people it brings it down to 45 right
like whatever those actual numbers are
we can see where that is and we can make
it at the point it's gonna have the
biggest impact not the like you're not
gonna make it for 7.5 billion people for
free we don't the money to do that it's
not gonna happen but if you're asking
people what's the price point you would
buy this at at this quality that we
decided lowest quality we would possibly
accept um and then creating it for that
amount like changing the economies of
scale so instead of being the risk-taker
and having to figure out how much do I
need to make and what do I need to sell
it out smocks maximize my profit said of
like literally asking people because
they're in it there is not I'm gonna
profit off of all this information then
you can't trust me it's our company our
thing that we're making so would you buy
this at $100 an hour would you buy it at
$20 an hour there is a lot of human
psychology that like there are people
who will buy something at $100 an hour
who will not buy it at $20 an hour but
that's because they think the hundred
dollar ones a better quality and it
comes with prestige those aren't people
if we have open science and open
information and you can see that they're
the same quality why would you pay the
hundred over the twenty unless there's
actually a reason like this one's a
higher like the hundred dollars goes to
more people you know there isn't a why
would you choose why would you choose to
Andrew dollars but together we can
choose to make things ethically and make
things like if you think about a workers
cooperative Jordans example right of his
company a workers coop if he handed it
over to the workers and the workers
it doesn't fix it it does not fix the
problem because they're still at a
hundred bucks per per bottle there's you
know what I mean it's still priced
higher than most people can afford it
it's just that yes the workers are
getting compensated more instead of that
profit going to Jordans and he can
fulfill his purpose in the world it kind
of fixes the philanthropic part so that
there isn't one person making mega money
while everyone else is poor and then I
can dole it out to you but it still
doesn't help the rest of the economy
that company is still gonna still going
to tell you that their neurological
drugs the best they still don't want the
competitors coming in and putting them
out of business because they're there
for profit not for purpose the only
player at the table it's there for
purpose in their fundamental need is the
consumer is the user right I want my
transportation system to transport
things out my health care system to make
me healthy or keep me healthy
I want my education system to teach me
help me have a love of learning my whole
life all of those industries aren't
there for those purposes they're there
to make people money the institution's
money and so when consumers come
together and we create something as long
as it isn't a tiny group of people who
are then keeping it secret and selling
it to everybody else which could be a
workers cooperative we have the
information if we have the transparency
on the product itself and for involved
in the making of it we can get to choose
why we have the ingredients we have
right and have a diversity of
ingredients so that you have for
instance with the neurological one right
if there's one size fits all and then it
turns out men at males and females need
difference and children need different
ones then we that's what we would want
to create right we're not we're not
pretending that males and females get
different ones so we can put pink taps
on the females one's writing your kids
need a different amount it's like you
can actually see the different amount we
actually have the science showing we
need different amounts and you can see
the pink text right like there is no
pink attacks it's like yes this is how
much it cost to make this one is so much
it cost to make this one it might be
that one of them costs more and
therefore it's more expensive or we
might decide that it's who cares whether
it costs more for males or females to
have them
it's gonna be the same price so we're
gonna price it out across the people who
buy it but you know it would only make
ten percent of female and ninety percent
are male and the ninety percent so when
they cost smart that buy it might not
make sense and the women be like were
the females we like weirdos will go off
and start their own company you you know
consumer co-op you're okay with
competitors coming in and the only
reason you're not is it disperses the
energy so if someone starts a competing
entity you want them to come on board
with yours or you want to come on board
with theirs what are you offering that
we're not and how can we help you offer
that otherwise why are you splitting our
member base right if I make if we're we
have our always pasta sauce if we have
our pasta sauce company why would you
start your own in the for-profit world
that makes sense right well because I
want money
well my grandmother's recipe to be out
there okay well the money part you
hopefully figured out her to grander
scale but the you want your
grandmother's recipe out there okay what
does that look like to you you want a
face on it you want like that yes is it
like what does that look like and how
many bottles do you want is it just
family you want to have it like we can
actually empower consumers of what they
want including and part of that is
empowering entrepreneurs of what they
want that if they would start a
competing business it's not secret
behind the scenes okay then we're gonna
pay you a million dollars not to start a
pastic Azaz it's like why are you
starting it and how can we help you
fulfill those needs because you wanted
your grandmother's pasta sauce and you
go through 100 jars a year and you wanna
and you want it made on us for you and
your family we can do that we need more
niche things to be made how do we do
that and so solving problems together
from the base and then solving them so
the economics is shifted where we're
creating supply to meet demand instead
of creating supply and then creating
demand and having to price it at
whatever is gonna be a highest profit
you know I I okay
I make a million bedsheets they cost me
five bucks each and I'm gonna sell them
for ten bucks so that's how much money
I'm gonna make here's how I can price it
and said it's like how many people need
bedsheets if we make that many how low
can we bring that cost are there
actually other people out there that
need batteries they don't even know they
need that treats right now they just
need to be asked right like how do we
actually increase the customer base so
that it brings the cost down and we can
make things on scale and then actually
create them on scale and create them
ethically we still care about workers we
still care about the environment because
you're gonna be willing to pay an extra
25 cents so that your kid has a planet
to live on and you can transparently see
that if that's actually not not within
the library with you when we have the
data we don't allow externalities
drawing back so you don't really have
the option of passing off your
externalities on to the rest of the
world so you don't have the choice of
shopping at Walmart after a while
because you can see that when you shop
at Walmart what you're actually doing is
stealing what you're actually doing is
stealing from all of the people working
in the factories and all of the future
generations and all of and you're giving
that money to the shareholders of
Walmart who I think have enough I think
that family has enough money but there's
not really an option when you're poor
like right now it pays to be ignorant to
what the cost is to shop at Walmart and
it's your only option but when you
actually have other options and you can
say okay I'm gonna buy this mug for five
bucks at Walmart versus I can create
that mug myself we can we can
mass-produce it together and it will
also be $5 but I can see that that money
went to the supply chain instead of the
Waltons
I think it's the Waltons since I think
the Walton family people who owned
Walmart and we can create things better
like right now and this is where in the
mills and the workers to talk about how
it used to be illegal to organize
workers because they knew these things
could happen right if the workers are
talking and they know how much money
they're making then they can fight to
have the same amount of money they can
fight or
or if they know how many people are
dying and getting and getting permanent
injuries then they're gonna be more like
able to fight right
everything's dividing conquer in our
society the more we're divided the
easier it is to to have power over us
the more were together the less easy it
is to have power over us except for the
togetherness right so if in being
together that togetherness has power
over you at least it's voluntary and we
can design it in a way it doesn't have
power over you because I don't want
anything ever to have power over me so
anything I design is designed to not
have power over the individual but I'm
one person so if other people really
want essential energy to have power over
them then I guess we'll create it that
way creating the system that can bring
users together to create solutions that
they then can all be part of is what
solution raises is doing and focusing on
it from that side right we're not
creating a pass to companies so that we
can all be millionaires and sell it for
a gross margin to everybody else we're
creating a past and we're not created
right now but it we're recruiting a past
a company cuz we like pasta and we want
good quality ethical pasta for as cheap
as possible as chief thrusts in labor
and Rihanna's cheapest in resources and
actually cheap in externalities passed
on to everyone else thirdly no extra a
letís past times everyone else and so it
doesn't make sense to compete with that
in fact a pasta company that's created
for the people with the people puts all
the other for-profit ones out of
business eventually because it's just
where the incentives are you can't
compete with your for-profit one with
our not-for-profit one yours is owned by
you
art is owned by us like why if you're
the person who owns it the Walton family
might still shop at Walmart Walmart
doesn't exist if just the Walton family
shops there ain't going clean just some
shop all parts and so it's not about
seizing the means of production or like
taking over somebody else's property the
Walton family owns Walmart we're never
gonna Walmart unless I was a goodness of
their little barely their hearts
they're gonna just give it up to
humanity they're not but any of those
big mammoth companies like right now the
solution that I see that people promote
is to go back to the old days it's right
to have worker coops to have like to
come together and fight the government
fight the big 1% which on one level on
four but on another level it doesn't
 work so why are we doing it like
like it's so much energy fighting and
Goliath as David like it just is too
much it's like what the Bible says he
did win yes it was hard so maybe
we don't maybe we don't even have God on
our side I don't know I don't know I
bring in Michael but we can create a
entity that puts Amazon our business in
here we can create an entity that puts
Facebook on a business in here that's
not our purpose I hope that's not our
purpose our purpose isn't to annihilate
what is out there it's to create
something better that is transparent
that brings in the masses I use Amazon I
trouble Walmart sometimes because it's
what's there and it's what's available
they are all our alternative is to go to
the farmers market the farmers markets
not sustainable it's not it's way too
pricy for anyone who has any kind of
financial restraints it's not that great
for the farmers they have to sit there
for their Saturday bring all their stuff
in and they have to have it go to waste
right at the end of the day if no one
buys it and it's just a lot of
inefficiency it's like a fun thing to go
to and test taste test things but it's
not a solution it doesn't help RIT like
it's not gonna help keep Walmart or
Whole Foods or its we could we could
easily okay why do we go to Amazon
because it's convenient because it's
convenient so basically the only reason
things get brought to us right because
it's not that cheap you can separate
things are on sale I could always find
things on sale in person easier than an
Amazon but it comes to you and then
there's all the negative that it cost
the environment a lot their packaging
and transportation is not efficient it
gets to you fast but it's not efficient
their workers are sick and possibly
crossing Coppa 19 to everybody because
they don't have sick days and they don't
and Jeffy's those two scares about
breaking seconds off of the the supplied
the time it takes to get the packages
out we can create a system that that is
a delivery system of our Goods where
it's picked up for one person and
brought to another and figure out like
what is it we actually need and start
manufacturing those goods and that's
what Amazon does they don't start
manufacturing they wait they showing
once it's profitable
once someone else has come in and proven
its profitable they basically steal the
idea and now you're competing with that
was on we can do that ethically create
epic lee because every time we'd steal
an idea every time we which boasts the
ideas don't eat like it's like right we
have clothes is making clothes really
stealing an idea if we know how much
clothes people use and we can make them
in a way that they want them right we
can't just demand everyone nowheres
great job suits and let me provided
great jumpsuits for you if we know how
much people are using why they're using
it and have their permission to create
something that they would use instead
because they're fully involved in that
process and a lot of since we don't even
know what we want right I might want
clothes like that and then they come
they like actually I don't want clothes
like that but it's your company so it's
your risk there's no one to return it to
right like you're involved in the this
is the Wardrobe I want this is the food
I want and then you order it and it's
yours
and if it wasn't made properly then we
have to deal with that as a company
right as as an entity why is our food
full of holes why is our clothes we're
out in five months it under fast fashion
for profit who cares
it makes them profit it's not going to
be in style in six months so does it
matter if it breaks apart doesn't matter
that it's destroyed our blood so that we
can think we look pretty we can create
clothes that are that are that last that
are our eternal style right like I know
what I'm probably never gonna wear again
I know what I like and I could order it
multiple times right like a t-shirt
never goes out of style I can and why do
things go to style but you actually are
dressing for you then things don't go
out of style
in style you might see something
someone's very idea I really like that
but things aren't made on a massive
scale and it changes every month it's
just like that's not sustainable but
I'll let the fashionistas decide on that
that should ease this can decide what
what they want and how to create it
because if we can get to the point where
we have nearly a rehab this is the word
I would say sustainable energy but like
very efficient sustainable energy so you
can basically use all of it you can use
as much of it as you want and the
materials are recycled ad infinitum
right we can grow algae and print it
into cloth and cloth and then that's
broken down and it's fed to the new
island you get broken into cloth and by
all means print yourself a new wardrobe
every day and wear it in the world
but when that's not the case and instead
you're buying a four dollar shirts so
you could throw it out at the end of the
week is having read something sees you
in it twice it's a lot of problems
conceptual framework that is generate
answers but though sorry I'm sending
this up here's other people going to but
the ones we need to get those answers
work better when they generate more and
more more and better questions I don't
know what you mean but I don't know it's
problematic contradiction we want to
build conceptual frameworks that
generate answers but the ones we need to
get those answers work better when they
generate more and more more and better
questions I don't see that as a
contradiction I'm someone who likes to
create more and better questions but
like I think I'm like there's something
there but or sustainable questions yeah
no I mean that definitely helps he's
more sustainable questions work yes what
are questions you like to ask that is
what we're working on I mean with both
solution or using and idea cafe every
idea cafe is around a question and just
generating them is half the battle
those are there you have a conversation
but like I don't think we need to
generate the answer because there's
never the answer
it's a system of how
answer answer how to come up with
solutions to questions and then you can
have people who want to generate
questions generate questions all day
long and those that are good and want to
answer them be the ones who answers them
it's like employs the wrong word but
helping people find relate where they
want to some questions to ponder I
ponder all day long
definitely ponderer but the asking
better questions is definitely a one of
the solutions and it's one of the things
we're not doing as a plan I mean I just
had someone the video I posted last week
on Michael Moore's video he release
which supposedly as a decade old which
doesn't quite make sense because they
both talked about old things from a
decade ago and talked about new things I
don't it was released in 2019 but it's
old information the people commenting on
it someone was like well yeah well
they're looking at the wrong technology
and like what's the right technology
like I agree what they looked at was the
big basically oil producers now doing
breeding green energy they're never
gonna do it right there and it for
profit not for purpose if it's
transparent and open I think there is
sustainable renewable energy it's just
not what our governments are gonna put
their money into they're gonna put their
money into their friends projects which
probably aren't them greenness unless we
have and so this is like that's the
wrong question everybody said the right
question was it like no it's really not
the wrong question it's not it's what's
the right technology even if I like
you're like well my cousin my cousin
knows how to do solar or super
efficiently right how do we know that
that is the question like the
underlining of the question because I
could ask how do I trust you how do you
know what you know but until there's a
system of trust a system of I don't care
if he's your cousin I don't care if
Jordan Hall how do I know the
neurological drugs work right it's by
having a bunch of people who aren't
Jordan Hall fans taking the drugs no in
placebo or not and seeing if they work
and and then testing them right for six
months years down the road is this
placebo is it is it is it actually real
make the mood on the road kill him no
which is like both true and untrue
because it's like Buddha himself
probably said he was
it's like there are Buddha's out there
and so when someone says they are right
when someone says they're an amazing
engineer and they don't clean up the
oceans how do you know it's not the
person it's like you need to look at the
technology their idea what is it about
their idea that's good and not good and
how do we like make the bad parts better
in the good parts even better and in our
current system of secrecy and
intellectual property the system doesn't
work like even if you come up with a new
or better idea well the money's not
going to you it's going to someone else
are you hungry
you've got something or gave me to get
it I'm gonna get off now cuz I didn't my
kid didn't eat before it was on so we're
gonna do it after ok I will see you all
tomorrow for tomorrow is Wednesday so
we're doing the solution raising on meta
meta project so like on how
transportation and education and
healthcare and everything if you fix one
other parts break how it is all
interconnected and so if you want to be
involved and have that conversation on
camera you can email me a collaborative
democracy at gmail.com and I will get in
contact with you yeah no ice we got
people who are coming ok my kids just
gonna ham it up for the camera so I'm
gonna go feed her and I'll see you guys
with some other people