so I'm curious what brought up the game
beyond boring idea it's actually it's
the consequence of a series of micro
experiments I did with the Facebook
group so first I thought okay that well
my interest right now is okay some
people are interested in theorizing
about game B away in the future some
people are more interested in the
transition what I want to focus on is
actually the actual scene the network of
people that are here right what stage is
impossible for us how can we become from
like a cloud of atoms more to an
organism you know like where people like
take on obviously in a distributed way
like certain roles or provide some
services to each other you know
differentiation and the integration that
kind of thing
so I started on Facebook asking the
question what is your greatest
impediment to participating more
meaningful to game B so that was a poll
and I think the first two results were
time and money lack of time and lack of
money and then the third was I'm still
learning about the scene you know before
I can participate and Hitler and then I
wondered okay the second question has to
be like what can we actually solve long
short term because you know lack of
people's lack of money which correlated
highly with the lack of time you know I
really succeeded that we can solve it so
I asked I made a second troll saying
okay well among like the solutions to
the previous factors you know which one
do you think we can solve more easily
then I kind of like cross like I
multiplied the two and so the thing the
place that looked like it would have
most leverage is the onboarding right
where the people like that still are
wondering what is this about what should
I do
how can I participate what are the
opportunities the affordances and so on
get a way to do that in a relatively
quick way and so that that's then what
sparked they okay
I bought game P DOS guide the domain and
but who knows maybe maybe it has to live
in
Wiki I don't know that's why I also
wanted to frame this in a more general
way not like what should we do with this
domain but more like okay what is a what
is an optimal onboarding experience or
maybe more even more generally what is
the process through which someone it
doesn't even have to be a newbie can
become valuable participant to the scene
right what is it what is what are the
skill sets what are the experiences what
are the videos material resources link
and if I had to kind of like distinguish
that from any kind of that was actually
actually things to a conversation with
Wendy I would want to distinguish that
project from any kind of like library of
theory or even beyond that you know like
bench making around you know like the
transcriptions maybe or the wiki and all
of that I would in a sense that's my
bias like leer towards something that
it's kind of linear you know like and
it's obviously just a guide is from the
guide of this I have some very strong
feelings about this please so right now
there is no onboarding but people are
finding it and they're finding ways to
collaborate and they're finding ways to
participate and be engaged not everybody
but there are some people who are and
there is something that happens when you
try and codify a process and people
start to think that that is the way that
it has to happen so let's say for
example I've been watching the game be
space since it was about or the game be
Facebook group since it was about 300
people and the first group of 300 people
came together and they were trying to
make sense of what game B was and there
was James Allen's on game B document
that people were collaborating on and
this was an artifact that was Purdue
from a collaboration of people who are
trying to make sense of the space so
that's what that was for and then they
were networked with other people and
went on to other collaborations and then
that document kind of fell out of the
hotspot of collaboration right so it
kind of is what it is some people work
on it from time to time but it's not as
active as it used to be then we had
another way of a three to four hundred
people come into the game be Facebook
Arena and they were looking to try and
make sense of it as well except instead
of having to figure it out all in their
own they had this artifact to look at of
what game B was so now you have this
intergenerational transition to where
the original things that the people were
trying to figure out about game B now
it's they have this artifact to say what
game B is so there's this different
perception that happens and I've
actually spoken with Zack Stein about
this quite a bit I don't know if you're
familiar with him but he's done a lot of
work on he has a book called education
in a time between worlds and this is
about the new education paradigm and the
the conversation we've had a lot of work
on was the difference that happens when
people are wanting to find something out
and they have the challenge the
necessity of finding it out for
themselves and charting their own path
how that's a different experience and
having it given to you do this this this
so there's something in the nature of
working as game B or engaging in the
world in that sort of way that really
kind of requires this incorporation of
doing it on your own and figuring it out
it's almost as if the codification of it
trying to take that shortcut diminishes
something in the character development
of the individual so that's that's why
I'm interested in this conversation is
because that is
hard to articulate but it's very
important that make sense so the
codification is problematic it can be
yes particularly if it's trying to be a
shortcut in some way because it almost
there's something about the drive and
desire to figure things out that you've
never figured out before that's really
important so making it too easy
almost short circuits that and loses
that aspect all right there is an image
that I have in mind with which I don't
know if it applies so I just mean just
gonna share this so this idea of
standing on the shoulders of giants that
kind of thing right where there's still
work to do right we have to do the next
step but kind of like the work that the
Giants have done before helps you reach
that point and I wonder if it applies
and there is a sense in which or like I
have the feeling that there is something
in this new space where it doesn't I'm
wondering then what is the contribution
that we could make for newcomers or even
for the people who are still wondering
how could I participate more if it's not
a codification well that's that's the
interesting part is that there is
something that can help and there is
standing on the shoulders of giants and
I think that that is very important but
I also think that is important to
preserve the fact that there is still
work to be done and we need people to
work on those things it's like
must all be unfinished it can never be
finished right it it needs the constant
input from people who have new
perspectives and working on that sort of
thing
when when we go to a point and say well
this is how it is and then we have
defined it then it starts to lose
something so how do we do it in a way
that helps people but also preserves
that sort of very important challenge
right yeah I know you had something to
say Wendy what was it I can't remember
now few thoughts I noticed a few
concepts like I wanted to throw out
there is I know that expression standing
on the shoulders of giants um you know
is used to describe yeah the you know
scientific process and scientific
research and advancing human knowledge I
know in one talk John for Vicki referred
to science as um besides he said there
is no solid ground you're lost at sea
you know science is actually more like
sailing and there's sort of self you
know sort of self-deception there's
deception everywhere you look and that
you know almost like you know rather
than having this building engineering
metaphor the scientific process it's
more of you know imagine you know
somebody seeing you know sort of
seemingly ended feeling and you know on
the sea of water and the waters are
choppy and which that makes me think
about the when there's come to people
who say oh like what when they gather
you know Yacht Club's Steve is a sailor
soft but I'm able to look at him for Co
a metaphor it's like what is it that I
look at others you know sailors often
they each have their own boats but what
is it that they do together like they
race together they gather and Clubhouse
together of course you know they're
sharing you know information all the
time about the weather but it yeah it's
very very different from say how you
know you know people who are like
building a bridge kind of come together
and work so that that's one thing and
then also to I guess the idea that like
idea means
Balaji I don't know how to pronounce his
last name he's uh you know somebody
who's in venture capital and active on
Twitter and involved the sort of thing
currency scene I know he talked about
that he's talked a bit about the idea of
the having you know kind of discoveries
for mean if I'm having the sense of an
idea maze that you have your own idea
maze that you were exploring and
navigating like your own labyrinth and
and that that yeah having that kind of
Questor journey of navigating the idea
maze is sort of like perhaps like that
the powerful frame for entrepreneurship
I mean right now I feel like I'm
navigating this idea needs to figuring
out what to do with like garbage and
recycling movie theater and when I put
on this idea maze of like feeling like
oh wait nobody nobody has really figured
out the best way to handle all this
stuff for a movie theater in Kingston
like I'm totally on uncharted territory
here like this is unchartered territory
this is my problem to kind of figure out
and then maybe if I do actually figure
out something good I can share the
solution maybe other businesses or how
do I like yeah what what is there that I
figure out that I then need to put in
conversation with other people to help
other others like solve other people's
garbage recycling problems but there is
I shouldn't just solve my you know the
problem for the screening room and then
sort of be done with it like that just
feels too far too individualistic and
that there's some there's some kind of
problem solving that I might be doing
that I maybe I do sort of solve the
problem in a way and other people can
use that solution so yeah there is like
this information yeah like anyway I
don't even know what the point is I'm
just putting those those those images on
the table yeah that's yeah I get where
it sits like this individualistic thing
to just okay I solved the problem that's
it there's something to kind of evoke in
other people and try and help them do as
well and that's
I'm really interested in you know
preserving that and and the way that I
see it is it's not about an individual
problem but there is a sort of a way of
engaging that we understand as a part of
the game B and being attracted to it and
what what's brought us here and our our
path forward here even the types of
things that we're taking on individually
whether it is the recycling thing
locally or whether it is you know how to
help people be in this space better it's
a how do we
not just teach people how to solve the
problem for themselves how to find those
problems for themselves that they feel
like is theirs to take on and also
cultivate the type of personality that
can do that and also bring forward the
same thing right the same thing of
teaching other people to find their
thing to do right so we're standing on
the shoulders of giants because we
shouldn't have to solve the problems
that other people have already solved
but how can we solve the problem of
helping people learn how to be salt
problem solvers right like I want to
preserve that sort of that that
challenge that nature that we have to
find these problems and solve them it's
like the the what is it the initiative
that you had Nick to to come into this
space and and want to do the onboarding
thing the initiative that you have for
me on how to solve the recycling thing
within your space these are things that
you recognize that are calling you how
do we help people identify that and take
those on and establish collaborations
that teach the same sort of thing right
mm-hmm so I feel like there's something
there we can grab on to it and help
people learn that but I don't think it's
really very straightforward as do this
this and this check these boxes you know
what I mean there is a sense of wanting
to keep the center free something like
that like okay we can add to the thing
but we should not put something in the
center like gym rats manifesto idea
fresh so that maybe there should be a
number of manifestos all around and all
from a specific perspective but there is
no game D manifest
and then of course people in the space
who are just allergic to manifestos and
then although part of it then is also
actually it is sort of a cultural tone
of saying that leg yes somebody can
propose the manifesto and then somebody
can say I am allergic to manifestos and
it's not like you have to terms of if
you're allergic to manifestos there's no
like you then have to like get off board
well it's funny I'm just at the
onboarding and then off boarding I guess
what extent if there is onboarding does
that then imply that there's such a
thing as like off boarding or something
to get off of kicked out you know well I
heard jordan's say if you don't want to
play game B anymore just stop playing I
don't know this whole it off boarding to
that part but he's also said and this
comes to mind now the thing that can be
named is not the thing right so if if
it's a process that we can name and
write out as step by step how to do it
or what one needs to do then that
inherently doesn't capture it right
there's there something more to it so
that's the that's that that's a real
challenge I see with the onboarding
thing is how do you preserve that and I
see this fallacy happen a lot where
people go into a group and they have
trouble understanding what's going on in
there obviously yes we can make it
easier but in the process of trying to
make it easier missing the fact that the
challenge in doing so with such a large
part of it right so how do we keep that
at this point I'm wondering what would
be an anti onboarding well it did looks
like it give us the onboarding language
like it makes me think of like a big
boat and onboarding it makes me think of
like a plank from like imagine there's
the dock so there's sort of like the
solid earth solid ground you walk out
onto the wood
dock and then there's this plank which
is the board you know which takes you on
board the boat the boats floating on
water and then at some point you know
the board is going to be kind of cast
aside and then the boat goes out to sea
and there's many people sailing together
on the boat and of course there's like a
skipper or kind of a captain of the ship
and then you know and everybody kind of
has these roles sort of sail the ship
together and so is that first of all is
that image more kind of game Amy what's
gave me about that image is game be is
game be just like a bunch of people
single-handedly like sailing their boats
around together
is it cruising or is it yeah everybody
goes out and races and they come back
and have drinks in the clubhouse like is
I think about like what a like on
boarding but the idea is almost like
just saying that there is a board that
it's just saying to somebody who's on
solid ground that you already have a
ship like there is like a boat like
there is a boat for you to sail in these
waters and you can go aboard that that
boat but it's your boat to go aboard and
you're gonna be simulated on your own
but there's gonna be other people
sailing with you and like there is
something larger for you to participate
and also to like the idea that like it's
in terms of that single-handed thing it
is - I also want to avoid something it's
not gave me as being lost at sea
completely by yourself like I've been
the scene of somebody like on a raft by
themselves no one around and they're
completely lost like that's that's not
it like there is something kind of hyper
social and connected but yet again that
sovereignty maintaining thing so imagine
kind of like what was ante on board he
might have something to do with like
inviting people to board a ship but at
the same time like they're the they're
the captains of that that ship so I yeah
there's a couple of things that come up
for me with that as I think that's one
of the things
to me that really sparks the need for an
onboarding process is that people are
joining and then they don't know what to
do they're curious they come to the
strange attractor and they're not sure
how to engage or participate so trying
to find some way to help them learn or
find groups to collaborate with and what
resonates with them and get to that
other space I know Phil and Wendy you
both through different collaborations
that we've had you've seen that the game
be Facebook group is not all there is to
it there's so much more outside of that
that people don't even see that's going
on and a lot of this is collaboration
that's in real life it's collaboration
and other spaces it's just not taking
place or being talked about right there
so how can we open it up for people who
are joining to know that there is this
level of collaboration that's happening
and understand how to get to that space
we understand that rule Omega and
competent conversation is one of the
prerequisites to be able to collaborate
but where where do they go right that's
one of the conversations I was having
with Jim ROG about this new environment
or form that that he's looking to build
that's a little bit larger than the
Facebook game B space or the game B
Facebook page right because it's not
really good for collaboration so how do
we have these sorts of collaborations
that are happening visible to people so
that they can see what interests them
and they can find ways to work to get
into these different spaces which is
active right and actually doing things
something is becoming more and more like
vivid in my mind which is an experience
I had as a child I went to public school
for one year after which my mom then
sent me to a Waldorf School I'm not sure
if you're aware and I remember the first
week being for the first time faced with
with a white piece of paper completely
blank no you know like things that were
already drawn and I just had to
the colors right and I was completely
frustrated as a child like what you know
what do I do with this is just white a
white camera
and in a sense that was life-changing
that decision for me because I was
completely fit for public school would
have felt like the straightest career or
like ladder ever and instead I was
forced with this
creativity this initiative having to you
know fill the canvas so at this point
I'm wondering like how can we present
newcomers with the blank canvas
what a lovely lovely description of that
experience thank you
do you remember though Nick how you fell
like what the white paper like did you
did you quickly be like ah do you
remember feeling liberated or feeling
this is better and like do you remember
responding positively no no not at all
as a child I mean I it was it took me
weeks to adapt
I was always complaining I don't want to
go to this school I want to go back to
my old school and the teacher was very
patient and kind and guided me and
helped me I swear I was cutting
chuckling as you described it because I
went to a school that was fairly
progressive and it's like a school that
wasn't me cultivating you know kind of
independent thought creativity although
not probably not as normal extreme the
Waldorf School I remember each morning
there was kind of this free was drawing
activity and I remember we're told draw
a picture and write three sentences and
beyond that it could be whatever right
and I arrived at the story that I
thought it was great which was like this
is a bunny the bunny is going for a walk
it is a sunny day and sometimes I would
change it and make it a rainy day or
swapping a dog but basically that you
know this is an animal the animal was
going for a walk and then here it's the
weather like that was my formula and I
just drew that formula for like a few
months every single morning and I'm like
I've nailed it the teacher actually like
we were doing like a parent-teacher
night was like talking to my mom and
talking about this and said like that
the idea here is to actually write a
different story
and draw something different every time
not the same thing and there were like
19
to mix it up and I'm like I don't see
what the problem is here this is a Greek
story and I mean I did go on to actually
really like art and drawing and really
would express myself through for drawing
but yeah I don't know it is my in terms
of like that system like some people
like it is my in terms of that
systemization or kind of reducing things
down to their essence or that repetition
like sometimes that is what makes the
soul saying rather than just like
endless creativity endless you know the
endless organic growing garden like
there is this urge to rationalize and
systematize and form you formula you
know create formulas and that there can
be this like intrinsic joy and creating
a formula and of course Nick your
programmer right like the creativity for
you creativity is that creating the
system you know
you
yeah not necessarily sticking to the
system but yes creating the system
Hale happy to be here with you quite
overwhelmed at this point so much
autopsy but it's nice to come and see
you all and able to ease in a little bit
[Music]
yeah just so that you know I already had
a chat with field last week a bit about
this onboarding but yeah I can't seem to
get to the specifics so general you
refer to there being work you did say oh
there is work to be done like find like
within sort of the I guess sort of like
growing the the network say or in terms
of dealing with somehow working with
like new energy or need people coming
you done what in your mind do you
perceive as being yeah so last time I
was in California I had a fantastic
conversation with a guy named Kendrick
and we were talking about how to grow
these things we were talking about this
particular thing and new people coming
in instead of indoctrinating them how do
you incorporate what they know into what
we know into like this sort of weaving
into it as it grows right so that there
isn't this core centralized idea that is
crystallized this is how it works but
that there is a seed and it's growth
depends on the individuals bringing in
their experiences in a particular manner
like using rule Omega and and using this
sort of non-rival this sort of thing but
but leaving in their stories and their
experiences and
allowing those things to be brought in
and how that makes everything grow out
of it so maybe something is more like
teaching people or onboarding
encompassing how to engage in that way
not what to engage in but how to engage
in a way that's cultivating to the whole
space right so maybe something even more
meta I actually in terms of on the ante
onboarding you're describing that made
me imagine this image of the 17 or
onboarding I guess I think of
traditional like organizational
onboarding the ideas the person kind of
arrives as kind of this Lang slate that
needs to be indoctrinated or trained or
oriented instead I'm imagining this new
person kind of entering this room and
then everyone kind of looks the thumb
and be like maybe you know what to do
what tell us what you oh you have what
you okay you share with us what you know
because that's gonna be a piece of the
puzzle right like they're sort of like
you start with this presumption that
this other person has has those piece of
the puzzle and they have this expertise
and it's almost like yeah like okay take
us to the next level sorry also my
experience I've had a lot of experience
on cross-functional teams and research
and development reverse engineering
rapid prototyping and I do not have any
specialized degree in anything I'm not
an engineer I don't have a PhD in any
sort of thing but I was always a support
type technician so I had so many
wonderful experiences on these teams
with these incredibly brilliant people
that had all these different answers and
ideas and I never knew what the hell was
going on so being new on these teams
being like less knowledgeable about
what's happening what I learned was that
my strengths was the questioning why do
you do it this way what can we do
differently why don't we try this you
know what
what types of things can we try what I
learned was the the people who are
almost like the elders who have this
sort of develops knowledge that they
hold that's really important but they
also to get that it comes at a cost it
brings this sort of myopic view to get
that deep of knowledge so it's so
important to have new people come and
ask these questions to help challenge
that and bring out new perspectives and
that's that's what I've always brought
to the teams that I was on in the past
and that's kind of what I see is the
strength of new people coming in is so
important otherwise you get into this
crystallized myopic view of how things
should be and that becomes fragile
strikes me that onboarding
their own work maybe the great
integrating is oh I like that one
kind of like someone on a YouTube video
made a super nice comment of like the
idea that as the tree grows it like it
becomes more like world in a sense like
the world becomes more 303 becomes more
something like that like it's not just
the seed that becomes bigger somehow I
don't know I like that and then there
was something else for me that something
that is this idea of anti onboarding
evokes is actually a kind of a
withdrawing and maybe a bit something
like I'm becoming occult you know so you
said there is a lot going on on the
ground maybe that's okay maybe Facebook
should remain like this chatty loud
place and the people who already will
hear what's behind and reach out so one
of the things that that we've noticed or
that that I've been watching too and
this is unfortunate but I can understand
why it's happening so as that first
group of people began to find the groups
that they resonated with and went on to
collaboration further they were taken
out of the Facebook group they they like
their time was spent elsewhere not so
much in that space so that means that
people who are most integrated into how
to gain be outside of the Facebook group
page are not really present to cultivate
that with people who are coming in
especially as we've been having a lot of
people come in really quickly compared
to the early days of it so like even
myself I don't get to spend a whole lot
of time in the face be faiths Facebook
group as I did before and certainly not
in the collaborations in the manner that
I did and it's a lot larger group now
it's how do we you know kind of keep
that and that sort of interaction
between people who are collaborating
outside or underground
with the people coming in how do we help
them make that bridge right I think I
was listening to a podcast actually it's
the podcast so uh Chris oh that
Christian I guess Christians start I
think all of you are familiar with it
was him appearing on on it the podcast
called an infinite path and it was it's
very much like a spirituality and kind
of sort of sort of a solo spiritual not
solo sort of a spiritual journey outside
of you know organized structure Piper
type of podcast but he describes it in
shift like uh but I guess when it comes
to a certain kind of like those phases
we sort of groups that allow for a
certain kind of spiritual questing
there's the there is a door they scrub
like there is a door the door is there
and anyone can enter through the door
but like the door doesn't have a sign
like it's not a business announcing
itself with a sign it's more like the
door and Sarah you can walk through it
freely but nobody like nobody is
inviting you to the door and yeah I do
imagine a space or you know I can't
believe the sort of idea maze where yeah
where there are doors so there are many
doors and we're not the doors maybe
shouldn't be advertised but they should
be like visible and it's funny because
in a physical space you know in a
physical space you can walk around you
can choose to kind of pay attention and
if you pay attention you will see the
doors on the buildings but in the online
space you have to participate to make
something visible right like a zoom is
not when it's it's empty it's it's
nowhere right like the zoom room only
exists when we're in it right like the
zoom is not visible if there's no one in
it there's no door right so like there's
this it just makes me think of some kind
of new way what would be some new way in
this odd virtual online realm for there
you know like what do those stores look
like or how can people are even showing
people how
recognize doors I think the doors maybe
they're already there it's not about
building the doors it's about like
almost sort of it as some kind of
encourage like encouragement or but
clues or hints or you know telling
people how to look for doors that they
could walk through and that's one of the
things that I'm really drawn to and why
I show up and participate in the way
that I do I really like anything that
seems to be a hint of collaboration that
somebody wants to do I'm really keen on
trying to find a way to instantiate that
and bring the group together because
what I see is it's in groups like this
where people get to know each other and
establish those relationships and are
able to pass through that doorway right
there are multiple things that that that
we've collaborated collaborated on that
I've collaborated on where this thing
itself doesn't seem that important but
what happens after you know once you
walk through that initial door and say
yes I want to show up and collaborate
what can I do right once you get to that
space and it's almost this this personal
transition of the act of walking through
the door right that that changes your
ability to interact with people and how
they interact with you so yeah I agreed
that the door should be absolutely
visible and I think that's one of the
things that the game be Facebook group
is really struggling with because it's
not so clear where you go after that you
get to the game be Facebook group page
then what right cause you know we're not
physically impressive it feels much more
intimate
I think the gap so I don't think the
question would be how do we increase
something like this I think it was
someone who is like
so I had one of these in Costco this
will cause last week I won with David
who I think last week I noticed because
somebody he wrote up his bio on it's
like all I want to do some resources and
then someone tagged me I'm like oh yeah
let's check it's gonna zoom and it was
very quick close like oh yes sounds like
someone who wants to help yeah that make
sense
it's like these are type of pathways
that I agree on I see but how do we
increase these type of interactions
it's kind of hard could we have a
thousand people know like how do you
know who questioned I think it's
acceptable to say that a large part of
those people won't get to that space
people go to the game be space for lots
of different reasons and it's almost as
if that challenge is necessary to sort
out people who really aren't sure
whether or not they're ready to go
through the door right so there's
something to that that I feel is
important but my experience and one of
the things that I wish that I could
really explain to people in the game be
space is that just showing up there
finding people you resonate with just
getting into a zoom call about something
that's how you really start to establish
those relationships and connections
that's how I get to know people and then
even going further beyond that through
that pathway
I have physically met people from the
game be space and become yeah bill I've
met you a couple of times you know and
I'm looking to go out to where you're at
Wendy and and hopefully I get to do that
quite soon but these this is the like
the progression you know Facebook page
find people zoom talk really resonate
find who that is and then move on to
this in real life sort of thing so
that's what I would be interested in if
if there was a sort of I guess
integration sort of aspect that also I
think actually there just the existence
of
I mean YouTube well 20 how like in terms
of the social network the Facebook group
lately is sort of been where like okay
in terms of the social network Facebook
as brothers as focus it's where there's
text but really it's video like I feel
like yeah it's video where I think it
really lives I mean yes it calls like
this but also I mean gave me spaces
animated by was animated by you know
Jordan Hall in particular talking over
video like an on pot you know on YouTube
and on podcasts you know and I think
that I mean so you know I don't know if
you're aware of this speaking challenge
that Nick is is doing and and in the
past on YouTube I've I'm doing it myself
but it's I guess it's sort of like you
know committing to record a series of
videos where you're just talking to the
camera and you're just practice speaking
to the camera and uploading it to
YouTube so I'm this is day three you
know me doing the speaking challenge and
if you did this yeah you've done this a
few times he originally did it a few how
many years ago yeah that was like two
two years ago in the middle of the
Jordan Peterson wave I wanted to read
all the books that he recommends and
then talk about them and that's why I
started a YouTube channel but it was
taking me weeks and months to read the
books and then whenever I was standing
in front of my camera was feeling so
awkward and then I said okay I need to
do something about it and then I gave
myself it's 30 days speaking challenge
where I will basically forcing myself
like force it recording myself for five
minutes
unprepared without even knowing what I
would talk about and upload it to
YouTube and that's how my you know
online not I for sure my youtube channel
got kick-started that way and I learned
to become way more comfortable in front
of the camera without the frame without
being prepared in that in that sense and
so it was beneficial and and these three
days ago or five days ago I said why not
do it again you know like two years have
passed and so on
and Wendy started her own challenge yeah
yeah and it's funny I knew you had done
the speaking challenge but it was only
through you doing it again more recently
that I was like oh I could you
resurrected the idea and I'm like oh I I
should do this too I think this is this
is something that I can do right now
with my time constraints and this yeah I
felt like in terms of my own leverage
points and increase improving my
expressive capacity as well as being
comfortable with the vulnerability of
putting yourself on YouTube I thought
like okay if I can like widen that
bottleneck for me I felt like that yeah
that's leverage points a wide that's
some kind of widening but yeah I did
yeah in my in my mind I do kind of
imagine like oh if the game beat like do
the accept that the game the scene
couldn't like very much actually just
migrated to you like some like mycelium
Network / zoom and YouTube like in my
mind that that seems good but of course
text like text does have a role but it's
yeah I do imagine just some kind of
almost flipping of of habits when it
comes to the habits of writing out your
thoughts versus speaking them I'm kind
of moving more to it like an aural yeah
just thinking about like the kind of
powers of kind of like oral culture yeah
well I'm working the transcription a
world that we've been involved in as of
late it's very stark the difference
between the oral world in the written
world so very different in the structure
of thoughts and engaging people that's
one of the hardest things I find
translating the spoken conversation to
written conversation there's so much
nuance in in the conversation that just
reading it as being like kind of a light
motif of our group right when to switch
to video from the written form
but there is something that is bleeding
over to the written form at least with
us which is when things are not going
well we know we know that we can get
back to this and fix things you know now
we have this shared understanding which
maybe allows us to be a bit more risky
or it would allow us
I am Not sure that we actually exploited
that but I think that that sense that
actually we've been through the emotions
enough time that yeah maybe some tension
arises but then we can go and in a city
Nicole and really like it I like you
know fix the thing in a way faster so
that's from sovereignty right some skill
what is it that in essence community
yeah my my feature request for whatever
Jim Jim Rhett is working on as an online
forum is having a feature where if
people if two people exchange a certain
number of texts communications back and
forth in a forum like if there's like
four or more text messages between two
people in a text conversation you
actually the text communication channel
gets cut off and then you get have to
you're forced going to be to talk to
each other so in terms of the kind of
text flame war stuff it's like you cut
it off it's like okay like whether you
two are really hitting it off in a
positive way or you're fighting like
take it outside outside or the bedroom
you actually need to change mediums you
need to change conversation spaces
YouTube you know you're to clearly have
something to kind communicate to each
other and then it's sort of forcing this
medium where yeah it's a completely
different kind of understanding another
feature could be like that you need to
there is a sovereignty ruler that you
have to kind of set after every written
message you know like I wrote this
message but I don't feel so sovereign or
enter the message end this over to 11:00
I'll make a trippin off soon but I want
to share one final thought thinking a
lot about around like fitness landscape
so like how would it onboarding fictive
okay that's kept us safe and I'm
imagining like most other kinds of going
through to Facebook Facebook group and
then that that would generally mean that
maybe this group should be like looking
at the onboarding on specifically on
Facebook so like what are the questions
that people are answering the three
questions right now maybe we want more
of you or less or are were the units
currently it's like Facebook isn't the
best platform but it might make sense
like build off of that
I don't know I remember messaging
touring about this before let's fill the
onboarding process on the Facebook I'm
not sure where that went
yeah that's just some thought or at
least like game B wiki canopy guide can
be a link that people can see very early
on if you want to but it does seem like
if you are going to a Facebook group
they're the for all funneling into there
then something attached to these yeah
that's something I I'd be happy to ask
the admin group so yeah if there's
something that we can do with the
questions that might be a little bit
more helpful even I know they have a
couple of units that you have to go
through in the group like lessons maybe
there's something that we can do in that
space that that will help people who
come in just get some orientation I
think I think we have I think we have
excellent help figure out some sort of
principle which is like Texas great
trying to get video calls and maybe
that could be one of the rules as well
or added as a principle because I've
seen that you talked about as well yeah
yeah also maybe pointing out something
about the collaborations like if you see
a collaboration happening and you're
interested in it join the group calls
see what it's about you know participate
it's a participatory thing I feel I
don't know if that's so obvious to to
other people I see that this call is
being recorded Nick is this we are still
here is this something that we could
just post on YouTube publicly and then
just link to from the Facebook group is
there a YouTube channel that we are used
I mean some of these videos have
recorded in the game the coffeehouse
there is the coffeehouse YouTube channel
like that Jordan was opposed to that
forum is that in the game the host died
yeah like what access to the YouTube
channel all I know of is that game be
coffeehouse was that was put about
Christian and it was like when there
were three or four hundred people it was
kind of a post that came up and it was a
hot thing for a while but as of late it
hasn't even really been mentioned too
much so new people coming in might not
even know about it
yeah no no yeah it's a matter yeah
because I don't think there's you know
in terms of people hosting anybody can
host something in it but I don't know
the game be coffee ice did itself kind
of catch on is a little bit of a mean
but the idea that anybody could host
anything and at any time did not quite
catch honor and yeah there is a short
yeah there's not it takes a certain
temperament to host something although I
know one thing that I can discover
didn't I discovered in Chris
discovered but often anybody who owns
something it actually sticks their neck
out and hosts something there's normally
like like a strong response right yeah
oh there's like I've been here Phil I
have a game B it's not comprehensive but
I have created a game B youtubing
playlist where whenever I noticed people
who are you know tuned into the game B
discourse and they post talking about
whatever I'll just put it in my
youtubing this so that indirect so that
indirectly points to a number of
people's channels and it does kind of
reveal I mean actually maybe I could try
to make it more complete but it does
kind of reveal who in the game B space
is comfortable it feels most comfortable
with putting themselves on on YouTube
for starters yeah I think the game B
wiki I think this is a good place to
start to weave that together no no I'm
just I think we this this conversation
is interesting I think we get into
something here that is kind of like Oh
solving game being some sort of way
which one figure out how to collaborate
though that interior that hopefully
allows us to grow or something like that
so yeah interesting
oh and the wiki is slowly game are you
with the idea of uploading this - oh
yeah I am also yeah yeah I'm good um I
do have to hop off though so it was a
pleasure speaking with you guys I'm
really excited to see where this is
going to go thank you for joining