welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where equal hear and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
jenkins i have excited nervousness right
now and i am drinking Mexican beer it's
a true story I only drink Mexican beer
at the dark stolen so welcome to the
stoah I am Peter Lindbergh the Stewart
of the store and it still has a place
for us to cohere and dialogue about what
matters most that the knife's edge and
today we have the most dangerous man on
the internet some say Pat Ryan and Pat
hasn't been having if this is your first
time here at the the stoah or the dark
stoah which is we're calling about Ryan
series Pat has been having an ongoing
kind of exploration of his thought and
you know we're just basically
encouraging him to talk about whatever
the he wants to talk about with an
active trust that he doesn't not get the
stoah cancelled or suicided so far so
good
so how day is gonna work is Pat's gonna
share his thoughts and after that we're
gonna have a Q&A if you have any
questions for Pat right in the chat box
I will unmute you and then you ask Pat
your question if you want me to ask your
question on your behalf just indicate
that in chat box this will go on YouTube
just FYI
so that being said I will unmute Pat and
give you co-host access so the floor is
yours my friend excellent thank you
again for the platform I do appreciate
it I've been D platform more times than
I've been platform so I mean I'm
enjoying the what is most likely limited
time I have here so thank you all for
coming back we are approaching the end
of what I would call a season of the
topics that we've been kind of swirling
around everything is actually connected
when you put all these chains together
and these next three episodes are
definitely going to cohere and bring it
all together kind of like IKEA furniture
when you get to like the last couple
steps and it all locks into place so
last week we talked about blackmail
inflation which was the exploration of
what it means to take zero trust
networks that rely on mutual blackmail
and then destroy the underlying
blackmail material that keeps those
trust networks together and the way to
destroy them is to use deep fakes to
explode the volume of it and thus
inflate it the same way you would
inflate gold by printing too much
certificates of deposit against it that
opened up what we would call the
Tartarus scenario where all of these
mutually blackmail but powerful people
are suddenly decoupled from one another
that can spell certain disaster so I've
been doing doom porn for the past two
episodes now it's time to look at some
of the solutions that are possible and
at least trending towards these
directions so the first one is I'm going
to take some parlance from Jordan Green
Green Hall I'm not sure if he came up
with game a game B but he's certainly
heavy in that community so this
particular episode is going to look into
what's called game days most likely
outcome in the Tartar scenario and what
we're and that's going to be called
robotic nationalism so with that said
let's get this funny show started I
think and also I believe I fixed my
audio so I should have a much better
quality audio this time around I'm
really excited about that
okay sure I shared just the screen let
me confirm mistake on my part and I
apologize see that's right yes that's
correct okay we're back okay robotic
nationalism game a it kind of looks like
this but it really doesn't I'm just you
know just grabbing some stuff for
visualization purposes don't forget that
wonderful little VPN that might be
relevant later on than the slide so
robotic nationalism is going to explore
what we all know as the
military-industrial complex which is a
pile of scary words and that's big which
is usually a pile of scary words and
everyone has their own personal opinion
of what it is but we're not going to
look into personal opinions we're going
to look into the key functions of why it
keeps happening the core behind all of
it the problems that's actually solving
because it is solving a specific problem
it's not all greed and how it's likely
to extend in a world of cheap robotics
and AI so to get started I always like
to start with the fundamentals as you
know so we're gonna start with war well
first we're gonna start with them to
Pharaoh scenario so it is a recap of the
end of the previous episode where we
have our run-of-the-mill unaccountable
psychopathic billionaire living in his
ownself curating Murrell universe it
sounds like a title for my Chemical
Romance song but he's are all the toys
and tools that he has available to
basically do it every once and use force
of will to justify whatever it is he's
doing so in this episode we're going to
focus on the robot army because we know
how the nukes go and smart dust just as
chemtrails I don't want to go there yet
crisper we've already done robot army is
up next so oh yeah this VPN it's like
really powerful so okay we're gonna go
into the history of war which is
everyone's not favourite topic and again
everyone has a billion opinions about it
so I'm gonna stick timelines and objects
and concepts and I'm gonna use this
wonderful little Zoomer meme that's been
going around the internet that comes
with the Federal Reserve printing too
much money so I'm just gonna steal that
so we're going to start with the coach
versus the geek soos I don't know how to
pronounce that which means I read for a
living the chariot was a devastating
weapon when it got introduced you it's
it's it seems like such a simple concept
you like its wheels and a you know a
poor cart and two horses just strapped
to it
you're up against people on foot you can
just run doughnuts around them all day
and just arrow arrow arrow arrow there's
nothing you could do you're just screwed
and these armies were not full of like
extreme IQ trained professional soldiers
these were like farmers who had never
seen these type of things before so
especially during the cushioned so
spores these were heavily deployed and
the backbone of a lot of Egyptian
military prowess for thousands of years
most of the eastern Mediterranean their
military cores were surrounded by
supporting their chariot forces for a
very long time this was a devastating
like super asymmetrical advantage over
your regional enemies probably up until
the Bronze Age collapse which then leads
of course when you have all of these
type of Mediterranean powers fighting
one another they obviously have the
resources and the networks and the
wealth to commend these massive armies
so during the Bronze Age collapse you
have all these problems the the proto is
the proto Judd ayah Empire collapses
Egypt doesn't collapse but it gets set
back so far to this day it still hasn't
recovered you have the proto Turkey
empires collapsing and the proto Syrian
empires collapsing and during that
collapsing effort people basically run
more inland and they start setting up
these empires things like not
necessarily Babylon but Darius and
Persia and that type of legacy comes
into the sand seconds who's again last
name I can't pronounce but the Persian
Empire becomes a massive player as a
result of these type of consolidations
and reconfigurations of power this is
massively challenged at the presence of
Alexander the Great he after years of
being trained by Aristotle has this
ambition to one try to see the rest of
the world he actually he wants to see if
there's an ocean on the other side of
the planet like that's actually a
serious motivation for Alexander the
Great he wants to see if like the
Pacific Ocean is real or not
which is ridiculous like I'm going to
hire some of the world's most ridiculous
armies just so I can see an ocean I
guess but these are the stabby squares
of AB Alexander the Great and I believe
when they intercepted arias and took his
gold cart it was the equivalent of three
billion dollars in gold in today's value
so that gold injection which was the
accumulated gold of Babylon and Egypt
and all these other players
Alexander basically said yo I can just
through that in a Europe without that
move you would not have Europe as a
power force today this move alone
changed all of it we would have been a
like we as in white people who are white
people here at least we white people
would have been a backwater for all of
time had Alexander not done this by
basically stealing all of the gold from
antiquity the rest of the world was
forced to deal with Europe as a trade
partner at the very minimum instead of
just an endless source of slaves and you
know he's strange light-skinned to
people so that's again war changing the
world and whether we like it or not of
course that gold injection powers a lot
of the Grecian empires which then in
turn leads to the robustness of of
European economy which of course leads
to Rome being able to form its unique
Republic expanding outward and outward
up until you get to I can never
pronounce this guy's name but that's not
important this is just a fun little
example of Julius Caesar which I always
thought was a really good statue of him
Julius Caesar demonstrating a brilliance
of logistics more so than direct muscle
he's not out there stabbing people be
like I'm the biggest soldier he was able
to command wartime engineering building
bridges on the fly using immediate local
resources and the expertise he dragged
with him to cross streams of water and
move his entire supply chain across it
in this particular fight obvious because
battle alius I can't remember the name
this particular fight he was severely at
a disadvantage and he basically
surrounded this guy's forces and his
city
with two gigantic walls and starved them
out and it worked so this is this is one
of those examples where planning
logistics foresight and insight changed
the nature of war itself it became less
about bravery and heroism and more about
really thinking when many many moves
down the line
the brilliance of this play led of
course to the the formation of Imperial
Rome when he would then cross the
Rubicon and and basically and begin the
ending of the Republican and bring the
Imperial Rome into play which would then
resolve into the bifurcation of Rome
which is Western Europe Western Rome in
eastern room where you have Rome proper
as the capital and then Constantinople
way off and the borderlands of Turkey
which of course leads just did a
wonderful Crusades which is one of those
misunderstood periods of war or history
it's often seen as like oh this is just
religious intolerance and bigotry and
not really more than anything you had a
surplus male population in Europe at the
time I got a dump that hormone somewhere
man you don't want surplus testosterone
in your fields yet the Vikings were
maybe 300 years before this stuff
started you got to put him somewhere but
more importantly they wanted to protect
Constantinople the the Pope at the time
he saw a chance to unify Rome after the
bifurcation and he said okay well let's
bring some Western European forces in to
the protection of Constantinople but
we're not just gonna post soldiers at
the gates we're gonna set a buffer
States beyond Constantinople so all the
way down to Jerusalem and and every
country in between and that those buffer
states are going to absorb and slow down
attacks against Constantinople because
at this time the the they weren't
Ottomans per se but the proto Ottomans
they were significant fighting for us
it's very powerful they were able to
command the the wealth of the Silk Road
to their advantage considerably they
were not they were not just a bunch of
like back waters these were brilliant
intelligent logistics people themselves
and for hundred years
I think the Crusades kicked off and
Constantinople was inevitably sacked by
these forces by
by like a dynasty who was just obsessed
with sacking Constantinople like he had
visions of it like like divine
premonitions of sacking Constantinople
oh it's Microsoft from a med he has
opinions he looks like he referred to my
city as Constantinople this is the guy
who eventually took it and the way he
took it was with cannons big cannons
like big cannons fifteen hundred's
bronze that would shoot a 100-pound rock
one mile that type of cannery I mean
these things are like the cannoneers
were death after the first round so you
just had a bunch of deaf people just
shooting this stuff and it to really
just drive home but had this guy
seriousness and taking Constantinople
not only was he just hammering the walls
which were like legendary walls he with
these cannons there was also like this
like 700 meter chain in the harbor and
boats could not pass through it so you
couldn't send a naval force to actually
attack Constantinople so what this guy
did is he took his entire Navy and he
just put it on log rollers and moved it
around the land to the opposite side of
the chain that's that's like it's like
dedication right this guy did it he took
continent Constantinople turned in
Istanbul and by controlling that he
basically controlled all of the Silk
Road demand of Europe into Europe so it
was like this hotbed node like this
really powerful trade hub and so he
owned European demand so you couldn't
get silk pepper nothing you couldn't get
anything unless you paid this guy this
of course leads to the age of sale where
the Europeans say that not paying
that guy it's actually better for me to
sail around Africa than pay that guy and
so you had this huge incentive to start
exploring these ships that can do all of
this trade and this was again the
brilliance of Mehmed to ship his ships
through that little piece of land
well the European said we'll ship our
ships all across the planet instead
thank you very much we'll set up a
secondary plan for all of our spice
trade instead
this kind of pivots outside of the very
interesting intricacies of this
cat-and-mouse access to the Silk Road
stuff the advent of the musket is kind
of self it's obvious I think in the 13
hundreds the pope band of the crossbow
because it was able to allow peasants to
completely dismantle his heavy Calvary
and heavy Calvary is super expensive you
had the arm of the person trained the
person he had the arm of a horse I don't
know if you ever armored a horse before
but that's pretty expensive stuff and
one crossbow just just go right through
your armor and that was it so I mean it
was like the ak-47 of its time and Pope
banned it forever but they tried to ban
muskets and go so well
these were getting easier produced
mostly because of the sacking of
Constantinople Turkish mastery of
gunpowder and cannon Rhee was starting
to be embraced by the rest of Europe
afterwards they got their asses handed
to him and they started to adapt pretty
quick so the musketry not really exactly
accurate just a ball in a smoothbore so
it's just like you know the ball is
going down the bore and then maybe it
goes it's like it's like Schrodinger's
musket where does it go so that the the
to counter that you just line up like
1020 people and you hope for the best
you know you have a you have 20 chances
to probably hit your targets which is
why we look at square formations and
think that's insane
but that's that's how yeah that's how
you accounted for the inaccuracy of
these initial weapons these students are
just tearing through armor so we're
probably in around the mid 1500s at this
point just chewing through armor and so
again really expensive investment it's a
sign of culture it's a sign of royalty
heredity and these things were just you
know angry proto Republicans and I don't
mean that in the American sense I mean
that in the European sense the
Republican revolutions of the 1600s
these guys were just happy to overthrow
a royalty left right and center using
their newfound toy and speaking of
newfound toys you start using guns long
enough to get more accurate with it and
you get more destructive with it so
these are these rounds these artillery
stuff man
think this was able of targeting I think
5,000 meters off with a five foot range
of error in the hands of a skilled
cannoneer these things were devastating
these are the 12 pound the 12 pound
Armstrong guns these were they you know
the ability of Europe to marshal greater
and greater forces actually let me check
my notes so I should mention there's one
one other factor that makes this so
devastating right so the guy named
Napoleon he was a cannoneer when he
first got started he was actually doing
the mathematics and calculating the
logistics to run cannons you'll see he
actually contributes a small amount to
mathematics surprisingly because of his
experience as a cannoneer and he came
from a warrior culture the warrior
culture of France was feared I mean now
we just call him cheese-eating surrender
monkeys but like like France back then
was whoa their their military was was
world like top notch and that happened
because of the French Revolution and
1700 they executed their King and all
the royalty in Europe said I want
nothing to do with this we need to stop
these anti-monarchists from killing us
and so the entirety of Europe basically
all the royalty who were mostly at each
other's throats summoned a grand army to
then just go stop out this this this
revolutionary France problem that they
had but the French their response was
called level Mouse which I don't know if
I'm pronouncing because I cannot
pronounce French for the life of me
which means to conscription go French
male as a soldier every single one that
means if you're a city you're a deli
person you're a farmer you've never held
a gun before it does not matter you are
now a soldier they were so successful in
repelling the monarchists that they were
able to extend beyond their borders and
set up revolutionary enclaves all
throughout Rome all throughout Europe as
well monarchists were not happy about
this development it's severely backfired
but then again they didn't even envision
that it was possible to take every
single male in your country and
turn them into a soldier this was not
possible in most of history because if
you turned your farmers in the soldiers
who the hell was going to feed you you
were dead in a couple months so you
needed that dedicated farmer base but
the French because they gutted their
aristocracy they were already screwed
they had to redo their entire order
anyway so they said screw it let's just
make everybody a soldier and whoever
survives great that's less criminals
later on it's a really cold calculation
but it was devastating it resulted in
these type of cannoneer developments as
a result surprisingly so now the French
who were bringing all of their soldiers
into the field now every other
monarchist had to do the same and every
other Republic had to do the same so now
they're feeling these huge amounts of
people just to stay competitive and here
comes the artillery which is just
chewing through people and you really
start to see this come World War one
where artillery is just I mean crushing
people absolutely eliminating entire
squads of people and they get better and
better with it with it over time so we
starts dealing with these industrial
armies as they're able to raise greater
and greater populations and give them
greater and greater technologies and
very spiffy little helmets that look
like trees we start to see that hey we
need to counter not only can we raise
these armies but we need to counter them
too and artillery is a pretty good bet
right now yeah there's airplanes and all
that stuff but artillery is really there
that's the creme de la creme of just
grinding out meat so we need to make
sure that these artillery gets a little
bit better this was the birth of the
computer you know the computer you and I
are using right now in yak-yak was
designed to calculate artillery round
Precision's not just for individual
shots but also for rolling artillery
when you Moulton you fire multiple
artillery pieces over a great distance
at specific time intervals under
different winds under different
pressures those under different grains
and they would land in coordination to
maximize the devastation for whatever
was requested according to the spotters
and you could have a team of
mathematicians in the field doing that
but what one was brutal you could not
put brainpower on the frontline they'd
they die of trench foot or they'd get
trench foot they would get in
did they would get rat bites I mean
serious problems you couldn't keep that
brainpower on the front line so you kept
them in the back but then you had to
radio back and forth and mess so all of
this logistics overhead starts to
explore the Rd of computational services
like there are computational engines
like the ENIAC and the the hilarious
irony is that when any AK fire comes
online it doesn't it doesn't calculate a
single thing about artillery when it
comes online the first thing it's used
it calculators is nuclear weaponry which
is what then leads us to our unfortunate
outcome where well now we got nukes so
let's take artillery and instead of
every shell blowing up like a 20 foot
radius let's say every shell blows up a
two mile radius now we got some serious
problems and then throw some planes in
it I can deliver it really quickly then
tip them on a missile and now they can
really drop all over the place
then put them in a submarine and who
knows when they can attack you so this
new problem is hard so how do you make
sure that you don't get nuked well you
you over nuke yourself you you over
produce your nukes so if you're gonna
nuke me why I'm gonna nuke you okay so
mutually assured destruction all right a
little bit of game theory fine but what
if I knock out your first strike
capability or your retaliatory
capability let's say hit your telecoms I
start taking your satellites out I start
hitting your your fiber optics your your
ocean fiber alright that's a problem but
what if my networks self-heal what if my
telecoms can still route to each other
even if you take out a core hub
well congratulations we just invented
packet switching which is the core of
the Internet the internet works because
of packet switching tcp/ip packet
switching and this was developed to
ensure first-strike capability in a
nuclear bombardment scenario so that
game theory of mad could be sustained so
the internet exists because of artillery
that's a weird thing to say but there is
a direct line of reasoning that actually
supports that argument and then of
course we get them now now we're on the
internet now we have memes fighting each
other and it's just so French fur entral
to be funny we're all quite familiar
with me more I probably don't spend too
much time on it basically means of the
classic
of cyber semiotics you know if you have
a narrative and it's really tightly
manicured we can kick that
sideways no problem so these these
things are these things are evil so
that's basically the history of war from
chariots to find little Zoomer memes so
let's look at the let's start looking at
the numbers and participation of modern
warfare in the in the current space this
is a that's from World Bank yeah from
World Bank we're starting to see this
human participation in militaries across
the world decline in relation to their
population size we're not talking like
severe declines and the absolute number
of soldiers that exist that's still
pretty damn high but in terms of the
total share of the population it's much
lower it's decreasing considerably
although there was a spike in Africa
if you ever curious to look in that one
you want to look at I think Liberia yeah
that spike probably comes from Liberia
and Zimbabwe and all the Hotel Rwanda
type stuff but you know Cold War is on
its way out man we don't have to do this
stuff now we can play finance games now
we can blackmail each other woohoo you
know it's no you don't need soldiers all
over the place so it's look at these
numbers here's a superpowers throughout
time each one of the you know thousands
of soldiers so this is 450,000 and
there's a million 1.2 you'll see this is
broken into West versus East you'll see
at the very beginning the East has a
significant advantage so this is a very
strong indicator of organization of
logistical talent of having a stable
government and a heavy focus on stable
government cuz fielding these types of
numbers that's not easy and you know I
admittedly when you're dealing with the
East they didn't have the the military
brilliance that you see coming from the
Middle East and Europe and early parts
of North Africa they are able to feel
very large numbers but not with a degree
of great skill in terms of like you know
sending signal
here and then delaying your attack and
then moving it here and there operating
at a much larger pace in the East
they're not dealing down with like these
individual tactics although most the
fighting does boil down there because
once the fight starts it's all
individual tactics and and swordplay and
that type of thing
the East is actually aligning their
armies and their strategy is much more
towards dynastic assumptions so they
would raise these large armies and just
having the larger army was enough to not
have to deploy it so they're thinking
these things is like more and more
bodyguards so it's it's it's interesting
how the East looks at military versus
how the West does it and most of the
West in the early part I mean you get
the Romans they have a good run here but
but again I mean the most of this is the
Middle East and and their early
advantage with Mesopotamia France comes
along and does something cute at 13
hundreds but you know for the most part
this Middle East they get bit at least
gets a really good run for this whole
span of time and again just highlighting
that type of stuff so now we're looking
at things changing and they change for
the reasons that we've already gone over
we're seeing the French and the Germans
a lot of the Germans and the Russians
and the United States eventually goods
mostly because of Civil War of course
leave it to the United States to raise
the most amount of soldiers against its
own people but that's a different story
you see the French does the same thing
but their revolution the Russians but
they're in the middle of war with
Germany and World War one at this time
so not really the case but the Germans
and the Russians yeah yeah those guys
were just brutal they were just
massacring each other nuts and you see
it decline even though the absolute
numbers are pretty high you see this
like petering off in the east they're
slowly being isolated because of
colonialism they're slowly losing their
their advantages here and their
conquering the land masses of your--of
of Eurasia is no longer a good enough
strategy the West is just surpassed in
terms of naval force and because a
neighbor for us they have access to the
entire world the East did not have this
and you see it in their military numbers
it's just not holding hard admittedly
the Japanese had a pretty good run
against the Russians but that's
- blip that's a when you look at the
overall trend you see the East is losing
the East is long-term losing here I mean
the numbers are just net so now this is
a breakdown of World War two which is a
high I mean look at these numbers nine
million soldiers nine million are you
serious
12 million we sustained we put 12
million soldier holy jesus the German
Reich had 12 million I mean these are
huge huge numbers so this is what you
would call peak industrial warfare where
you're able to deploy you're able to use
total warfare you're able to use
railroads and artillery and carrier
pigeons and every single creative
instinct of the human talent is just
dumped into slaughtering each other in
this in this like ten year period and
you see it in these numbers are just
extreme the numbers don't get this high
again this is like this is like never
again type numbers and a lot of our
foreign policy is has been you know
designed to prevent this type of
craziness so let me get to the West and
this is where things start to get even
is where things got interesting for a
long time in history though the East is
able to field numbers that the West can
field in terms of absolute interesting
the this is a I mean you look 50s and on
that's modernization that's
globalization so now the East is able to
channel they're able to not only have
access to the the trade route that the
Europeans had formed in the colonial and
sale period they're able to compete
commercially they're able to consolidate
their means of production they're able
to have access to capital in ways that
were previously not accessible and you
see it in their military growth it's
there right so now we have almost an
even fight yeah how does that resolve I
mean we're starting to see it right now
these numbers stop at 2014 but Trump's
very anti China and with these numbers
most what happens right let's see what
happens when we start changing a little
bit the technological premises mean
that's some crazy numbers right there so
as we as we've noticed before
we know that the hard participation of
people versus population of military is
going down and correspondingly the
military expenditure as a percentage of
GDP is also going down now that sounds
crazy you might think they're spending
more and more now than ever before yes
but as a percentage of GDP it's not
technically true we're actually spending
less and that's mostly because of
personnel costs withdrawing coming down
we need less people to kill more people
so there you go there's also another
trick that's going on here which I'll
get into later it's called hiding the
numbers how do you categorize military
expenditure well there's a way to
actually categorize military expenditure
that isn't military expenditure and
again the other factor you need to look
into did the military spending go down
or did the GDP go up that matters
because you get this result in either
way I don't need to cut spending to drop
the percentage I just need to raise GDP
and maybe my spending is the same the
whole time comparatively speaking it's
just my GDP jumped up five times but my
military expenditure verse it probably
haft so that's a weird ratio right
whereas where's the rest of the
remaining that where are those numbers
hidden right are they hidden at all so
just keep these two things in mind
someone tries to tell you that we're
becoming a more peaceful world I think
Steven Pinker has that argument a lot
these numbers are obviously clever ways
to hide the accounting so how do you
hide those numbers because I alluded to
it earlier it's a thing called dual use
so dual use is a way to say we want this
weapon but instead of paying the R&D for
it we're going to allow civilians to put
their own capital into the development
of the R&D it's that way it's not a
military expenditure it's just the
economy look at that
so say chemical manufacturing for
example take Dow and and DuPont and all
those type of things
you know that's they can put their
private capital into it and it can
develop all these huge things and it
does develop stuff like you know radium
wristwatches that give you cancer or all
types of other chemicals you need well
it turns out you get a chemical
artillery out of that too well look at
that that's kind of strange it's like
it's dual use I'm getting the civilian
aspect of it and I'm able to hide the
numbers off
to expenditure books and entreat it as
capital mature I'm sorry tit as um
civilian ech treated as the economy and
then I take like a little bit off the
top and I get my chemical artillery neat
that's a neat trick can I do it again of
course you could do it again nuclear
power
well let's generate no we have two
hundred some-odd nuclear power plants in
America and turns out you can make a lot
of weapons with that so all the funding
here is civilian a mix of private ins
mix of private and public yes admittedly
but that's all to offset the production
of these type of things so again we're
hiding the numbers and dual-use reinter
evey achill super spacex stuff we gotta
bring her aston that's bad our
astronauts back man we're space stuff
right whoo Elon Musk just kidding it's a
multi re-entry vehicle weapon that drops
eight nuclear weapons on saves once it
reaches peak orbit so this is the same
research to get the same weapon and it
never qualifies as military expenditure
or more accurately the military
expenditure for this is reduced because
you have it's reallocated in these
categories instead PlayStation 2 was
actually classified as a dual use item
very strange so it's the same damn thing
this was uh this was a clever piece of
legislation done I think it was
Microsoft was pissed about this and they
found a way to slap PlayStation 2 with
the dual use as part of a so it can be
put under different import-export rules
so that they can get an advantage on
Xbox there is it was total mess leave it
to Bill Gates surveillance capitalism
which is what we all know we're doing
I'm talking to no camera right now right
what is Silicon Valley the developer of
transistors and developer of AI and all
that software stuff well it's capitalism
sure but well it's tyranny so that's a
dual-use thing any type of surveillance
equipment that's developed for us and we
you know we tell ourselves this is cool
and we have a dog walker app well we
also have apps that turn dogs into bombs
so it's it's just you know the same
thing it's though use this all I think
I'm driving the point home here so let's
talk about robotic labor force build
robots to build
cool right and got that walking dog Jeff
Bezos has that that's cute
creepy but cute Boston Dynamics has this
robot that's supposedly testing the
clothes of of soldiers right but it's a
it's a robotic labor force but the dual
use is that it's a military force as
well so dual use is a way to hide the
expenditures and once you start doing
this game it becomes so useful that it
turns out you're powering your entire
economy from this thing from this
mechanism alone you are actually
powering your entire you're driving the
entire capital flows into your economy
especially here I mean the dot-com I
mean imagine if Google and Facebook and
all the blue chips in Silicon Valley hit
like $20 a share we'd be in the Stone
Age
so as these things expand they actually
take over the economy because of this
trick here which then leads to the
insane asylum so the other dual-use
thing that I didn't get into is steal
steal is a magical piece of metal it's
flexible it's hard it's powerful it's a
four it's a real-estate multiplier as
you build like skyscrapers you turn one
piece of land into like 30 pieces of
land and you get multiples on your
investment railroad can move stuff from
point A to point B pretty quick so now
you can actually maximize the economy
the economic performance of much smaller
nodes in your civilian network so we're
gonna build steel everywhere it's
magical just steel at it what do you
want for Christmas kid I here's some
steel there's gonna throw steel
everywhere and then it's so powerful
that we've already saturated all the
possibilities in our own economy we've
built every Bridge every skyscraper
every railroad that could be even close
to economically efficient now we got to
spread it everywhere else we got a ship
at the Germany we got to get the steel
to Britain we got to get the steel to
India the steel the chine we got to
steal the whole place right no pun
intended so we're going to put the steel
everywhere which is great but because we
mass produce so much steel at now just
the precious drops we have done nothing
but produced steel to the point that
it's like 1 cents a pound because we
made it so globally available
well now we got an issue because steel
production is actually pretty capital
intense even if you spread it all over
the world and people need their money
back we got investors baby
so how you gonna get that money back are
you gonna recover that that massive
heavy expenditure into your steel
productions AHA I know what to do
I can make weapons out of steel to blow
up all the other steel things that I've
built so I can increase the demand for
steel later on this is called the insane
asylum and we've been here since 1940
so this dual use we're building this is
how dual use of all's when it gets real
circular when it turns into an aura
Boris we get our dual use so cool we got
this thing we got this thing thing you
know we get here Steel's at its cheapest
ah now we can start building weapons out
of it we can the RN be out of it we can
really experiment with it right so this
is how you hide dual use and how you
build these aura Boris's this is also
known as the military-industrial complex
but this is more of the control paradigm
what I was talking about in the previous
slide is the the economic insanity the
economic insane circle when you start
taking tool used to its most efficient
now in this case everybody knows in
military-industrial complex let's call
congressional consumer corporate
surveillance complex and probably a
bunch of other describers after that
Congress has tax funding for the
Department of Defense which in issues
contracts to defense contractors who
issue campaign contributions back to
Congress and round around we go right so
this is a driver for the this basically
develops those dual use circles of
insanity that I was talking about
previously this is also known as
military Keynesianism
for ru economy nerds who want to take a
crack at it so no let's let's keep this
in mind for the next couple slides okay
so this is where Intel's Moore and
Mikkel Foucault become the economy I'm
gonna specifically talk in terms of
surveillance capitalism this is the GDP
per capita and this is median household
income and this is often described as a
wealth gap but that
not true it feels like a wealth gap but
the reason it even formed is because we
the Fed has a dual mandate Federal
Reserve has a dual mandate to keep price
can keep prices low and to keep the
demand for the dollar high so what this
is actually doing is this is proof that
the Fed is doing its job this is proof
that the promise to keep cost of living
price controls are in place is working
because if you didn't have this line if
this if median household income
increased as GDP per capita increased
then what would happen is the price of
everything would be crazy high you bet
you'd be paying big normos amounts of
money for all kinds of stuff so
therefore you be getting less consumer
driven stuff and I mean I know I'm using
1930s models here so if anyone's having
an aneurysm and chat I apologize but
this is this is this is proof that the
cost-of-living promise is being
respected be good and you can just go to
Walmart and see that I mean how often do
it does Walmart prices change no change
very much you can still go to Walmart
and buy almost anything there to a
degree put it on layaway or a credit
card for more pricey items but the
reason
Walmart's even accessible to most human
beings and in the country is because of
the price the cost of living a price
control promise that's implied and what
the Federal Reserve mandate is and this
gap is proof that it's working so it
looks like a wealth gap but it's
actually policy so how do you get that
how you keep that gap increasing or how
do you keep that precaution in check
well you gotta use technology to produce
more goods at cheaper rates and if your
country has full of unions or its full
of people who are expensive and
professionals then just ship that
somewhere else buddy we're going to
we're going to China we're going to
Thailand Vietnam India man and you
notice as we go to these countries its
1960 and modernization happens and look
at that the exports as percentage of
their GDP starts to skyrocket meanwhile
GDP per capita goes up because financial
services take over the economy because
they're managing this growth and
everybody else's
the cost of living is held its
maintained because we are basically
deferring the met the state production
costs not wages I'm sorry that's
incorrect
the production costs are being held in
line in relation to this so that we can
get this this in turn leads to Moore's
law because we have outsourced a lot of
the cop we've outsourced a lot of this
tinier the the more I'm sorry we've
outsourced the less complicated stuff to
other nations that are on the rise in
terms of development we're able to then
take some of these people from here
specifically the people who are managing
this line and get them and retrain them
to start looking into information
manufacturing so that's like that's like
Silicon Valley that's like chip
production that's semiconductors all
those types of things so we're able
because of this system we were able to
start really developing Moore's law as a
byproduct of this because this requires
more and more research into crazy crazy
stuff in order to even get to this point
although we're starting to hit serious
problems probably around this point and
that's because just quantum physics is a
total pain in the ass so so these two
things have a significant impact on the
development of this so if any one of
these go out of whack you can start
seeing this number to go down as well
that should be and that should be a
pretty that's pretty a pretty solid
indicator according to what I'm
proposing here which of course leads to
economic because we have more
information processes more hear me out
real quick
we got Moore's Law and it's creating
more and more transistors and more and
more information processing and so we're
basically quantizing human behavior
that's basically what the 1990s onward
has been all growth has been about
quantizing human behavior for financial
services risk management for marketing
reasons for expansion of capital and
allocations of capital all of this has
been driven primarily by the fidelity
and the resolution that this has been
increasing over time and over time and
why is that happening one but
to manage the risk which means there's
social friction caused by the price
controls that's not clear that's not
obvious so it turns out that when you
keep people poor here and everyone else
getting rich that tends to cause social
friction weird a weird relationship
right even though this system can be
explained as this is actually not a bad
deal for most people it certainly
doesn't feel like that sometimes
especially when you can't pay your
medical bills or whatever happens but
this was the promise of the Fed this is
what they said they would do so and then
there's a more insidious part about
price controls because we're keeping not
necessarily the the production side here
we've already outsourced most of the
hard production here but this is
consumption for us right so this is the
cost of living so this is consuming
there's also a an insidious friction
that is not internal it's actually
external meaning I have either a cheap
labor pool or a cheap consumer pool and
now other nations want to take it for
themselves
so think when when America went into
Japan and we said hey Commodore Perry's
here and you're gonna open your market
so we're gonna shoot all of you well
there you go that's an example of you
know taking someone else's labor pool
and taking someone else's markets so as
you get better control of your human
behavior you start attracting the
sociopaths and so you think you need
more of this and you need more of this
to keep these guys away but by making
more of this these guys get better so
this system this doesn't hold
so this is where game a has some serious
problems off the cliff it goes you'd
think it goes off the cliff I wouldn't
count I wouldn't it can tap out but it's
not going to and so I'll explain why it
doesn't have to and that's primarily
because of opportunism so let's look at
jiu-jitsu in the morn for Colt dojo it's
gonna focus on on this little tidbit I'm
just gonna roll it out and you gonna you
want to piece it together I promise
so 911 oh god what the right so
bang you know planes hit building with
the ship I know it's a hell of a segue I
apologize
Brussels in the EU is 911 this is
terrible right everybody's in solidarity
it's a stupid what the hell you know
let's go after these guys Afghanistan
what the everyone's kind of in
agreement here right it's like it's also
yellow cake by the way I don't know if
you remember that you might I don't know
if y'all are old enough but this is
yellow cake thing and that was supposed
to justify going into here Brussels is
like damn oil dark
damn it you're supposed to say that it's
screw up our petrol your own damn it so
now everyone has to go into Iraq and so
it's a multi coalition force for the
most but you notice it's like I've
surgically removed Saudi Arabia from
this whole thing the rest of the region
is completely trashed by the way because
we go into Iraq and so it's just
sectarian strife boom Shiites and Sunnis
just completely decimating one another
mostly because of the D radicalization
technology we've been using but that's
another conversation for another time of
course not Saudi Arabia though they're
okay in fact they're quite happy with
this arrangement because they're able to
make their competition for oil
production murder each other they don't
have an army that's worth a damn but
they have our army because they have our
oil so put two and two together right so
what does this do well this is this is
like 30 years war but for this region of
the world
it's just neighbors murdering neighbors
they don't tell you that in the media
but that's what's going on and that's
what's driving a lot of the immigration
to Europe is because of that mess
everyone anyone who's migraine year sans
the obvious radicals who were trained
under you know spooky conditions but
people who are moving here and aren't
radicalized their neighbors they realize
their neighbors aren't seeing their
opportunities are gone they basically
have to sell their labor to where it's
stable to where this kind of crap isn't
happening so of course you're gonna go
to Europe it's it's like a bus ride or a
boat ride and you get the Europe right
look German Karen there she is she's the
queen of all that's morale now she's
gonna take them all in look at her go
right she's the she's the real she's the
real MVP right just kidding Germany gets
cheap labor in 15 years
that's the real play so this is an
example of taking these moments of
instability as game a screws up and
turning those into gold for game a so I
could do this all day it has been doing
this this is what it does this is the
game
it's jiu-jitsu in this dojo of insanity
it's how do you roll at the moment how
do you how do you get the maximum
opportunity out of this stuff so it's
always seeking for that type of stuff
and it has no problems just placing
entire populations that's just the mo
that's just what they do right it's been
that way forever
so this is why game a can stay on life
support you could do this forever and
has done this forever I wouldn't say
they just kind of wake up and suddenly
have a crisis of conscience I would not
assume that's the case so let's instead
look at what game a can do if they were
smart and that involves robotic
nationalism so what is robotic
nationalism well it's the dual use
concept that we've described in the
previous slides where we intentionally
create robotic soldiers so that the
robotic soldiers go to war with each
other so that every time a robotic
soldier gets shot down it creates 50 to
70 jobs so the robots aren't actually
shooting people
that's terminator James Cameron crap I'm
talking to nations going to war with
each other throwing only robots at each
other so that they can guarantee 100%
employment for their Nations not
far-fetched
we've done this before I've walked you
through us doing this we did this with
Steel except you know we killed people
to do it mostly the uneducated and
criminals and all those type of things
but you celebrate them as heroes later
on that type of thing
that's what I'm proposing is that you
don't have to kill anybody nobody has to
die so let's look at where those
hotspots kick off
let's see what's interesting
conscription and corruption are
difficult things to merge together
there's different types of corruption
you can have corruption at the federal
level where you don't trust your federal
leaders like say most people don't trust
Trump or you can have corruption at the
local level where you don't trust your
local police department it's different
perceptions depending upon where you go
and it can be a mix of both totally
possible so I'm just going to use I
forget where I got this chart from
doesn't matter we're just gonna use a
corruption index because they're all
just made up anyway I'm gonna see if we
can find countries that are drafting who
are doing mostly mail drafts the
exception of these guys and and it this
also doesn't show the difference between
compulsory drafting and volunteers like
turkey is compulsory and I think Russia
is volunteer I forget but everyone signs
it for like selective service in some
capacity it can be caught upon later on
but these are America has that but I'm
talking about like military draft it's
always active it's part of the culture
so now let's identify places where the
draft is going on and corruption is
really high the lower the number the
higher it is right so looking at the Old
Kingdom of course we're looking at
Turkey looking at Russia they were
looking at Mexico right so what we have
here is a case where if the leaders of
that country say hey we need to draft
you because of a war there's a good
chance that people are gonna be like
 right off I'm not going to do that
because you're corrupt and that's that
right so now your military draft is less
of a nationalized galvanizing moment and
it's more of like well we'll pick who we
can get right so this means that these
nations in particular are really
susceptible
- requesting robotic soldiers because
they can't draft enough people because
they're corrupt and they're not gonna
fix their corruption there's too much
money so these these are hot spots to
bring robots in because they're just
greedy and they and their people know
they're greedy and that people want
nothing to do with that game so we're
gonna bring the robots in now it's also
true in the inverse it's not just
corruption that's a driver for a robotic
warfare demand it's also success that
sounds weird but let me give you an
example these are the number of
deferments between 1948 and 2005 I won't
tell you the country yet but you might
notice that deferments are when people
are drafted but they say yeah I want to
go I want to go to college or I want to
go start a business or do something
right so I want to do something other
than and I want to participate in the
civilian economy instead of being
drafted so these deferments are just
going way up over time and what's
causing that I have unaccountable power
influencers you see these people getting
money I want money to I want to play
that game I want to make the money game
so why am i serving I make some money
you have entitled civil servants who are
ok with these deferments usually they're
like you should not be deferring go
serve your country but they're making
money - so it right and then maybe
the citizenry is just so they don't even
care they have no national identity
there's like it right oh what
country am I talking about here I'm
talking about Israel those are the
numbers for Israel that is a country
that has been at war since its founding
all of its neighbors want to kill it and
what's happening there success which is
a very successful country BYE MOM
modern metrics they don't want to fight
anymore
these citizens do not want to
participate in the military draft so
their own success is actually gutting
their own military surprisingly which
means you're gonna need robots to fill
the gaps all the neighbors want to kill
them probably vice versa you don't need
some robots for that so either high P
heavy corruption or heavy success we'll
both Drive robotic warfare in either
case because the demand to fill you know
person online with gun has to get
fulfilled
so then let's talk about how to take
this concept and scale it across the
entire planet not just the hot spots not
just the exceptions but make it
everywhere at the same time here's our
favorite fat cat we all like to make fun
of because we're poor and reliable Pei
Pei Royal citizens we need to crush to
rally the enemy not you're a reptilian
putable off right so they're not
doing that stuff they're not feeling it
so uh we already know the enlistment is
gonna be low so they got to hire
mercenaries they're gonna reach for
mercenaries first we're gonna go to Z
Blackwater and triple-canopy in those
kind of people and pay for pew pew comm
and that type of stuff so you could
bring in your dudes and you know shoot
mercenaries they're not loyal
they don't necessarily fight to the last
man but they shoot people so that's good
right
so oh look it's Erik Prince look at him
happy business but this Erik Prince
laughs you never research this guy this
guy's a cutthroat business dude in the
traditional mercenary sense for example
a history of mercenaries yes there's one
case I think it was a German prince who
hired a mercenary firm to sack Rome in
the 1500s and the the mercenary firm was
successful they sacked Rome and then
they said well you've already paid us
for this successful part pay us twice
and we won't burn the entire city down
aah God be careful mercenaries because
he will you in the middle of an
operation so maybe he's looking at you
like you're a weak you know
execute order 66 and overthrow this
twerp you know he's like okay lawless
hilarious so now you got a problem you
can't really go to mercenaries is to go
to because there's this cost and
penalties associated with that let's go
to IMF like give us some defense loans
like I need soldiers because I'm greedy
and these people know I'm greedy and
this is scary so help right you go to
the IMF they're like yeah man we you
know we've hit up everybody we've hit
the Mafia you know that nobody wants to
fund you you're a piece of but I
just got a phone call hear me out I got
something for you
so there's this like
badhak infrastructure fund that's coming
and we just happen to have access to it
and you're entitled to it because you're
an IMF member but if you sold your top
of the waterfall place in that fund we
can get you that money I'm get you that
what does that mean that means this
person says hmm instead of building my
own infrastructure to help my people
these people will do it for me I can
then take the money from selling the
claim to then purchase the military I
need for whatever the hell I need it for
ah interesting
so now I'm giving up my own national
destiny to build up a infrastructure
fund so that I can build my immediate
needs for military stuff and then I'll
spin the whole thing is saying I'm
creating jobs and then you know make
earth great again 28:20 X you know this
guy somehow won in this whole situation
where he was certainly doomed from this
factor alone but here you can you can
play some fun games okay so that's one
country right so now let's let's tip
over to the next tip part of this I call
it the Robo dollar like petrol dollar
but robots cuz it's robot evening robots
everything so here's a country cluster
one country cluster to agree fat dude we
all hate robot infrastructure deal
that's set up and the workers for both
situations right IMF sitting here pretty
looking at Westphalia 3.0 because
remember blackmail inflation destroyed
Westphalia 2.0 say oh god wait you
funded this guy but you gave him robots
now because he has robots now I need
robots because if I don't have robots
then he can invade me because he has a
bigger force so now I need robots ah IMF
help right you cut a deal with this guy
cut a deal with me I need help hmm
interesting
the more I fund this the more I can
spread it what an interesting
correlation I can now get more loan
obligations to me and all I have to do
is forgive debt and convert that into a
Robo investment so all these countries
have stupendous amounts of debts with
IMF if the IMF was willing to forgive
the debt in exchange for
that top-of-the-line top of the
waterfall claim on any type of robotic
infrastructure fund
well they drop that debt in a heartbeat
they drop that debt worldwide and a
heartbeat you're talking to believe
level of dropping debt these countries
absolutely walking to they'd love that
they couldn't get enough of that cuz
they have to because oh no hungry has
robots I'm Serbia now I need robots now
everybody needs robots and just spreads
right now their citizens don't care you
know they're quite happy the fact that
they have jobs oh great more robot
infrastructure 5g you or whatever I'm
building I'm building all my
infrastructure I'm getting jobs in a
mass unemployment scenario great then
they're staring at each other realizing
they're probably locked in his robot
building arms race because now they both
have robotic soldiers they're corrupt as
hell they're not getting peels these
people are not joining the military
anytime soon despite the fact that
they're impoverished because now they
have a vehicle to get jobs and
participate in their economy so they're
certainly not going to join the military
in bulk not like a conscription allows
and now these guys have to build robots
because they rely more and more on the
robotic forces for defense and less and
less than human you know meat shield
participation so now we gotta build the
robots today I got robots in that that
takes work so now that's more jobs and
then you start dropping suggestions
think you know how it'd be a real shame
if these guys want the war they
shouldn't go to war you know war will be
a bad idea I sure hope they don't go to
war cuz cuz war would would destabilize
everything and you just keep saying war
over and over again before you know what
someone starts thinking war that sounds
great right I got a robot war for
whatever reason maybe it's uh maybe this
guy hates this guy or or whichever the
case may be something initially pops off
organically some dumb stuff you don't
have to you know put economic hitman
there but in the back of everyone's mind
they start to realize a conclusion they
start to realize that every robot that
dies in this war is 30 to 70 jobs for
everyone involved and so now instead of
all those jobs again jobs everywhere no
we got our jobs back so this is this is
the conclusion that's reached once this
kicks off and other people
see it and they'll go I want 100%
employment too because all my people are
burning down minutes Minneapolis right
now so here's a way out of that type of
problem and everyone's gonna see this
all it has to do is work once once this
conclusion is even tasted just once
you're gonna see the whole shift you're
gonna see the entire interpretation of
economic shift towards its robotic
military Keynesianism and steer policy
towards it to then keep civilian
participation involved keep debt
restructuring options on the table make
sure that you can defend your homeland
and also I already covered jobs and debt
that's that just those three alone is
enough to really fundamentally alter the
order of how the world organizes itself
especially if America was to say
disengage from all of its previous
responsibilities this is certainly on
the table as an option whether it works
or not well let's look into what happens
here oh look it's everybody's favorite
red or he's out here he's very convinced
that this all sounds nice and well but
what if they take robots and dump them
in a population center so what if they
don't you know what if they don't steer
themselves towards this ideal state
where it's robots versus robots what if
they decide to pull a Hitler and say
well I'm just going to invade your
population centers and it all right
that's a feasible that's a feasible
thing you could do that those robots are
cheap and population centers are
expensive and so there's soft targets
and you'd hit them hard and of course as
an obvious advantage for that in a total
war scenario of course but there's also
exterminators and I got 18 billion
reasons why this works these
 are off the table meaning
that's Prince oh ye
he's 18 billion dollar net value he was
hung upside down and had the kicked
out of him for six weeks straight this
is Clare Bronfman she ran at a sex cult
slash human trafficking thing she's been
in court ever since Trump got elected
and we all know who these guys are
so all these Untouchables we can touch
them so any one of these people decide
to step out of line and start throwing
robots at humans we can touch you
we have 19 billion reasons and 19
billion reasons why we can touch you
so it doesn't matter how much money you
got you can get exterminated we'll take
you off the table no problem so I'm not
really concerned about this one cuz
anyone who's trying to put that together
they can be taken off the table
so what we do it we can update our
Geneva protocols and say robot versus
human is a war crime we don't want that
that we're not out here trying to
exterminate everybody and fulfill
Malthus and that whole group we're
interested in making sure that if these
robots are coming let's put this thing
on a sane leash and say hey how can we
benefit from humans these robots are
coming with or without it you can't just
dig your head in the sand and be like no
they're they're here just work
it out let's start here let's make this
a war crime you can totally do this
you're not forbidding the creation of
robotic war machines but we're saying
when you deploy them on humans it's a
war crime and if you disagree out you go
get out of our system we want nothing to
do with you so now let's talk about the
other problem which is unemployment as
you put more robots in you're gonna have
less demand for people right and study
have to study tends to show this you're
looking at these circle radiuses imply
commuting zones so larger cities have
bigger circles etc and you look at this
trend when you take all the bubble
graphs and you know you walk down the
median and you'll see that you do have
more unemployment as you move along the
line as more robot use happens so you
have less robot use and it's funny you
actually have spikes of severe
unemployment when you have less robot
use and then you get to a more steady
predictable unemployment when you get
more robot use which is there's actually
some funds that can benefit from that
surprisingly but here's a key
distinction here right
everybody says unemployment this
unemployment that robots gonna do
anything this word private real quick
it's a private employment goes down
didn't say public employment goes down
now I'm talking robotic nationalism
where robots are out there shooting
robots and people are put in dual use
scenarios to them producers robots and
AI is probably stupid right now so let's
put humans to control and pilot those
robot
so even if this slips what I've done is
I've created a mechanism that allows for
public employment to offset this now I'm
sure there's a libertarian somewhere
screaming bloody murder at this whole
concept yeah
sure that's true broken window fallacy
of course that's all very true but this
is coming whether you like it or not
there's no economic tone that you can
point to and say but this book is gonna
stop the road that's not happening
the robots are here the technology's
here how are you gonna play jujitsu in
this dojo you can't you can't just go
off the mat you gotta roll with the
punches here it doesn't happen that I'm
not proposing permanent public
employment it's not what I'm saying I'm
saying transitional yeah that's the best
I can offer at this point that's cuz
other than that then it's just like
everyone's paranoid so let's look at the
three points here that that why this is
feasible and why this would even be
sought after this whole you know spiel
because of dual-use the public's at the
press the private sector can absorb a
lot of R&D costs and once you get to the
warfare scenario where the robots are
fighting each other that drives costs
down further as the employment goes up
because you need more robots for
everywhere about this destroyer but you
need the robotic infrastructure you need
communication you need manufacturing
production you need allocation the trade
stable trade between every player in the
game so as we pursue this road as long
as we're not expending human capital
like we were on World War 2 in the steel
cycle in the robot cycle it's feasible
to get the cost of robots down very far
and without a permanent reliance on
human misery and human expenditure to
keep those costs low like we do need
with steel it's probably pissed off the
Malthusian something awful but go pound
sand once you get to the point where all
of these nations have these robotic
armies and they're doing their
geopolitical dance with each other a
little tribal stuff you're going to hit
a Pareto frontier meaning there's going
to be only so many more configurations
of robotic conflict until no more
geopolitical advantage is discovered so
many ways you can possibly read jigger
that and that's called a Pareto
dear once you hit that space you will
have very high employment for everyone
that's part of a public employment at
least and that then tips into a swords
to plowshares scenario now why is that
because the entire economies of all
these nations will be modernised in the
in the robotic sense at least they will
have a surplus of robotic forces that
are not - remember these are dual use so
not only are they starting as soldiers
but they can be double back as workers
they can be brought back as a labour
facility which of course is gonna drive
this private unemployment down and we
know that right but why do we want that
that sounds like okay I've explained all
this stuff but why do we want that right
because when you have an abundance of
workers the cost of work the cost of
labour drops dramatically like extremely
so now things that were previously too
expensive become accessible so whether
it's deep earth mining whether it's
asteroid mining all of these things that
traditionally had bars that were crazy
too high because we have a surplus of
labor a massive surplus of labor that is
disconnected from traditional ways of
managing labor at least we can now
access these previously inaccessible
sectors and once you get to here then
the whole game changes the whole
changes because now you can take the
premise of capitalism which is infinite
growth and or at least financial
capitalism has the premise of infinite
growth and we can actually I think I
think Connie if you're here you had
mentioned a great snippet from Daniel
Suarez his book where he's making
roughly the same argument where he says
banking is ideal for space economics in
fact it's almost as if it was designed
for it just end this expansion into this
resource laid in this resource space
probably not so good when you hit peak
saturation of humans on a tiny planet
but when you hit vastness almost
incomprehensible opportunities that type
of financial capitalism actually is
incredibly functional so
that's where things might be ticking
with or without your permission
for game a at least and game a can use
this and will most likely use this to
continue its extension to continue its
time in the game outside of the scumbag
jiu jitsu it's been doing since at least
2001 if they decide to get their act
together and operate as a unified force
wouldn't be hard for them to put all
this together and knock it out the park
so remember if you want a robot army you
got to have a VPN you could trust has to
be quantum proof that's all folks thanks
a lot
nice ok so if you ever questions start
putting the chat box want me to read on
your behalf let me know this will go on
youtube so don't be an idiot
first question pat for me so I know
you're plugged into the kind of game be
space and I had some conversations with
the sense-making mentions matches about
this kind of like stuff you having like
criticism that you received that you
thought was good or if you had none
there in that space what is the best
counter-argument that you heard when you
presented this idea or maybe you could
play the devil's advocate to it I've
never heard anyone in gaming counter a
game beat counter this mostly because I
mean I'm the only person I'm like I'm
the only person formulators I'm
currently telling the story about these
particular actors and change of events
so obviously they've never encountered
and given some serious thought I suspect
that they could they would instinctively
tried to find tiny semantic exceptions
and try to build a whole counter
struggle against that maybe I mean it's
cute but I don't know if that's fun but
it's when you seriously grok like you
get down to like the steel cycle once
you understand the seal side this steel
cycle then I mean that's that's a harder
game eh so a game be you would have to
like critique this creative destruction
force outside of like flattening the
curve which it I think it's going for is
saying well
if it's gonna peak and spike and cause
damages let's like extend it over the
duration of time and and maybe we can
turn that destruction into opportunities
for more and more people as we dampen it
from populations maybe you know maybe
that works a sort of fractal dampener of
the of the destruction of one of those
steel cycles of course that's all
feasible and I'm sure there's entire
bodies of economics that come back that
type of reasoning but game a plays hard
they play super hard so you gotta
realize you're up against Psychopaths
and then when you throw the these
organized ones when you throw the the
black now inflation on top of it now
yeah disorganized Psychopaths
so that gets really weird in fact so I
think I think with game B I'd like to
target the spirit of what I think
they're angling towards which is why I'm
gonna save all that for next week which
is gonna be game B's approach
interesting interesting that was gonna
be my next question is what is your
critique on game because I think in the
black male inflation one you said that
if game B doesn't work we got to do this
robotic nationalism type thing so that's
that's that's next week we should say
that okay all right so let's pivot to
the questions Charles you had a good
question just oh yeah I gotta let people
unmute themselves
go ahead Charles hey Pat thanks for the
time
my question was this is my first time
listening to you and you're clearly a
very independent thinker and that's
impressive
just walk us through briefly how you
form your world views yeah I'm a next
Marxist it's probably too much shock for
people if you're really listening to the
language I'm using I was a the autistic
Marxist not the I I hate my parents and
I went over through the rich Marxist I
was the let's make sure that the
delicate equilibrium between production
and consumption is met and matched or at
least acknowledged so I was concerned
about some abstract equation
more than anything else that changed
when I encountered a book called the
human swarm written by Gregory Rollins
who fundamentally changed how I placed
blame in history and then I stopped
placing blame on history and then I
started seeing human nature as it as
best as I could ascertain it in the role
and I haven't stopped since I just like
to understand what humans are doing no
matter how insane it is and I like to
not ascribe morality to it because I
think it colors the observation of what
is and you can't change what is if you
walk into it with assumptions of what
should be so I tend to try to capture as
much of it as I can in the naked in the
raw and then I'll figure out let's let's
see what we can poke and see what we can
change you have a follow-up question
Charles okay cool
so Ernesto wants me to ask this what
would be the environmental implications
of robotic wars considering that they
should be using depleted uranium shells
and lots of batteries with toxic
substances would be destroyed also are
they going to take place in the
airlander sea 1% of the surface of the
earth is occupied significantly occupied
by human beings
yes we're spread all over the place and
yes we have farmland all over the place
but in terms of if you took all human
beings and stacked them into one spot
it's really like 1 percent so there's
there is a very large part of the earth
in which you can have all these wars and
it's not that big of a deal that's
called the Sahara Desert you're gonna
have these robot wars there all day long
and it's not going to disrupt a goddamn
thing in terms of ecology now the
production of those robots will
certainly probably have some pollution
side effects down the stream that's for
sure
but there's all kinds of cool techniques
that if you really were concerned about
establishing an eco balance these robots
don't have to be made a row of a metal
don't just throw that expectation out
the window I can make their shells out
of potato starch if I wanted to I don't
need these big like battle mechs from
i phi i justneed things at just hunting
i can have robots this big doing it I
don't need these massive monsters from
the Industrial Age too you know conduct
my violent will here so hemp robotics
right exactly right I don't I can make
it I've seen technology where you can
make circuit boards out of bamboo it's
not that hard guys you don't have to use
what China is selling to to make these
these lethal robots it's not that tough
so in terms of art you can have
eco-friendly zero imprint robot war if
that's a thing that needs to be marketed
I mean which it sounds like it might be
but it's it's it's within the realm of
feasibility for sure cool kocchi you
have a question if you can unmute
yourself mr. Keshe yeah
just wondering like what makes you think
the the robots are going to be expensive
in job-creating when they get destroyed
versus just like attaching a bunch of
explosives to quadrotor drone mm-hmm yes
so one robot it's not as simple as press
button get robot you need to pay the
licensing for the software you need to
put up the factory that can make it
whether it's a small factory or a large
factory you need to constantly maintain
it and prove it and there's a service
required for that you need to make sure
that the lenses and the servos and the
motors are manufactured as well you need
to keep quality control and swarm
management it's not just gonna be one
person for a robot you're probably
looking at one person controlling 100
robots with a bunch of intermediary good
enough AIS to assist in the person
managing those fleets there is a lot of
aggregate economics that can be
extrapolated from this type of
infrastructure
so whenever a robot goes down through
the aggregate more and more jobs are
created not just into production but on
the clean up management recycling
propaganda the whole the whole chain you
can include the entire economy off this
alone
cool okay this is a will he wants me to
read in his bath with scarcity of
nation's natural resources would be a
problem for continuous robotic war it
would be a problem in terms of
establishing robotic capabilities so if
you had one nation that happen to have
access to rare earths and one nation
that did not there's a very good chance
that the rare earth nation is probably
going to have better information
processing just because of all of the
techniques that rare earths can or
that's a well understood technology at
this point but as we've seen in world
war ii during the hyper nationalist
phase nations surprisingly got along
even without having access to an entire
world system of trade that was
functional the japanese were cut off
from oil and tin admittedly they invaded
you know their neighbors to get it back
but they were able to adapt even without
it again you have you have interesting
pressures that come into play when
you're cut off of world trade and cheap
labor and cheap material access and
frictionless stuff that we've all become
accustomed to when you have people who
are facing the the full brunt of mass
unemployment it's not as if everyone's
lazy it's just that the configuration of
the economics are bad and there will be
people who will work to make sure that
that configuration gets optimal again
the government has a huge incentive to
do so in those situations or otherwise
the politicians get outvoted
they have instability through their
through their federal system so there's
there's competing pressures that even if
there are resource dis equilibriums
those competing pressures really will
maximize human ingenuity to make do what
the resources they have and if they
can't which most of them won't and
that's true they won't that's where you
cut deals and you form alliances with
people you say put me under your robotic
union because i can't produce robots and
i need your protection so that's that's
an adaptation as well
there it's a Rachel haywire just dropped
interesting question Rachel can I meet
yourself hi yeah I'm nationalism
interesting interesting I'm curious on
where would robot dictators fall into
this equation from the media
possibilities first it would come from
the media place so you're looking at
populist dictators in this space will
most likely arise from VR that sounds
weird but I believe that question I
believe a question was asked last week
about the impact of VR yeah that's right
so the same reasoning applies there
usually when you look or I should say
when you look at the evolution of modern
communication technologies with every
advancement of communication tech you
get a corresponding dictator who got to
that position by exploiting the advent
of radio that comes with things like I'm
gonna say FDR as dictator but what I
mean is it's just central core of power
Vladimir Lenin heavily used radio a film
was heavily used by the Germans in World
War one under under Casa villa film in
TV Adolf Hitler was notorious in using
audio techniques in fact the idea of my
lower back tape was invented by the
Nazis and what they would do is they
would record Adolf Hitler on this really
high-quality
mile/hour tape and then they'd ship the
tape everywhere and then they play
speeches of him from different parts of
Germany so the Allies would bomb these
places thinking Hitler was there but he
was never there because the rest of the
world only had access to vinyl and final
was a quality sound so the idea of
this high-resolution quality sound
playing from somewhere else obviously he
was in front of the microphone so so
media revolutions tend to bridge the gap
between the will of central state and
how you normalize that to the rest of
the masses and so only mass
communication can do that so if you're
asking what the dictators will look like
they won't be necessarily robotic per se
but they will be part of the
communication regime of those world
robotic economies and that's probably
going to be VR exciting Thank You Rachel
did you fall question rich alert I just
wanna give our simulation of like a very
bad dictator you know you kind of
goggles like robot army is like merging
robots and you know like engaging those
experiences because they want to imagine
it's like even if we don't have that
maybe that would just be like an
artistic experience or send me to have
you noted like phones and goggles and
like we're about dictators you know I
mean there's yeah could be could be
Ender's Game as well
Rachel's into some kinky that's why
we that's why we love her um Jacob
you're up next did you gonna meet
yourself
sure thing do you hear me alright so I
was just wondering what the
sustainability of this system looks like
you called it West Valley at 3.0 and
we're living you know in West Valley a
2.0 right now with the system of
reciprocal blackmail sort of keeping
everyone in check but you know in light
of advancements that's going to fall
apart like you said last week so what do
you see as a system that would come to
replace this or how do you if that's not
something you can answer right now how
do you see this sort of playing out over
time yeah so I think the thing about
these westphalia systems is that we
should probably stop calling them
systems and we should probably start
calling them stints like little wedges
of transformation for that time where
this particular arrangement of here's
how we're going to keep our psychopaths
in check then that fell apart and we got
to keep them in check here's how we keep
them in check and that's just that's
just going to change as time goes on so
even what I'm proposing here is still
transitionary excuse me it's ultimately
the last transition as much as I would
like it to be one I don't know if that's
true but I would like it to be one
because once you have an abundance of
robotic labor available now Astro
economics is on the table and at that
point instead of voting with you know
your ballot or your BOTS you
with your feet and you just
leave like not we're done here like oh
you have kings and you have nukes I want
off this crazy train
I'd rather go die on a poorly oxygenated
Rock than spend one more second next to
these assholes so you need to make the
economics trend towards that mostly
against the will of economics which is
why I'm looking at this in a transitory
phase itself because once you get Astro
economics and the whole the whole pie
changes everything changes whether you
have a Westphalia system in that I don't
think you will I think you'll have more
of a replay of the Stone Age where when
people disagreed with one another they
just ran across the horizon basically
cool so my favorite poetry buddy key has
a question key could you onion self
again I'm not I'm totally not it's like
it's it's great it's thank you uh-huh a
lot for the time that's the first thing
that someone said here and I appreciate
that um question is could you clarify
the idea that banking is ideal for space
economics you mentioned someone Daniel
Suarez just just wanted to understand it
yeah the goal of financial banking is to
pay off the interest that's the entire
purpose of financial banking it's there
is no other rule everything else is
organically derived as a result of that
rule so to understand what interest
means if I produce ten Pat bucks like
here's ten Pat bucks I just pop them
into existence and then I give them to
you and I say hey you owe me twelve Pat
bucks you might say okay that's fine but
there's only ten Pat bucks in
circulation where are you going to get
the other two from well the answer is
you can't so obviously it's a game you
lose so now you owe me that money
because you signed a piece of paper and
I just got more goons than you so now
you're gonna pay me those two Pat bucks
you're gonna pay me all ten back cuz I
know you got them and then I'm gonna get
me I'm gonna get two bucks worth of
actual assets you own so that could be
hours of your time or property you have
or some contract or some other asset
that you evaluate
right so I'm over producing the demand
for my Pat bucks and under producing the
supply that's the that's the rule of
financial capitalism it's it's a game to
trick people into over playing their
greed and it works it works all the time
now ideally you want this game to be
stable you don't want it to be overtly
predatorial when you're dealing with you
know six billion people but you can't
hold everybody accountable contre
everybody's free to write whatever
contract they want and you're going to
 shoot yourself if you don't know
what you're doing or shoot yourself in
the foot if you don't know what you're
doing so you know contract signer beware
when you're playing financial capitalism
games but when you're playing the game
of space well you don't need to go to
lawyers and you don't need to go to
arbitration or say oh the contracts bad
and so and so now I got to hire some
mercenaries to take my pound of flesh
out of you instead I could say I'm gonna
sell my future time so I'm gonna double
down on the bet
so if I promise that you give me X
amount of Pat bucks I'm gonna go harvest
some asteroids and you failed to do so
you're gonna say double or nothing
yeah you're gonna double you're gonna
you're gonna try and change the terms of
repayment and I'm more likely to say yes
because it's an infinite capacity of
options out there I just need you out
there go hunting it and finding it sure
you won't pay me now but now I can think
in terms of hundred-year skills 2200
year skills because look at all the
 availability that's available so
instead of these userís assholes playing
their financial capitalism game here and
being real strict dicks about it it
doesn't once you open up to the promise
of space I mean there's enough for
everybody for a long damn time and
you'll find that the financial capital
is kind of like it that way yeah okay
I've been here laughing the entire time
thank you for explaining mehnat I think
so far
a beer Church you had a question you're
gonna meet yourself
I will unmute you you're in mutable okay
I will okay I'll read his questions
behalf what happens if someone goes full
Sherman that is destroys the means of
production then we go full wipeout your
genome that simple you want to go target
humans we will wipe out your genome from
the planet anyone who looks like you
just gone your family gone banks gone
your greens gone everything tossed cuz
you just broke the severe rule you broke
the human versus robot rule and you
can't break that cuz we're not looking
for body count we're not Malthusian so
we're not out here trying to slaughter
people because we care more about trees
it's not what we're about
cool Benjamin you had a question right I
did thank you pat really appreciate the
time and the insight here um you know
I'm not somebody was able to read a
tragedy and hope myself so I'm glad I
tried I tried I'm into the transgene
hope community I'm sure you know groves
work and all these things I'm in the
autonomy class as well as this okay so
my question was for the robots do you
envision this being autonomously
controlled of robots or do you envision
them being controlled in real time makes
more sense because the robots are not
yet there in terms of being able to
navigate spatial reality and that could
be a really compelling game for a lot of
people who like that notion very
interesting man really a lot of
thought-provoking stuff here what's the
time scale for this in your uh in your
essay if you could just throw it a guess
I started this research in 2014
I am already talking with people to
start rolling out some of this stuff by
2025 heard yeah I'd love to take the
time to get a chance to chat later on I
will hit you up thank you I really
appreciate it cool yeah yeah and just to
follow up for clarification
I'm not looking at autonomous I'm not
looking at AI is doing all the work when
we just kind of sit back and laugh at
the video game playing before us this is
a full participate there's a full
participatory sport you're going to
pilot these things you're gonna learn to
pilot more and more as time goes on
because I can't trust AI I mean you see
the self-driving cars I know they're
they're sold sexy wise but I know how
they work I just did a whole thing about
how neural networks working how to hack
those so I'm not putting my faith in
that stuff I'll trust a human brain I
got some the endeth all brands on the
side but they're not ready yet so in the
meantime I need I need human brains I
need people to they're already playing
spending 10,000 hours playing video
games they're already ready for this
economy I just need to plug them in fast
reaction times are what we need all
right we're training them now yeah thank
you every time Pat mentions neon called
beta brain so I get a meta boner
[Laughter]
so yeah just usually lot of meetings at
the store go for 60 minutes but these
ones you to go 90 minutes so Pat you're
cool for another 15 30 minutes here of
course Gail and Jon you had a question
granion um it's unshin aren't you okay
cool hey Pat this was incredible I look
forward the entire week for Pat Ryan
starts Dale thanks a lot thank you i
depression at the end of the week is the
best way again of your assumptions I'm
interested about the employment
assumption in the case they prove to be
vastly over optimistic by a magnitude or
whatever you want to say how do you
think your model changes and the story
changes yeah yeah there's a error
correction should be built in so if
you're going to well not if you you will
hit this saturation where the maximum
amount of people will be paired up with
the maximum amount of robots there is
whatever the equation represents that I
don't know but it does exist somewhere
when that happens you're going to have
what Marx called surplus humans now if
you time this correctly and it's really
a question of timing
because the unemployment cycle lasts so
long in the middle of the technological
shift where you make the move from one
tech and then there's an unemployment
downturn there's a disruption there's a
crisis of capital all these things play
out and we've seen this play out since
forever
if you timed this correctly then what
will happen is when you hit that
saturation point by the time the
unemployment becomes destabilizing astro
economics will have already began so
that's the key that's the hedge where
you can as these sociopaths and
Psychopaths are just whacking it out on
each other that probably was not the
right phrase but as they are just
whacking each other left right then the
Malthusians will disagree with me
they'll say just kill people if if
you're wrong about your model and
they'll they'll point to the steel cycle
and they say well just you know let 14
million people march into the into the
jaws of Moloch and stuff like that and
that will give them credibility during
this time period and people will look at
them and say yes we should do what
they're saying which is why the timing
issue is so important can I get the
timing issue right no can I find people
who can't get the timing issue right
probably so that's the best I got
because if you don't get it right then
what will happen is you're looking at a
lot of unemployment who will have the
opportunity to command labor that's
where things get interesting so it's not
like right now there's a lot of
unemployed people who can command these
things they should be programmers write
a programming is hard but if you make
the interface easy enough to where I'm
just talking to this robot and I say hey
robot build this thing the same way I'm
talking to you to do it
you're gonna look at these unemployed
people who are going to have their bar
to entry to productivity to be almost
nothing so whether that helps public
employment or private employment I'm not
sure but also keep in mind that a lot of
my model assumes public employment which
means you do end up in this type of like
tribute redistribution system
when you have massive amounts of robots
extracting minerals in a way that were
previously too expensive so you have a
huge volume of minerals I mean even if
you were to take one asteroid platinum
and slam it into the moon and then
extract it from there
you're looking at platinum prices being
the same as zinc and with just one
asteroid so prices will drop gradually
not instantly
I'm not never promoting instantaneous
stuff here I'm very realistic and you're
looking at the unemployed having access
to slave labor I don't think that's ever
happened in human history so I really
don't know what will happen because
that's never been an option cool if I
could ask a fault yeah go for it let's
say also on the timing things end up
taking longer than you expect do you
ever I don't know how to ask this what
if the entire kind of jobs capitalism
based system morphs into a ubi blah blah
blah type system how do you think that
also works
what's your model there you'll be able
to see rationale for ubi and what I'm
proposing by saying well we have robot
slaves so let them do all the work and
then we'll just profit from it that's
gonna be very politically tempting
you're gonna see a lot of people running
on that it's going to be almost boring
the amount of people that will run on
that and they'll be able to make it
happen to a degree what that does to
human psyche well we know what that does
of human psyche because the Romans had
access to slaves and they had a Roman
citizens in the city proper had the
equivalent of ubi they didn't have to
pay taxes they had free grain and all
this stuff that were available to them
and they just spent all day each
other so so it's it's like this isn't
the first time we've done this type of
thing if you want to see what ubi really
looks like go to Saudi Arabia good lord
the KSA you get a royalty for being
alive if you're a Saudi citizen like oh
you're born here's your free money I'm
not even making that up they will they
will pay you to be a it will pay for
your entire school from like pre-k to
like master's thesis there are examples
of like this like like this leisure
utopia that
that America and particularly seems
always strive for they pop up from so
often some type of time in history so
it's not like we'd be the first to do it
there are models we can pull from and at
some point I will most likely have to
pull from those models to understand how
to how to manage those a bit better cool
ok I'm going to read this question the
Robot Wars will be dependent on a lot of
computing power computing power
currently has a lot of resource
bottleneck with coltan what's the future
of the Congo in this context will there
be a fight to control this country
computing power can be yes so let me
answer the spirit of the question first
you will have a lot of these robot
resources being deployed for a strategic
capture of those resources that will be
an imperative and a lot of conflict will
certainly arise from there the
computational power that's required
again because I'm not using AI and
there's there's a analog to why you
don't want to use AI it's the same thing
as a rocket ship where in order to get
my rocket ship out of orbit I need fuel
but that adds more weights and now I
need more fuel to add more weight and
now I need more fuel to compensate for
the way of the fuel before you know it
your ship doesn't go anywhere so there's
actually this strange balance in order
to get a ship off the planet and into
orbit the same things true about robots
that are using AI the computational
complexity means more hardware more
battery but the battery means more
weight more weight means more structural
mass and now I need more battery to
compensate for the more CPU and then
around around we go so at some point you
don't want to use a eyes until they
really go through like a graphene
revolution or something at the
transistor level I'm not going to wait
around for that there's no need to so
the cheap hack is to basically have IOT
where the machine has its bare minimum
sensors for balance and stability and
control but it's the human brain that's
doing a lot of the offloading and off
processing just for starters then that
will obviously put a huge pressure on
trying to create these low energy AI
stuff and if you
the morality machine I go into the
energy efficiency stuff they're creating
that economy of pressure IOT is gonna do
that with or without robotic nationalism
that's just on the on the sleep anyway
so you may have resource conflicts but
those are those are accounting problems
where you say is the conflict worth it
do I deploy soldiers here and what's the
opportunity cost of that my robot
soldiers here versus putting R&D into
things like 3d graphene or cadmium
arsenide or something like that so those
are the equations you make to actually
answer those questions in a more
predictable manner David you had a
question for Pat yeah this is this is
kind of jumping trying to jump out as
far as I can think so
listening to prove a key and really
grokking the levels of knowing so for
those who don't know for Vicky's lecture
series awakening from the main crisis is
important but biological life seems to
go participatory booting up into
perspectival knowing booting up into
procedural knowing and then booting up
into that and to propositional
propositional seems like the peak of the
pyramid to us and so when we start
inventing computing we think AI is going
to be the end-all be-all because it get
each to play chess but we can't teach it
language or vision and that's really
hard yeah so it seems that biologic or
synthetic life goes the other direction
its propositional it's its base and then
it goes the other direction with
participatory being its final stage so
there's something like a flipping of the
motivation which is kind of the Lorenz
attractor kind of lobe switch between
right brain left brain left brain right
brain you know which which is dominant
that kind of balances where we are that
creates kind of an ever-increasing
pendulum swing to new dominance
hierarchies so is there something like
that that is continuing to grow us
with balancing the the AI so AI
stretches us to grow more and we stretch
it to grow more rather than some final
end state yes yes that is that is a
pretty good visual Lorenz attractor
stuff is applicable in this sense which
is why I focused on the Neanderthal
brains I I did not have faith when I
started when I really started
researching the AI Tech in 2005 I had
absolutely no faith it was going to hit
any of its promises because it's an it's
an epistemological problem from the very
jump it just demands infinite data and
infinite computation to solve infinitely
useless things
so if unless you structure your entire
economy they have infinitely cheap power
you know Tesla hope aside you're not
gonna hit those AI goals yet not a
hotdog exactly not a hotdog I don't know
if you've seen that from Silicon Valley
but that's exactly the problem so
instead of trying to pretend that in our
mathematical hubris we can reproduce a
two billion year winner-take-all product
that is the brain in a 55-year
post-industrial spin I have just given
up on that fight entirely and I said
screw it let's just use brains they
can't use human brains obviously so I
use another species instead and and so
here's the here's a thought this is kind
of where this comes from is back in 2005
watching Kurzweil talk about the age of
spiritual machines and the thought that
technology can evolve faster than we can
because it goes exponential and we can't
do that my thought was oh you're under
estimating the power of networked brains
doing something kind of very powerful
kind of computational thing if each
human is effectively a neuron in a
global brain doing all that kind of
computation we have we have way more
computational power at our disposal why
are some sort of level of coordination
that needs us to use the technological
brain to extend that but something
happens where each of our we're
basically indras net becomes self-aware
hmm so a self-aware is
I don't burden myself with theological
problems but the when it comes to that
level of exponential expectation you'll
find that in fractal complexity you
don't necessarily have to drive more
horsepower behind something once your
network effects feel fractal then you
have all these resources totally at your
availability and that's what I'd like to
rely on but instead of instead of
putting all the trust in the eggheads
and in Silicon Valley I'm just going to
trust two billion years of evolution
which already has the fractal complexity
built into it it's already there so I
don't want to reinvent the wheel here
that's just overall silly and when you
start tapping into like again even with
humans with humans controlling swarms of
AI which is a huge part of military
research right now it's not as intuitive
as like a real-time strategy game it's
not like Starcraft where I select the
drones and then off you go
they're experimenting with some pretty
clever stuff in terms of neural
interfacing how do I control like a pile
of people how do I control a pile of
drones just from like some sub auditory
you know thoughts in the nerve down here
there's I've seen a couple interesting
proposals that involve putting a mesh on
your tongue and using the tongue to
because the tongue has so many sensor
receptors on it and using the sensations
of that to control all these drone
swarms so so you're looking at full
spectrum neural envelopment in order to
control all of these types of things
it's not just typing on keyboard or
selecting with a mouse it's every single
part of your neurologic being tapped and
tapped into wherever it can so I think
you're gonna see that type of control
scheme rise as the economic pressures to
commend robotic labor rise with it if I
could just do one quick follow-up
the sense of somebody said the out of
the Borg right
since the Borg time there's something
here that doesn't quite jell in my mind
with a Borg and that if I if I look at
I'm gonna I'm gonna use the matrix
trilogy as an interesting view
in which you know the third Matrix is
really confusing when you first watch it
but when neo gets blinded and he sees
that it's all light the machines are
light - hmm it's something like
intelligence or life comes at it from
all angles so this consciousness thing I
don't want to say you know this the it's
the part that you don't want to go into
it's already there so this is something
like and this is where I come back to
Donnell Hoffman in the notion of the
case against reality something is
already happening where life the
universe is living and just doing ever
more complex ways of perceiving itself
so the thought that we invented
something it's really we're being used
yeah to deepen a perspective not to not
to infinity perspective there's a
there's a raging debate in academia
about is mathematics invented or is it
discovered and that hits the heart of
what it is you're talking about and that
you can actually filter in personality
pretty quickly from that and be like if
it's if it's discovered then you're
probably talking to an engineer and if
it's vented you're probably talking to a
philosopher so it's it's a fun little or
a theologian so it's a fun little game
but that's another way of sort of
mathematically teasing out what I think
you're circling and I think next week
I'll be I'll be covering Auto cults
which will be tapping into the periphery
of some of that stuff certainly not the
core but definitely the periphery cool
thanks for that David so let's ask one
more question and Hannah if you can
unmute yourself and ask the question I
would like to volunteer my space to
someone else
I can read your question Hannah we've
seen human operators at of at distant
war tech in need of mental health
support with things like drones but the
human propensity of anthropomorphize
ation will the robot soldier operators
need therapy that i've seen i've met
some of those drone pilots some of them
are hurt by it
some of them enjoy the fact that their
god it's it's most people can't
comprehend like it's not like they're
sitting there and disassociating from it
and saying it's just pixels on a screen
no drone operators doing that they know
damn well that they're hitting some
people and that's gonna have
consequences and they hope that their
kill chain did the right analysis
because there's they're pressing the
buttons throughout they're making you
know the call and you know what wedding
parties target and what gets even worse
is that sometimes the operators are in
control and sometimes it's
experimentation on AI so if you start
seeing these drones targeting wedding
parties it's because those were false
positives for groups according to the AI
oops
you know they put AI in the kill chain
and it makes mistakes and I'll talk
about that but that's the thing and so
if that ever gets back down to the
operator than that guys like what the
 I didn't want to do that obviously
he didn't want to do that and he's not
out there for a genocide or rampage so
there is huge pressure to at least
psychological to one keep your operator
in check but that's again that's
targeting humans what does it operate it
look like when he's blowing up robots I
think he cares probably no different
than shooting you know pixels on the
screen targeting humans is a big deal
targeting other robots yeah whatever
just light it up
all right on that note Pat you have any
final thoughts in today's session my
analysis relies on a lot of assumptions
and there is an endless number every
single you might have seen the political
compass and every single square and the
political compass can tear this to
shreds there is no doubt about that I'm
not here to make an indefensible on a
saleable position I'm basically making a
heuristic guess of when you get
information technology to the cheap
state that it's at and you compare that
with the demand for increasing cheap
labor it is not hard to start getting
these robot soldiers and robot warrior
robot labor once you have that in play
do you think it's gonna be democracy do
you think it's gonna be fascism I think
it's gonna be something you've never
 seen before
I'm probably gonna be the latter cool so
next week Pat back same time same
channel continue the conversation and
the explorations here at the dark stoah
so a few announcements before we close
out next week I'm gonna upload or post a
lot of events on the store page we do
have a symposium our first symposium
that's coming on Tuesday it's gonna be
called let us not or let us maybe get
triggered by Jordan Pederson suburban
there's a series of talks from all sorts
of the spectrum political spectrum on
Jordan Pederson is going to end off with
screening on the the rise of Jordan
Pederson documentary with the filmmakers
in attendance and then we're gonna have
a cure of the dawn and like jam and he
might introduce steal the culture theme
song of the stoah which Don Ricky talked
about so that's gonna be dope I'm gonna
post that now check it out
signed the mailing list check out the
gift economy and and if you have any
existential horror emerge from this just
let me know and we'll plug into the
wisdom gym hopefully you look okay all
right everyone thank you good night see
folks