welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
all right check-ins I'm a little tired a
little calm and ready actually been just
arrived so hello Ben we're doing a we're
just we're just starting so welcome to
the stoah my name is peter lindbergh
I'm the Stewart of the stoah and the
Stowe is a place for us to go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
knife's edge of this moment and today we
had just naturally emerge at the stoah
so at the stove for those of you who are
here for the first time we have a couple
of different types of events we have a
wisdom gym where we practice sort of
psycho technologies transformational
technologies like meditation you know a
shame breakthrough Socratic speed-dating
we have existential dance parties so
like a little bit on the jazzy side and
then we have kind of Q&A type
sense-making type sessions which would
fall this would fall into that bucket
and for whatever reason a couple events
fell on this day that were related to
Jordan Peterson and full disclosure
Jordan Peterson was a my former
therapist before he became famous and so
I thought hmm why don't we just like
slap the the word symposium on this
which like this week feels a little tone
deaf
right now my stuff was happening in
America but since we had things already
scheduled I thought we would run through
it with with care and sensitivity to
what is happening in the world right now
and so in this particular session we
have the authors of myth and mayhem a
leftist critique of Jordan Peterson and
what's gonna happen they're going to
kind of talk for seven minutes each
share their their ideas their opinions
on the book and then we're gonna pivot
to a Q&A and I will put their website in
the the chat box if you don't know it
the zero books published and zero books
is an excellent publisher I love them a
lot Michael Brooks who was on the show
the store recently had a book fair
Angela Eagles kill all normies mark
Fisher's capital capitalist realism a
lot of good books from zero book so I
would definitely check that out
so that being said speakers will speak
and then if you have any questions just
right in the chat box while they're
speaking and then when the Q&A portion
happens I will call on you to ask your
question so if anyone would just like to
go first I don't know what the order is
just maybe introduce yourself and you
can jump into your seven minutes okay I
think we said we're gonna go in the
order the answers were written right
yeah that's good okay so that me me
first and then we'll go on to Conrad and
then Marian and then last but not least
Ben of course and I should mention
actually one of the new classics for the
zero line is actually Professor
Burgesses give them an argument logic
for the left which is not just a really
good book in and of itself but actually
a really nice manual introduction to
logic so if you get a chance you should
take a look at that so one of the
reasons why I decided to write the book
was I was doing my PhD at York
University around the time when Peterson
started to really ascend to the
stratosphere of fame and like a lot of
people in Toronto at the time who were
also involved in academic intellectual
circles I was really surprised by this
right you're kind of used to writing
obscure academic articles and having
them be read by two or three hundred
people and every now and then you know
some people appear on the CBC to talk
about their area of expertise but
nowhere near the kind of attention this
figure was getting a major outlets like
the National Review or CBC or Channel
four and the United Kingdom and so like
a lot of people I was just intrigued to
figure out what his work was about and
in particular since I kind of broadly
associate with a left liberal political
tradition arguing for social
redistribution of wealth and so on I
wanted to see what all the furor was
about on that angle as well and when I
went through maps of meaning for the
first time in 2017 about mid 2017 right
after I finished my degree what really
struck me was how much continents there
was between Peterson's own account of
modernity and a lot of the more overtly
reactionary critiques of modern life
that you found in many of the
theoretical figures that he drew upon
people like Friedrich Nietzsche Carl
Jung or Martin Heidegger and what
surprised me was actually how little
deviation there actually
was in his own Academy identity and a
lot of what these figures were saying
there were some novel innovations that
he made certainly psychologically and
bring them up to date using you know the
best kind of scientific literature that
was available in the 1990s but there was
nothing that Peterson was really arguing
against modern life
or for that matter against the
contemporary left that would have been
obscure - Heidegger or even someone like
Nietzsche and this made me start to
think that there might be space to
develop a left-wing critique of Peterson
that resembled many of the left-wing
critiques that were developed of these
figures at earlier points particularly
in the back of my mind Adorno's critique
of Heidegger came to mine Adorno
famously castigated Heidegger for saying
that you think modern life is rubbish
and it's all the faults of Technology
and cultural changes but nowhere do you
really speak that much about the
influence of capital moderns machinery
in modern media and so on and so forth
everything kind of operates at this
highly idealized level and so that was
the genesis of the book back in 2017
where I just started to come up with a
few different ideas of what it was that
I wanted to say on this point did a deep
dive into a lot of Peterson's writing
and the writing around him I started to
publish a series of articles for small
outlets like Aereo Marilyn or Marion
West there were one or two and Colette
that weren't directly about Peterson but
referred to him that kind of got the
critique going a little bit and what
really surprised me was people were very
receptive to this there was a real
hunger a horror more sustained critique
of his work from a left-wing perspective
that took his ideas seriously without
treating them like idols right like they
should be beyond contestation and at
that point what I figured is that I
didn't want to do this alone since I
certainly don't have the area of
expertise necessary to speak on all the
different dimensions of his work which
is why our other co-authors got on board
Konrad Hamilton to write on this from a
Marxist perspective may hold the right
on us from a feminist perspective and
then Ben who's just an excellent scholar
when it comes to the structure of
argumentation
being a logician my own contribution in
the book was mainly to criticize Peter 7
along to demand
one was again the inherent problems that
one finds and any modernist right-wing
critique of much like contemporary life
as I called it and again I don't want to
imply that I didn't draw on some
important inspiration here
people like Adorno and Horkheimer we're
really important and framing my own
criticisms of their work but one of the
things that I said is that I believe
that Peterson is right that in many
senses Modern Life does have a problem
there's a great sense of desolation and
people feel a tremendous lack of meaning
and modern and now postmodern life that
we need to find solution for the problem
that I had with Peterson of course was
that much like Heidegger and Nietzsche
of your know where does he actually
account for how capital might play a
role in generating this sense of enemy
and the sense of meaninglessness and I
think it's actually extremely important
to take note of this since as far back
as Marx and Engels writing in the
Communist Manifesto where they pointed
out that under capitalist conditions all
that is solid melts into the air people
were away about how traditionalist and
sacred forms of life were being
absolutely corroded by processes of
industrialization and capitalization and
that this was more to remake the world
in many ways for the better but also in
many ways for the worst because people
would now not have a sense of stability
on which so many of us depend for our
sources of self and that earlier
generations were more easily able to
avail themselves than people in
modernity and now post modernity and the
other thing that I criticized Peterson
for was on a more constructive dimension
arguing that he likes to characterize
himself variously as kind of classical
liberal I think even more correctly
situated as what sometimes called an
ordered Liberty conservative which has a
tradition going back to people like
Edmund Burke and I said I actually don't
think this kind of ordered Liberty
approach to liberalism and freedom and
equality is appropriate what I actually
think that we need to do is establish
something like a rosy and liberal
socialist state where we
don't talk about meritocracy or
hierarchies of competence without
establishing genuinely fair conditions
of opportunity for everyone according to
something like the difference principle
or another egalitarian principle of
distribution and one of the things I
point out is that nowhere and is lengthy
screeds about competence hierarchies
does he anywhere talk about the fact
that for many contemporary liberal
authors you can't just have unbridled
capitalism liberalism actually demands a
very serious redistribution of wealth
provide opportunities for everyone and
if you don't do that you have no right
to actually call yourself a liberal
state and I put a little bit of pressure
on him in that respect at the end of the
book but I'm almost out of time so
people want to ask questions about that
I'll be happy to take that they draw so
I think it's Conrad's to yeah it's
interesting about what not said about
Peterson's liberalism because that
became you know sort of from a Marxist
standpoint a significant point of
investigation for me but you know I mean
I think what intrigued me about the
project is the fact that responses to
Jordan Peterson or so totally divisive
right so in one side you see him
portrayed as you know an unrepentant
chauvinist if not fascist who's
evolutionarily tinged self-help
philosophy reprises the worst prejudices
of Carl Jung pseudo-scientific mysticism
and the other often you see him
portrayed as a benign liberal
conservative whose calls for men and
women who like to toughen up represents
a welcomed corrective to decades of
overstretching by meddlesome
progressives and I think that what's
interesting about this is that you know
there's a certain truth to both of these
these images what I'll referred to as
sort of the exoteric and esoteric images
of Peterson I mean twelve rules for life
has sold three million copies so I think
it's safe to say that not every robot is
you know marching out of tiki torches
throwing Zeke Hales but you know I think
it's similarly it would be also
disingenuous to say that Peterson's only
modus operandi is like to tell
disaffected men to make the
that's she's probably most women to be
happy about really because if that were
the case he would have never become a
crucible for activists at the University
of Toronto he never would have been
valorized by the right-wing media the
way was and he never would have
ultimately attracted the rabble field
right but in my account actually Zone in
on an interesting episode that occurred
I discuss a lot of things throughout my
part of the book but I'm just gonna
focus on this a bit I discuss something
that happened at at Lafayette College
and there was an interesting question
Peterson was posed about race and IQ and
you know I'm not here to try to crucify
Peterson for you know violating the
tenants of political correctness but I
actually think it's important in terms
of clarifying his larger sort of
ideology so when he's asked a question
about the fact that certain races have
different IQs and what he thinks about
the validity of the science Peterson at
first sort of hesitates he says you know
I don't like answering this kind of
question because it means you'll get you
get killed
right but of course Peterson being
Peterson he does give a response and you
know there's a kind of misdirection
that's involved in his response because
this is very characteristically Peterson
he sort of digresses into a discussion
about the public misapprehension of
statistics so he points out that often
when we read statistics what we don't
understand is what he calls the tale
problem right so the way that if you
take even one standard deviation of
difference in IQ right so Ashkenazi Jews
for example one standard deviation of
difference in terms of IQ higher than
other groups
this will really manifest extremely at
the high end of the spectrum so it'll be
a lot of Ashkenazi geniuses you know and
then he talks about how you know even
the US military won't hire individuals
with IQs under 83 which is about 10% of
the population in sites this is this is
evidence that you know as a society we
need to sort of find something to do
with these people now it's interesting
right because in this lecture questions
about IQ being a consequence of
socialization or mostly swept under the
rug on the grounds that IQ is the best
thing we have right
but then at the end you see this very
very characteristic move by Peterson
which is that you know having said all
of this you know he says that you know
but just because people have different
IQs doesn't mean that they have a
different intrinsic value as human
beings um and I think if we examine this
it can help us really get to the bottom
of Peterson's views Peterson describes
himself as a classical British liberal
but if we're gonna you know quibble with
this characterization one thing we can
say is that you know within the liberal
tradition there's a sort of qualified
focus on the importance of a Galit
arianism right you see this in mill
Smith etc even Thomas Hobbes thought
everyone basically had the ability to
kill each other which judge by Peters's
rep Peterson's reference to the military
he might be skeptical though but really
if you look at Peterson's views
egalitarianism you know hints it well we
could say you know liberalism
egalitarianism these sort of ideas for
him they don't speak to the ontological
structure of reality right they're
really just kind of fictions I'll be it
important ones right and if we want to
understand this kind of disarticulation
I think we have to look at how you know
you you said that you know I'm an
inveterate Democrat but I believe nature
is aristocratic and esoteric so for
Peterson nature which is there's a sort
of structural affiliation with the
unconscious is largely at ARCIC right
and we see this in the first chapter of
12 the rules for life stand up straight
with your shoulders back for example
when he says it's a winner it's winner
take all in the lobster world just as it
is in human societies for the top one
percent have as much loot as the bottom
50% and were the richest 85 people have
as much as the bottom three and a half
billion and for Peterson this affords
proof of how prices law holds in nature
dictating differential production or the
necessity of differential production now
this has an implication for how Peterson
perceives capitalism because in a
certain way Peterson doesn't support
capitalism in spite of its inequality he
supports it because of its inequality
now he would never say of course I like
inequality but the point here is that in
Peterson system if
you attempt to diverge from this
naturalized inequality you know what can
happen very easily is that you lapse
into totalitarianism right and this
totalitarianism this sort of is in turn
feminized due to its relationship with
you know left side of the brain matter
archetype of feminine chaos devouring
mother and so on if we really get into
the structure of Peterson's work but but
I think this really gets to the problem
of it right which is because if you
don't by the way that he marries you
mean archetypal archetypal structures to
evolutionary psychology which is a
rickety intellectual edifice to be sure
none of it really holds water right so
he'll for example like heel heel site
it's often a very dubious study by
student Giri
that shows how women and gender equal
nations relatively gender equal nations
like in Scandinavia are less likely to
study STEM fields and you know like the
thing is even if that even if that were
true
Peterson draws a sort of peculiar
conclusion from this which is that you
know this owns two inherent biological
differences and that the biological
basis of this is crystal clear this sort
of thing would only make sense if you
accepted the idea that Sweden or Norway
or so gender equalized that the only
deviation interest in STEM fields
between men and women you know that they
have to reflect biological substructures
but this is kind of an odd conclusion to
reach given that there were very few
women doing stem even in these countries
fifty years ago um and so I think again
we see this I'm just being very
schematic here you know I know maybe in
the questions we can elaborate a little
bit but I think you know you have to
sort of understand this conscious
unconscious exoteric esoteric divide and
Peterson's work and I think this actual
division between a kind of exoteric
embrace of liberalism and an esoteric
belief in a deeply autarkic image of
nature explains always popular both with
the old right and the mainstream because
while he disagrees with conclusions
reached by the alt-right his severe
naturalization of inequality also
affords a kind of affiliation to their
worldview and in a way that I think you
know
we could say that the alt-right is kind
of akin to Peterson's own Union shadow
right unconscious aspect of his
personality which the conscious ego
doesn't identify with and considering on
her Peterson's own professed to stay in
for a POC recei can we really blame some
of his followers for taking pic taking
his ideas to what seems to be their
apotheosis if individuals such as those
in the alt right or Peterson shadow this
much is clear
he casts a long shadow over them - yeah
that's my presentation my my section was
from a more family assistance standpoint
and also at the very end I kind of tried
to point out Peterson's hypocracy when
talking about women's issues and
especially like us like of course
activities that have okayed right for
than a transparent of women in the
society the reason why like I'm not
Canadian right and I knew very little
about Pedersen by the time math kind of
started to to dwell into his thought but
one of the reasons I made a difference I
decided to go into these was because
when I start engaging with Peterson's
public yeah like his interviews etc like
what I saw was a very similar way of
talking about feminism against feminism
of course then the very similar what you
will see in Mexico for example when I'm
from from very conservative and
reactionary people there so what kind of
interested me was why is it like right
like what's happening or what's going on
right about these issues that people
from very dissimilar backgrounds
like kind of pink semen in similar ways
right about feminism so that was like my
motivation and what I wrote was
basically like first or my my section is
divided in four points first I wanted to
address his anti-semitism how he
basically hides this truly anti-feminist
position by saying that he's only
against radical feminism so I tried to
dwell a little bit on how that's not
true he's actually an anti-feminist just
in disguise
the second part of like it's like my
second point I made was about how he
uses tyranny and he confers feminism
with tyranny right and he come first
like some of the like conquest like all
sorts of families have done over the
years with basically tyranny so when I
said there was firstly that it's a it's
a word a weird critique the one that he
makes because he kind of says the third
aesthetic tyrants right and sometimes or
implies that families are tires because
the problem my problem with Arizona at
least he said he is clearly not so you
can draw some constant like some
conclusions from his thought but also at
the same time he could like these stunts
himself by saying oh I didn't say that
right like he kind of bleeds you in a
way or that's my the way I see it and I
think I've heard been like express a
sentiment at some point and elsewhere I
like he kind of points somewhere but
when you go there he says oh no I wasn't
really pointing there right so but when
I say that or reading other or they're
like other text other he sticks like
what I see is he kind of talks of this
tyranny in the sense of like a
government almost like a government
apparatus right it's not run from the
government of course
for that it's like almost like that
social justice movements including
feminism there right like I have this
very tyrannical like or operated in like
this like mechanism of tyranny right so
I criticize that very saying wife to
think he's wrong
my third critique has to do with like
hierarchy as a as Conrad and Matt
already mentioned right how like when he
speaks of like hierarchies in right of
course when it has to do with gender and
sex like he mentally means leaves us
like in a lot of ways my first issue was
at he says that was like biology like
evolutionary biology for example
basically says right how like males tend
to be the way pillars of characterized
them right or top of the hierarchy
because of their sex traits and what
idea was these beauties because actually
there's no consensus in evolutionary
biology about these hypotheses right it
is remain a hypothesis and that's not
true and finally what I wanted to point
out is that hypocracy right because
Peterson like kind of is against this
victimization culture like oh you
shouldn't be a big team like this is the
whole problem with feminists right like
they wanna frame themselves as victims
this is wrong because you have to like
what he says facing it right like make
your bed and just uh procreate like I
don't take responsibility of yourself
right so I pointed out how this is where
you have a critical because when he
talks about the effects that what he
sees feminists have done to men he
certainly speaks of men in a very like
from I think men were the victims right
the victims of these bad feminist and
like look at all these like sad men
right like most of what happened is not
only what Matt said right like modernity
and he's like the problems with
capitalism etcetera but it to me see
that he also plays of course what it's
happening to men mostly to like it likes
it already he pins it on feminism right
so I wanted to address how he just is
very selective on heustis brief him
rhetoric when like denying these
victimhood to women but he's very
willing to give this label to men so
that was like those are like the general
things that I I talked in my section and
I think Ben you're our last speaker last
but not least is our set alright grades
uh so I guess the way that I originally
will actually in a way everything that
I'm doing right now is thanks to Jordan
Peterson so thank you for that dr.
Peterson because a few years ago what I
was doing with my time was writing
academic papers about philosophy of
logic which you know as matt said you
don't really expect anybody to read and
and then also spending far too much of
my time arguing with members of my
extended family who were fans of Jordan
Peterson and this has led me when when
my friend Dan Lane is the editor of zero
books was organizing a couple of years
ago a conference it was it was called
Jordan Peterson a conference in lieu of
a debate because Doug had invited
Peterson to be on his zero books podcast
and Peterson had initially taken the
invitation and then he realized that it
was going to be ideologically hostile
territory so he cancelled the interview
about a couple weeks before going on Joe
Rogan and Rogan said hey man why don't
you ever have a debate with one of these
equality of outcome Marxist and and
Peterson said oh because they don't want
to talk to me so so so Doug organized
this conference and since I had its
a lot of time thinking about Peterson
just for the purpose of you know arguing
with relatives of mine you know who were
much more enamored with him that I am I
I said hey I'd like to you know I'll
submit an abstract the conference and he
said actually I was thinking maybe you'd
like to write this other book for us and
he laid it you know he sort of pitched
to me the idea of the first book that I
wrote for them and everything's kind of
followed from that but I want to talk
just briefly you know what you know some
of I think one one way to start this
would be to connect to something that's
already come up with both Conrad and
Matt's presentations which is Peterson's
relationship to classical liberalism so
to my you know my perspective on this
since some thinkers like like you know
cons David Hume were very much in the
classical liberal tradition or certainly
people who are academic interests of
mine I've taught class is about and so
when I when I see anybody write say in
2020 on a classical liberal I get very
confused by that because my perspective
is that it's not so much the Petersons
he is a classical liberal or he isn't a
classical liberal as the very idea that
classical liberalism names a
contemporary political position is
slightly bizarre if you go back and look
at the actual normative and political
views of people like Locke or can't they
bear are no resemblance to anything to
anybody like the libertarian centrist
anybody thinks today in terms of a lot
of their specific views on subjects like
slavery and and race relations but they
do bear some you know the resemblance
that bear is one that's to every
contemporary position and so on so on
the one hand nobody as a classical
liberal today any more than anybody as a
young again we had or a member of the
Jacobin Club today they're sort of the
issues that define classical liberalism
refer to a world that no longer exists
in capitals were
and out of feudalism and reacting to
feudal institutions and church power and
all of those things but on another level
everybody today is a classical liberal
the basic assumptions of classical
liberalism are part of the DNA of
everything from libertarianism to
Buckley at conservativism to Marxism you
know you can talk about a broad sense
the philosophical liberalism like what
we're all talks about you know which
which sort of starts from the assumption
that everybody has equal worth but
that's a but you know that's not you
know but that's not specific to
classical liberalism right that's even
broader all right so so what do I think
Peterson's political position is well I
don't think is fascist right you know I
think that would be that'll be a silly
thing to say but there's also I think
for what my perspectives an equally
silly home what I think is the equally
fake so we think that that many people
say is is Peterson as it's like you know
you know it's a psychologist is a
self-help author why are you you know
giving him a hard time about his
political or philosophical
pronouncements because of course he's
primarily famous because of his
political pronouncements he originally
rocketed to fame because of his crusade
against c16 to add gender identity into
Canada's pre-existing human rights law
and he interpreted that in a way that's
I think extremely legally dubious you
know I'm I don't live in Canada
themselves but myself but Matt assures
me that there are that no one has been
sent to a pronoun who like just yet but
in any case uh he constantly talks even
in his self-help book he talks a lot
about so-called postmodern Marxism and
and these trends that he generally
opposes and and I guess I'd like in the
last minute you know my remarks and we
can get more into this in the Q&A to say
just a little bit more about that which
of course takes us back to the overall
issue of hierarchy right so and I saw
this came up in in the chat right so is
is Peterson make it a purely descriptive
claim about hierarchy or is he also make
an enormity of claim and I'd say a
little bit of each so his descriptive
claim is that hierarchy is natural and
you know is natural and not and not
social that it comes from it comes from
our biology you know it's it's it's
embedded in these deep archetypes but
then his normative claim is therefore
when you try to mess with it
your that's that's just a misguided
effort it's like try to make water flow
up so then so then you so then you're
gonna lead to all kinds of bad results
and as you try to you know quality of
opportunity okay but as you try to
enforce equality of outcome which we
clearly associates with Marxist
feminists etc you are by meddling with
these things that are etched into the
firmament by trying to meddle with those
you know you're on a straight road to to
repression because when you try to
change human nature you can only end
with with with the gulag right I mean
this this isn't even really a character
I mean the kind of says this I could
point you to some specific videos where
he kind of says this and I know I meant
by seven minutes but I'll just I'll just
wrap up on this point to circle back to
the very first thing Peter said at the
beginning about you know how in a way it
seems sort of tone-deaf and of course in
a way in a way to even you know talk
about Peterson have feel symposium on
Peterson as we're seeing everything that
we're seeing and I feel that too but in
a way I feel the opposite that at a time
when we're seeing a unprecedented level
of civil unrest largely by impoverished
people sparked by state violence I in a
way I actually can't imagine a more
relevant time to delve into the issue of
whether existing social hierarchies are
natural
available or whether they're contingent
and we'd better off be better off doing
at least without quite a few of them
great Thank You Ben just to confirm for
the the four speakers do we have you for
like seventy five minutes
or is it the hour that we have to head
out seventy five minutes is cool with me
bring us to five thirty yeah yeah it's
fine good we usually go for an hour here
but there looks like there's a lot of
questions there speak more speakers than
one so for the seven five minutes so a
lot of questions the chatbox just a few
things this will be recorded so if you
don't want to be on camera just ask me
to read it on your behalf and I will and
I'm gonna have the heuristic you can
have one follow-up question and that's
it
and I will climb the dominance hierarchy
and kick you out of the zoom call if you
break these protocols and just you know
let's just be polite here cuz I know the
Peterson gets trigger people get
triggered on all sides of the spectrum
when no when he comes up so for the
first question max you've got a question
he had a bunch of plus ones about it if
you can unmute yourself and read it yeah
sure let me go back to it I asked a
question regarding what Conrad said and
the question is where does Peterson
actually state that inequality is good
or implies that he supports capped
capitalism because it depends or
reinforces inequality then I added that
my take on it is that he's merely I'm
laying out what he believes are the
facts of inequality and not making a
value judgment about whether or not such
facts are good or if he agrees with
those facts rather he's at least my
understanding of it simply laying it out
as he perceives it uh yeah well you know
I mean part of what we're doing here is
trying to understand the philosophical
structure of Peterson's work right you
know not not simply to extract
quotations right you know I mean I think
that it's entirely inherent to the
structure of what he's doing right that
there's a normative aspect and this is
what Ben was touching upon right because
you know if you look at what he's
attempting to
in maps of meaning right you know he's
attempting to rationalize union
archetypes right which is a kind of
cosmology of gender if we look at
psychoanalysis you know with respect to
neurobiology right you know and and it's
part it's partly this this tension
between normative and and descriptive
you know that allows Peterson to have
eight questions about this kind of thing
right but what's very very clear like
like the thing is and I where I think
your question is interesting is I think
that there's a certain amount of
flexibility in Peterson's work it is
true in terms of how we could improve
the world right so when he uses these
terms like for example you know equality
of opportunity versus equality of
outcome I mean like an in reality
there's almost no one on the Left who's
ever really defended equality of outcome
all right even Karl Marx doesn't defend
that right you know he criticizes class
inequality specifically but acknowledges
that people have you know different
virtues and you know there are likely to
be hierarchies that emerge on that basis
right so there's an amorphousness right
with respect to this and so so again my
point is what does it mean right a
quality of opportunity versus equality
of outcome right you know is our current
system one that's defined by quality of
opportunity right I mean obviously if
you're impoverished and in Africa you
don't have a quality of opportunity
right so he moves in this very very
vague terrain but what is clear but is
work right is that you know the if you
push hard against right if you push for
what eat what he deigns very badly right
as a quality of outcome that this can
lead to deeply dangerous results right
and this is based on a naturalization of
inequality right so I believe you
commented also that you said you said
let's see here what was it here you said
anyway you were you were commenting that
it's not necessary someone was
commenting that it's not necessarily him
saying that that he's drawing on you
know other sources to say that right but
the point is that he actually structures
it philosophically right so because
there's an ontological
in a quality that's inherent to nature
and I think the first chapter of 12
rules for life is this most succinct
statement of that though it's can be
found elsewhere right we have to respect
that inequality right and we have to
develop systems of government that are
representative with respect to it right
and if we diverge too far from that
right but there's potentially going to
be very very dangerous and catastrophic
results right and that that's actually
the structural role the notion of
totalitarianism plays in his work right
it's something that emerges right when
you go too far in the direction of
equality of outcome right you know and
then it exerts this kind of crushing
weight as a response to that does that
make sense
yeah definitely but then my follow-up
question would be if I'm allowed that I
don't really see in Peterson that it's a
necessary conclusion that the only if
you follow them logically they will take
you necessarily to these extreme
right-wing and destructive
interpretations because precisely in
maps of meaning at least it's what I
understood when I read it and I consider
myself a leftist is that me she she
tries to lay out the structure that
deletes the positive change in society
that's part of what is contained within
mythological and religious structures
like this period of change he insists he
insists on the idea that through
changing yourself you can change society
and all that stuff but I didn't I really
didn't see this idea that you shouldn't
try to change things it was closer to we
should be serious and responsible and
trying to change things because doing it
prematurely or too quickly or without
seriousness can lead to those kinds of
distortions and so my main problem with
it is that
the he isn't really in my understanding
he isn't really trying to justify
inequalities in some ways doing
precisely the opposite he's trying to
say if you want to change it then you
have to be serious about it and that's I
really don't see how that's it's it's
like the interpretation that you were
saying strikes me as being opposite to
what he's actually stating okay well the
first thing to say is that I didn't say
that you know that Peterson's positions
are our far right or that you know
reading Peterson will automatically lead
you to them right you know I think it's
very very important to Peterson's work
that there's this tension right which I
described right between an ontological
ontological naturalization of inequality
and a view that we should develop
structures which are responsive to that
and maybe can improve upon it in certain
respects but are nevertheless limited
ontologically right you know by this
sort of deep dimension of his work right
so I don't you know I don't think that
the most natural political position in
terms of compatibility with Peterson's
work is a far-right position but what I
was merely pointing out is that if you
look at the particular ontological
prominence right the Attar kkuk aspect
of his work plays in terms of being the
real reality that undergirds all kind of
political formations and regulates them
then you can start to understand why
some people would view them as very
sympathetic to that right or why certain
people read his work might go in that
direction right you know that raises a
larger question about its complicity
with those cultures right but in terms
of your your other point about improving
the world yeah I don't mean to suggest
that Peterson totally out rules the
notion that we can improve things right
I mean presumably if he says that he's
an advocate for equality of opportunity
right you know that's one species of
equality that he supports right but you
know what I'm saying is that there are
absolute limitations that are assigned
to that in terms of what's possible and
ultimately everything indexes back to a
deep ontological intelligence a tion of
inequality that's and this is the
horizon of what's achievable right you
know and he says this very very
succinctly time and time again right you
know equality of
whatever that means right because again
it's extremely vague as an ocean right
you know will lead to catastrophic
results well that's interesting too
right because you know if we look at you
know if we look at you know the 20th
century you know we can debate you know
the morality or you know the actions of
states like the Soviet Union or China
right but one thing that's very clear is
that in a global perspective that you
know often in order to change you know
economic inequalities that are that are
deeply embedded as a consequence of
historical structures it's not it's not
it's necessary to actually be radical
right um you know and I would argue that
in many respects that's the only way in
which things are really accomplished
right
you know like house with the French
Revolution we could give an example and
we might discuss the foundation of
Petersons liberalism right and how that
was manifested politically because it
wasn't necessarily peaceable which is
another little irony right so again I
think there's a real naivety right you
know in terms of you know you know
creating this sort of ontological
affixed historically insensitive
structure right and saying that all of
our political practice has to index that
and function to some degree in
accordance with it right now I'm not
saying absolutely right but to some
degree I just really quickly add on to
that yeah so so I think it's it's
certainly true that that nothing
Peterson says entails that that all
forms of social change are impossible
but it's clearly the case that he he
goes out of his way constantly to
attribute at least quite a bit of
existing inequality and distribution of
resources etc to natural sources so
Marian gave an example about STEM fields
earlier which actually I love that
example especially because if you go
back and look at the you know the way
people talked about computer program in
the mid 20th century it was largely seen
as women's work you know and and then
there was
later you know shift their the opposite
direction is pick a more prestigious but
but certainly with with with large-scale
economic inequalities he constantly
makes remarks about like that that's one
of the main purposes for which he uses
his favorite animal metaphors right that
oh look at these lobsters you know some
having much more territory and resources
than others look at the ants you know
and and how some of them are you know
doing this work the other other others
aren't well that's not because of
capitalism and the west white men and
you know he's very very very fond of
this rhetorical strategy now I agree I
think you could agree with a lot of the
larger scale things he says in maps
edenia etc and and reject all of that
right like I don't think it particularly
flows from those sources he has to have
that position after all Peterson himself
recognizes that at least the specific
historical forms that hierarchy has
taken have shifted right it is in his
view for the better you know that's more
meritocratic etc so so you could
certainly agree with a lot of his
promises and think that further shifts
are possible and desirable but I do
think he's saying something more than
just be careful and serious about it
when you pursue pursue it because his
particular quality bout coming
particularly the way he creamed he ties
that to his critique of extemporary left
certainly implies that he thinks that
Marxist feminists etc are demanding
unreasonable forms of equality of
outcome that that aren't that could only
lead to disaster and if you make any
input into attempt to create it given
these extremely natural forms of
inequality he sees at the base the human
condition okay Nathan you had a question
that got a lot of plus ones
Nathan you we can hear you I think
oh you we can't hear you you're one
moment you hear me now yep good sorry
about that thank you guys so much for
coming on and been willing to present a
nuanced critical point of view against
Peterson so my question is that a lot of
Peterson debate seems to hinge on
whether a person senses that Peterson is
either quote good behind all of his
rhetoric and is at bottom seeking to
explore and help people or whether his
rhetoric is presenting a facade of good
in order to smuggle in a lot of
reactionary or tired old views do you
guys also get that same sense and I you
know Ben you were saying that you have
had a lot of discussions with people and
I I just gave up on them because it was
either like yeah a Peterson is good or
boohoo Peterson is bad like almost every
single time I the nobody budged from
their from their initial viewpoint so do
you guys also get that same sense about
the hinge do you yourselves parse him
along those lines and how could we make
a reasonable judgment about such a
question yeah but just just real briefly
that I'll throw to my co-authors I think
a lot of discussion is like that it's
certainly not the kind of discussion I'm
interested in I think that's probably
the least interesting question you could
possibly ask about somebody whether they
like are individually virtuous or not
you know I don't know if you know
whether I think whether Peterson he
clearly has some political views that
are at least in a very broad brush sense
conservative right you know that he
talks about a lot even in the self-help
writings so he clearly has those views
that's not necessarily the same as
saying he has like an evil agenda
smuggle them in or that everything he
says about self-help is bad or that
there aren't people who really benefit
from it right I'm certainly not
interested in Peterson a or Peterson
I'm interested in okay he makes he has
these specific ideas he makes these
specific arguments are they convincing
arguments are they good ideas or parts
of them good other parts bad if so
what's what can i I'm all onto that
before just just to add directly to what
you said there you mentioned you know at
the beginning not you but I think Conrad
at the beginning mentioned that he's
sold three million books and you know
you can go I can go to my local
university and find fifteen or twenty
people and have a really engaging
conversation about these kind of ideas
but these kind of ideas don't sell three
million books so it feels to me like
there's something else at work you know
behind or beside or you know surrounding
whatever it is that the philosophical
framework maybe helps to give some
legitimacy to what he's saying in in
certain people's minds but that maybe I
don't want to say there's something more
going on but that that analysis doesn't
exhaust the Peterson phenomenon
Matt do you want to grab that yeah sure
actually I suppose I should because one
of the things that I wrote about was the
question of authenticity and moral
virtue and Peterson's work and I don't
say this expressly in the book but I
think that if you want to put it
colloquially there's two stages that you
have to go through to assess whether or
not someone is a good person
in the classical Brechtian sense of the
world right and the one that I'm more
interested in is the second which is the
one that been highlighted right so the
first stage that you have to ask which
is one that Peterson's about devotes a
great deal of time to analyzing
since it's a more interesting
psychological question is the
authenticity of someone's moral
viewpoint but do they actually believe
what it is that they're saying are they
committed to it and how committed are
they to this right and in this respect
you know authenticity has a lot of
virtues to it right we admire people who
are authentically dedicated to causes
but we admire people who are
authentically dedicated to causes that
we think are worth pursuing
right there couldn't be authentic Nazis
there can be authentic people running
Soviet gulags who really believe in
their cause they're going to be
authentic reactionaries right so in the
sense that you know Peterson is a person
a great authenticity I don't think
anyone could deny that right he really
seems to believe what he's saying and I
think that a test to some of the
charisma that Nathan was talking about
right he comes across as a man of
conviction who really feels that he's
speaking to the fundaments of Western
civilization and its enemy and people
who want answers to these questions pick
up on that and it resonates with them
right after the second a more delicate
question that Ben was trial ighting it
concerns whether or not what he
authentically believes is morally
plausible right and that's what I have a
lot more issue with because even though
he seems to authentically believe and a
lot of these different reactionary
convictions however it is that we want
to frame them I don't think that they
are actually hold up to sophisticated
moral analysis I think actually if you
even look at the liberal tradition and
has been articulated through the 20th
century most liberals who looked at the
tradition with any severity would say it
doesn't hold up to serious moral
scrutiny and there are a lot of
different dimensions to that so would I
characterize him as a good person I can
she was a person of tremendous
authenticity great charisma and powerful
conviction but somebody who holds
ultimately an implausible and
undesirable moral outlook that people of
good conscience should reject for a wide
variety of different reasons well I
would just say that I agree with you
Nathan in the sense that I do believe
that and that's my problem with Peterson
particularly and I think in the book
there's an introduction by Slava
Dziedzic and Jeter kind of makes this
point because he says the problem with
Peterson is not when he lies but when he
hides a truth when he's lying right and
I think this is a brilliant point made
by Dziedzic right I think that this is
something I tried also to incorporate
into my own like a critique right that's
I think the problem and I do agree that
and my problem being is with him at
least and related to your question is I
do think that he hides these very deeply
rational politics right in like this
kind of common sensical things that he's
telling you right because when people
tell you like well and maybe if you want
to prove it like you want to make your
bed in the morning right like well if
you maybe you want to howl even more or
they're lying you wanna do that for
yourselves like you accomplish little
things right I have friends that have
gone through like psychological
treatment and one of the big not
treatment but they talk to cycle other
psychologists especially today right and
what the psychologists have told my
friends is like well if you don't want
to feel this we're like very deep
pressure what we're living try to give
yourself little tasks like right at - so
you feel that you complete a task over
the day and you feel good for yourself
right and these will like if you build
up on that and we'll help you learn
right so what I'm saying is it's not
wrong to sometimes tell yourself do your
bed and stuff right or the problem is
what comes next repeaters on and he
tells you right like well you don't do
your bed because you want to be order
and orders good etc and if we look at
what's happening today in the u.s. right
what we are seeing is that not all forms
of or there are okay
right just because we say they are
natural right sometimes in order to see
something better happening maybe we'd
come to the moment in which all of the
previous earlier has to crumble right
and try to kind of grab it and just want
to want it to stay the same way for our
own personal reasons right is bad or at
least I would say it's totally wrong to
hide it until like under some pretension
of I'm just giving advice right yeah I
actually just wanted to build on this
since I touch very briefly on that in
that section it's that he kind of insist
on advice that on the surface though it
seems really common sensical and
actually is individually dollars right
like having grown up in toronto as a
millennial I can tell you there are a
lot of people I know who should clean
their room I would probably benefit from
that right you know ask personalized
advice it's not bad where I find this
problematic is when someone says you
should put your own life in order before
trying to change the world well what if
your life is in disorder because there
are fundamental problems in the world
and one of the examples I give is if
you're not earning enough money to
actually live a life of dignity when
Peterson is telling you don't form a
union or don't try to politically change
that situation just try to improve
things for yourself that's highly
problematic because one of the best ways
you might be able to improve things for
yourself and for that matter improve
things for others would be by engaging
in social agitation and that's where
this kind of common-sense bullet the
advice becomes problematic and where we
should question its political efficacy
yeah and I would just also just add that
you know because because I know it's
come people to the chat were amazed by
the assertion that that Peterson's
individual virtue wasn't really of
interest here so just to just briefly
defend that look if you wanted somebody
to be a friend or romantic partner or a
mentor or therapist then if then sure
they're they're their individual moral
character might be of tremendous
interest to you if a public figure is
making arguments for ideas their
individual moral character is of no
interest whatsoever completely
we irrelevant I think there's a common
popular obsession with this point right
now in Western politics whether somebody
is act is speaking in good faith or in
bad faith I like Star Trek but this
might be his worst legacy that does not
matter one iota somebody who is an
insincere bad person in sincerely making
arguments might still make a good
argument
all right that's somebody somebody who
is extremely sincere and and is and and
is extremely virtuous person might make
terrible arguments somebody who has a
somebody who who wants once only good
might be endorsing vile ideas right they
have so I think rather than trying to
look into Peterson's heart which is
impossible in any case for those of us
who don't know him we should we should
evaluate his ideas as they are can I get
could I get Raven Connolly Connolly's
question here could I take that Peter
sure okay
so raven connelly writes here should i
read the question or a raven do you want
to unmute yourself and ask it I didn't
really frame it as a question but
however you are taking it go for it okay
I thought it was a question because
there is a question mark in there I see
yeah I think what's very interesting is
the way that if you look at maps of
meaning part of what Peterson does is
you know an apropos is kind of Union
influence he takes he takes these sort
of narratives right these archetypal
narratives and he maps them on to you
know cognitive biology essentially and
he focuses on certain this has already
been written about actually in
psychology today right he focuses on
certain kinds of narratives right you
know that you know in which there is
sort of a hero's journey and so forth
right we could talk about the Odyssey or
we could talk about the back of that
Gita and things like this and while
these do persist across different
cultures
um you know what's interesting is that
you know from an anthropological
standpoint I think it's broadly
understood that this kind of narrative
structure is characteristic of post
agricultural societies in general right
and also you know with post agriculture
and animal domestication we tend to get
you know the rise of patriarchal
structures right so I think it's
interesting because to talk about this
view of the Risso notion of nature right
versus a Hobbesian view of nature or
peterson has to you know for all of this
to be plausible right he has to pedal
very hard across his books to try to
discredit you know any notion of nature
that we disagree with his ontological
naturalization of inequality so for
example the entire sort of tradition
that runs through the coffin and Lewis
Henry Morgan and so forth that talks
about the idea that societies were
natural local or matrilineal prior to
the development of Agriculture is
dismissed just totally off and there
isn't it's not much of an argument by
Peterson Rousseau is dismissed you know
and what's interesting about this is
that it seems to me that you know
perhaps far more interesting than this
debate and of itself is the way that
these conceptions of nature nature index
to different political positions right
so you know you can that the reality is
right you can find like you know I mean
I I tend to think that you know class
and wealth inequality well I think this
is is demonstrable or a consequence of
certain changes that emerged perhaps in
the in the 10% most recent part of human
evolutionary history of course there's
some dispute over those matters but the
point is you can find all kinds of
examples in nature to rationalize
different political views right so
Peterson cites Jane Goodall's work on
chimps and he says well chimps are
horrible and they kill each other and
you know this is what nature is right
and it's like well if you're left you
can just go cite bonobos right I mean
it's not that you know there's always a
counterpoint right so it's not terribly
convincing in the end you know and I
think you know in a lot of respects or
least with respect to Peterson that it
can be more interesting to analyze again
these conceptualizations of nature with
respect to the general political and
ideological agenda that he's putting
forth give any folks that room yeah but
I don't know maybe we could save it for
the sense-making session later on today
okay cool we'll plug that at the end so
Rogell oh you had a question about what
is a morals and immersion biology could
you eat yourself in and read that yeah
on Peterson's case for emergent morale
firm Wiley emerging from biology and
what did you guys think of that and also
just curious what moral structures are
you guys operating from just kind of see
I mean I guess I would say that some
moral impulses probably do have almost
certainly right do have have biological
sources some don't right so so so so it
could be that you know some of our
deepest moral intuitions are ones that
anybody who shared our biology would
have and some of them might come from
from cultural sources or other things
but I don't in a sense I don't think
it's a very interesting question right
because I think that because I think
like no matter which ones come from
which source right you know that like oh
these these deeply held moral intuitions
are an inheritance from evolution these
these ones you know come from from from
culture from whatever right you know
wherever else they might come from I
don't think it would ever make sense to
say oh well will embrace the ones that
come from
right sources will reject the ones that
come from from the wrong sources and the
reason I don't think that and trying to
think how to how to put this as
succinctly as possible so it's not to
become a total bore and like talk the
next ten minutes you know about my
co-author it's gonna be about it but has
to do with David Humes point about facts
and values so they so empirical facts
can only ever tell us how to implement
our normative goals right that be that
they could be terribly relevant to that
right like okay we care about bringing
about greater equality whatever we as we
care about right then we can start
looking at empirical facts like oh
what's worked in the past what hasn't
worked you know what are the one of the
sort of limitations built in by various
empirical issues and those can be
tremendously relevant but the one thing
that the facts can't do is tell us what
to care about in the first place
and so I'm deeply skeptical of the idea
that there's anything that we could
appeal to outside of our most deeply
held moral intuitions in order to in
order to justify them you know that we
say like you can say oh why do you care
about X I can justify it in terms of Y
if Y is some other goal that I care
about even more deeply than I care about
X but once you get down to why do you
care about the things that you care
about most deeply I just kind of see
that as a pseudo question but my but my
co-authors might have totally different
views on this Oh could I just real quick
clarify because at least from what I
understand it is but his the main belief
with the source of morals is that they
arise from at least in part from a
projection of the hierarchy and their
certain behaviors naturally promotes you
know confidence and climbing on the
hierarchy and that kinda has these weird
and visible rules that aren't fully
articulated or clarified they're more
patterns of behavior that we
conceptualize as rules
so I guess to that extent
you know before you that couldn't be the
case right but if that were the case
wouldn't that be an example of where
facts could actually define a morality
because it's kind of a self
introspection into the moral into the
very concept of why we have a concept it
is more yeah so I would make a
distinction there between saying that
that empirical facts can be can be
informative for the descriptive question
of why it is that we care about the
things that we most deeply care about
but out make a distinction between that
question and the question of why we
should care about the things that we
most deeply care about so the first
question absolutely that's like that
that is a question for the empirical
psychologists the anthropologist the
biologist even right sure absolutely but
any I but what I'm skeptical about is
that any answers to those questions are
going to be relevant to the to the the
art questions the the what should we
care about the most
yeah I probably agree with that kind of
framework the way I identify following
someone like Derek Parfit is as a quasi
cognitive realist and to try to unpack
that a little bit I do agree that a lot
of our basic moral feelings or our Moral
Sentiments to use the classical term
probably do you have a biological or a
naturalistic basis right they emerge you
know in conscious beings that have
evolved over a long period of time to
have certain sentiments and studying
them can be of great interest right now
saying that just because we have certain
moral sentiments that emerge in
conscious beings doesn't really tell us
very much about which Moral Sentiments
are appropriate or what kind of rational
programs or rational imperatives that we
should ride from do sentiments right and
this is where the realist element comes
in because I think that once we try to
use reason to ascertain what kind of
moral codes we should follow they have
an independent status that's not
beholden to how we feel about them and
what I think is actually a much more
interesting question than just what are
our feelings about morality is actually
context and people like Henry Sidgwick
were aware of this
as far back to the 19th century where we
might have days strong and compelling
moral reasons to do something that
operates against our sentiments Sidgwick
characterized this as a profound as
problem in ethics right oftentimes we
might have compelling rational reasons
to do something that we really don't
want to do and that actually feels wrong
to us emotionally but nonetheless if we
look at it from a more impartial
perspective it seems like we have very
good compelling moral reasons to do it
and in his case Cedric was talking about
the necessity to put aggregate utility
over ahead of individual utility right
and these kinds of questions aren't
things that can be answered by looking
just at Moral Sentiments from whatever
level of analysis that you think is
appropriate right you can only answer
them by using different analytical tools
than what an empirical scientist or
philosophical psychologists have
available to them yeah yeah I would just
I'll just say you know just real quickly
so we don't turn our remaining time into
a debate about meta ethics that would be
a lot of fun though sure another time
for sure then I'd say that that what
that more impartial perspective from
which we can reject some of our
sentiments amounts to ultimately has to
come down to what Rawls calls reflective
equilibrium which means that what we're
doing is we're looking at different
sentiments that that seem to point in
different directions and we're going
through this process of trying to make
trying to figure out how to cohere them
together into an internally consistent
framework which may it might mean at the
end of it you have to throw some of them
out right that's fine right but
ultimately what's going on there still
has in my view read that I'd still go
with the very human view about that has
has sentiment at the base of it right
like like like it's in at the end it's
it's an elaborate form of throwing out
some things we care about because we
care about something else either more
deeply yeah absolutely we're trying to
rationalize or create a hierarchy of
rationalizations for our Moral
Sentiments right and this should be done
as and partially as possible but
ultimately it does arise from a
convention that we should be good
in some strange sense of the word right
and we can talk about that later on but
that's why I think quasi cognitivist
realism is the way to go about it uh can
I can I hop in and just just say
something I want to do because the the
idea of competence hierarchies was
brought up and I just wanted to
elaborate a little bit on the historical
and ideological context of Peterson's
work of course Peterson talks about you
know certainly he naturalizes the idea
of competence hierarchies right though I
think he only says it's it's the case
amongst animals with higher-level
nervous systems that competence
hierarchies exist and what's interesting
about this as regards competence
hierarchies is that this notion that
nature is defined by competence Aki's
emerges more or less specifically within
the context of bourgeois capitalist
society right so you know it's very
interesting right if you look at if you
will get C on SPO we're at the
university elite University in France
right the founder of it Emil but knee I
believe he gave a speech when it was
founded and he basically said that you
know as Republican forms of governance
have ushered in greater levels of
equality us the upper class we're no
longer just going to be able to depend
on our status anymore right that we have
to attach to our status in order to
defend it right certain tangible
capacities that can differentiate us
from the other members of society
you know and I think you can see the way
that this is very much part of the genus
of a bourgeois society I mean of course
you could look at you know the you know
if you look at Darwin right in terms of
how we conceptualize as natural
selection and Marx observes this Darwin
ends up being very influenced by Malthus
right you know and this aspect of
Darwin's work ends up being played
played you know the sort of survival of
the fittest sort of vulgar
interpretation of Darwin's work ends up
being played up more heavily than it
even is represented you know in Darwin's
work so his cousin Francis Galton right
you know he really stresses this you
know sort of social Darwinian dimension
right you know that then becomes very
very popular within the 20th century
but of course the difficulty with all of
this right is that you know it is the
case right within a society such as ours
that hierarchies are based partially on
competence right you know I think it
would have been unthinkable for someone
living in the ancien régime in France
right you know to think that I our keys
were really based on competence but
today there's enough of it right that it
can be defended but you know I think
what we have to understand is that you
know like say you come from a very very
wealthy country right typically a white
country right you know then because of
that country's wealth you're gonna
better access to education and then
you're gonna be more educated right so
it's actually very very hard right you
know to separate out hierarchies of
competence from from from hierarchies of
power right and in a certain sense the
idea of a competence hierarchy is
something that's ideologically used to
defend the inequalities that exist today
so this is why someone like Foucault
will say you know we have we have to
look at power knowledge right because
power you know in the context of our
society you know is always defended you
know through the transmission of
knowledge you know and through an appeal
to the notion of knowledge and
competency if it's okay there's a this
question it was asked a while ago by
Matthew MacGyver that I'd really love to
engage with before we end it
Matthew we don't know meet yourself an
ask your question or Ben if you know it
sure okay sir what was the one it's it's
a 447 in the chat it's and it's a long
chat comments I won't read the whole
thing but but the last part was was I
don't say Marxism is rooted classically
liberal principles not individualist
really manifests liberal Marxism is
reactionary the outcomes classical
liberal principles that's why ideology
built on Marxism tend to focus on
outcomes I could be confused maybe mr.
Berger's could expand and how he thinks
Marxism is meaningfully classically
liberal
uh I'd like to chime in on that once
you're done also good yep
so okay sorry I was just laughing
because it occurred to me that I could I
could assert the competence hierarchy
here and say dr. Burgess damnit but guys
look I think I think that so
so it's certainly true that many people
have done extremely liberal things in in
the name of Marx's ideas historically
it's no doubt whatsoever about that I do
think that we tend to have some weird
double standards about this so to to
illustrate that so most of the most
important libertarian figures of the
20th century supported Pinochet
dictatorship and Chile which had an
extremely bloody reign of terror for
anti-communist reasons so Wilson
Friedman actually gave gave gave
Pinochet a you know like flew down to
Chile to give Pinochet economic advice
and voting with glowing rather a letter
about it you know you know Hayek you
know had actually wrote extensively and
justification of him etc the state went
some Marxist intellectualism
Stalin's Russia and in fact if you go
back to look at that at the roots of
these things I think the contrast gets
really striking because some of the big
classical liberals like John Locke and
John Stuart Mill were themselves
directly involved in some of the
greatest and most liberal atrocities of
their era John Locke wrote in defense of
both slavery and the dispossession of
the Native Americans and was directly
involved in both insofar as he helped
write the Constitution from the South
Carolina colony John Stuart Mill
imported classical liberal figure worked
for the British East India Company you
know doesn't get much more liberal than
that and also wrote philosophical
justification for British rule in India
in on Liberty whereas Karl Marx people
who seem to give Locke and mill a pass
for their liberal political activities
blame Karl Marx
for what people who were born after he
died didn't his name even though Marx
himself never never wrote in
justification of of undemocratic regimes
you know his idea of the dictatorship
proletariat of the rule of Labour his
go-to example was the ultra Democratic
Paris Commune of 1871 the only head of
state he ever thought in it well enough
of to even write him a friendly letter
was Abraham Lincoln so so that's on the
part about about how its manifested
itself as far as the question of
individualism
whereas Marx doesn't have an explicit
normative history you know theory one
way or the other
Reagan if he clearly has normative
commitments right but like he doesn't he
doesn't he's not and he's not a moral
philosophers he doesn't theorize about
ethics but he does actually clearly not
an advocate absolute equality of outcome
re critique the Gotha program chapter
one and I'll just leave it at that for
the sake of brevity right someone let
Matt talk but as far as the
individualism question I do think in
fact that if you know Marx is not an
ethical theorist you know he's a history
you know historical and sociological
theorist but certainly if you look at
the kind of normative theory that could
provide a basis for an ethical
commitment to socialism
I mentioned Rawls earlier John Rawls
there at justice and I think that and I
think that a good that so Rawls is
starting point is that everybody has the
same moral status so just society is the
kind that you would design if you didn't
know who you were going to be in that
society wouldn't know whether they'd be
born into a rich family or a poor family
for that matter you wouldn't know
whether you were to be extremely
talented or extremely untalented so pure
bureaucratic distributions wouldn't
particularly appeal to you doesn't
necessarily mean that you'd have to have
absolute equality of outcome he talks
about other factors you might weigh
against that but it does mean that you
know you'd want to society you'd want to
live in regardless of any factors
outside of your control and and that
sort of thing actually does strike me as
providing us with
with a with a good reason to criticize
capitalism and support some sort of
democratic socialism and say that this
is actually one of the points where I
find there's a bit of an ugly side to
Peter Sounion analysis and the kind of
broader
IDW analysis that you see where as Ben
mentioned they're far more willing to
forgive figures in history of political
thought particularly who reached
conclusions that they find palatable
than those who actually weren't
responsible for many of the atrocities
carry out in their name but nonetheless
they find their conclusions unpalatable
and just to bring it back to Peterson
one of the things that I point out is
he's very willing to forgive Nietzsche
this is the same Nietzsche I used to say
things like well if several million
people die in the 20th century that's an
acceptable loss to produce a more
interesting kind of environment or who
famously chimed in the Spoke Zarathustra
goes out at a woman make sure you bring
a whip right and he's also very willing
to forgive Martin Heidegger who unlike
Marx actually did support in
totalitarian party while he was alive
the Nazi Party all right he was very
like vigorously involved he tattled to
the Gestapo about you know various
people who are in university programs
about how they weren't German enough and
you find very little mention of that in
Peterson's work much as you don't find a
lot of references to the crimes
committed by various classical liberals
and the work of the IDW more generally
right and I'm not saying that we
shouldn't read Marx our fight ago and
Nietzsche or lock our path on that basis
what we need to do is of course extract
was valuable from their work well sadly
chucking the rest as either an
unfortunate relic of history or just
every bad conclusion that they reached
that wasn't really supported by anything
other than their own prejudices and
negative inclination yeah yeah oh by the
way real quickly I just realized I never
actually connected the dots with my last
comment right about Rawls and
individualism that that walls you and
framework that I just mentioned is still
one that in if we mean by individualism
as seen discrete individuals as the
relevant unit of moral evaluation unlike
for example utility
which is actually collectivist in the
sense that your your aggregated
happiness and not worrying about how its
distributed among individuals then
Rahl's e'en ISM is is morally
individualist right roles you know
Rawls's concern is how any given form of
social organization and what it would be
like to live in it as one of the least
well-off members of that society so even
though his conclusions are very
different than that libertarians or
perking conservatives or anything it's
not because he is less morally concerned
with individuals yeah actually this is
one of the things that I want to talk
about also since I'm an Aussie at heart
right although my own esoteric way and
when it comes to the point about Marx
right I actually think Marx very much
belongs in what you call the broad or
Western Canon which includes liberalism
in part because marks rather like many
of his liberal progeny ders was very
concerned with freedom first and
foremost right one of the odd things if
you read Marx whenever he actually talks
about his own normative commitments
which has been pointed out has been
frequently and he almost always talked
about things in terms of freedom the
development of your personality not
living in an exploitative system where
you're ready to power 'less rather than
in terms of the necessity for strict
equality per se and this comes from the
fact that Marx was highly opposed to
Hegel well yeah right
who was very much a kind of conservative
liberal thinker who Marx radicalized
along with others in the Yoyogi galleon
movement and Hegel's entire point was
that you know in society you want
freedom to develop various sides of your
personality and as robust a fashion as
possible you know this is putting it
very simply since of course
hable Hegel is famously difficult know
when it comes to what I think our own
normative commitments should be I agree
with somebody like Rawls right I don't
even think you can talk about us living
in a meritocracy when it's patently
obvious that many people enjoy
tremendous advantages from birth right
and other people are extremely
disadvantaged from birth and this can
include things from their social status
what kind of family you're born into you
what kind of advantages your parents are
going to give you a disadvantage is
they're going to give you but can also
come to or so I relate to things like
natural abilities but one of the things
that people like Charles Moreau
really like to talk about and say well
we should live in it from a meritocracy
defined by IQ I the smartest people
should rise to the top or they will rise
to the top and there's nothing wrong
with that
well my account that's not a meritocracy
right if winning a genetic genetic
lottery allows you to get to the top you
don't merit that you happen to be lucky
enough to be born with us and the
rauzein point is that you shouldn't feel
bad about this but you should recognize
that you were lucky enough to be born
where certain gifts and be willing to
redistribute some of what you gained on
their behalf to those who through no
fault of their own happen to be less
fortunate than you are and I think
that's the appropriate thing to do and
it's also the liberal thing to do
if you take things like the moral
quality of individuals and fairness
seriously which our society are afraid
to say does not in any serious respect
yeah okay I guess I guess I just very
briefly shot man that you know i think
that i think that if by meritocracy
you mean a a society in which the
primary way of distributed resources is
according to a hierarchy of competence
right as is a hierarchy based on
variations and natural talents then of
course one we obviously don't live in a
society with the slightest resemblance
to that but you know I think that like
Twitter is very useful for illustrating
this how the mental quality of a lot of
our richest plutocrats and - it wouldn't
be a desirable one to live in anyway
right as Matt says right just just to
put a very just just to lower the level
of discourse here I'll say that my wife
and I just watched the classic 1997
science fiction film Gattaca the other
night and that that seems like a good
illustration of why a genuinely mirrored
kradic society in the sense of the
Society of where distribution is along
the lines of of classic of variations
natural talents would be a dystopia yeah
great film and I just uh can I just say
something if we have a bit if we have a
couple minutes I just want
to say first of all just with respect to
what you're saying about marks and
individuality it seems to me that there
is a you know the problem of this with
marks is always like in a certain sense
and marks his early work you know
different albeit in a genre similar to
Peterson in a certain sense is that he
does have you know a bio logistic view
of morality in a certain sense right and
this is because of the daddy has to fire
back right so for our back you know
understands huggles dialectic you know
in relation to the biology of the human
itself right so the things that are
portrayed is dialectical movements and
haggle become a question of biology and
Mark sort of structures is work in that
way like the struggle for socialism is
about overcoming the alienation of the
individual but in around the mid-1840s
there's a shift right where Marx pivots
and he starts to focus more on the way
that notions of individuality an agency
for example are structured by
socio-economic formations and you know
in capital we see that you know the
historical unfolding of value in
economic systems becomes quite decisive
so he says well the freedom
characteristic of Protestantism is
appropriate to a society of individual
commodity producers and so forth
you know and that certainly opens the
door to a broader critique of notions of
liberalism or humanism in terms of how
they can be ideologically deployed in
the present or in that Marx's time so
people go in different directions in
this like Michele onry tries to explain
all of Marxism with respect to
individual phenomenology reading the
earlier work whereas someone like Luis
Salazar will say well Marx is totally
anti humanist and there's a scientific
Marxism that dissolves these notions and
so on and I also just want to say one
other thing
I believe rayvin's said how do we
distinguish competency from merit and I
think one thing again from a Marxist
perspective is that you know if you
think of our society economically you
know this is one way of looking at it
right you know there's a certain
inequality about the fact that
you know if someone has capital and they
start a business right but they're able
to appropriate the value you create
right you know and we're it the case
that you didn't have a system right in
which one you know you have people in
McDonald's working for minimum wages you
have you know shareholders and
McDonald's owning Ferraris and so forth
the people actually would be rewarded
far more based on merit right because
they'd be being remunerated for you know
for something approximating the actual
value of their work right so I think
marks this point not respect is that the
capitalist mode of production is
actually incompatible with a truly
merit-based focus
I just want that no I just want to say
something that this should be our last
share because we do have to close out do
you want to one of the things where I
think we can distinguish confidence from
merit is confidence is fundamentally
just how good you are that's something
right and there are a lot of different
dimensions of formal competencies that
somebody might have and they're already
by the market and fairly arbitrary ways
sometimes in less arbitrary ways
depending upon the skills that one might
develop but what we understand typically
when we talk about merit it goes back to
an earlier question of what someone
deserves right and I think this is where
people like Rawls and myself have a
fundamental problem with the kind of
Association people make between a
competence hierarchy and when were the
deserving or the worthy rise to the top
because my argument would be yes while
it might be the case that people with
high levels of confidence in fields that
the market happens to reward in here I
think Conrad is correct right might rise
to the top that doesn't mean that
they're particularly worthy in any
meaningful sense of the word
particularly if they get ahead merely
because they have gifts that were
distributed them through the
happenstance of nature or because they
have had certain advantages from the
beginning if what you really want to
talk about was a meritocracy our society
would look radically different than it
does right now so radically different
actually that would probably fill
Peterson with nightmares because it
would involve massive forms of
disordered to try to establish anything
approximating a meritocracy in the sense
that any moral theory would find
appropriate all right so I think if
we're going to actually have a serious
debate about capitalism versus liberal
socialism or Marxism of where it happens
to be we need to start from the
standpoint that whatever capitalism is
and one of hierarchy competencies are
they are not meritocratic right in fact
it's a perversion of the notion of merit
ought to consider them such cool and the
sense Ben wants to respond but we have
to we have to stop right there no okay
so thank you for coming today this was a
really juicy discussion I think the chat
was like blowing up I don't know some
philosophical culture wars are going in
there or something so we would
definitely
love to have you guys come back I know
Conrad do you you mentioned something
about stoicism and marks and stop
thought that that sounds right up our
alley so we would love to have a future
session and yeah and Peter should
actually mentioned you guys already been
in the latest newsletter so I cannot do
their article yeah yeah sorry that the
Conor Conrad so you guys check that out
so yeah the symposium continues we have
a brief break and then we're gonna watch
the documentary together and we tried it
actually looks pretty good so it's the
quality is good and that is that was at
the rise of jordan peterson the
filmmakers here right now i don't want
to put under spot too much but tricia if
you're there a we a brief moment that
you want to unmute yourself just plug it
a little bit yes yeah we can hear you
okay plug it I guess yeah how many
people haven't seen it yeah it's what to
say about the film it's that our point
to it what's your point with the film
director I'd say that so the film was
the film we finished filming what
beginning of 2019 and initially we were
kind of gonna stop filming like right
around the time when Jordan started his
book to her so you know a lot of it is
framed from before that but but the main
thread running through it all for me was
thinking about the culture war that was
brewing underneath it and the
polarization so that's a lot of the lens
that we were looking at it through cool
so we're going to watch the film
crab-like and afterwards we're gonna
have a Q&A with the two filmmakers and
then Raven
everyone's favorite black bird at the
stoah is going to be running that
sense-making session
Raven could you just meet yourself and
kind of say how that's gonna go down
yeah sure so um I think as anybody can
tell who's been looking at the chat
there's a lot of con
and here to do some sense-making on so
I'll be hosting a sense-making session
and if you don't know the lingo that
just means we're gonna have a
conversation the cool kids call it but
yeah so we're gonna have discussion
about some of the different ideas and
viewpoints that have been coming up
today throughout the symposium and I
will also be really holding the frame in
this conversation so we don't get off
the rails so yeah I would definitely
invite everybody to come I think
everybody's perspective is valuable here
so thank you excellent
thank you really can I just add
something about the Peterson documentary
because of the sort of protests against
it and some of the censure I was really
expecting when I did watch it some sort
of Pro Peterson work of ideology but I
was quite impressed by the nuance of the
representations in the film so everyone
here I do encourage them to check with
the film after this I think was quite
good work that's the first I'm hearing
about this yeah I said that they mail it
to Conrad so you can maybe I'll forward
it but I have one final class to teach
this semester and it's three hours and
the students are expecting me to give
them their grades at the end of it so I
will not be here but I will watch it at
some point because I've heard it's good
so just screen it to the class so the
class forget the last okay and then but
and after that we had 8:30 we have a
cure of the dawn he does this a meaning
wave he takes Peterson's voice and all
the other self-help kind of people and
he makes these cool music with it so
we're gonna have a talk with him for 30
minutes we're gonna jump on another link
and just dance together so that being
said again the speakers today thank you
so much and thanks everyone for the
excellent questions see you in a couple
minutes
thank you thank you