I have been sitting with individual
sovereignty how and collective
cultivation of leadership and that is
actually what the idea Cafe is gonna be
on this morning but there are these
trade-offs in society between having a
central leader that you can release some
amount of authority to leave it up to
them to solve this leave it up to
them to tell me the path to follow
and it comes at a cost because the
community that's created around that
falls apart when they fall apart and
it's not empowering us each of us should
have power over our own lives complete
sovereignty for our own lives betweens
owning the out of the feelings when
we both feel we need the leadership or
we need to be the leader both of those
things and neither of them are bad
neither of them are broken but it's
being part of society and realizing the
cost that plays when we need there to be
celebrities and there might always be
celebrities but I hope not there's a big
difference I think between being the
best singer having just the beautiful
vocal range where you show up and and
being someone who has to be an archetype
of the best singer therefore has to have
the perfect outfit the perfect life the
perfect and it's like that's what we
look up to because that doesn't exist
and the celebrity isn't getting enough
out of it they're getting money and
they're getting influence but they're
not getting love in connection in fact
it's costing them love and connection
real love because even if we think we
know a celebrity and we love them we get
the oxytocin we get the payoff they
don't they get this admiration of a
brand that they know they're not the
only way they could know that this love
is actually theirs is to be themselves
and even then they're not the ones
feeling the love
they're getting love and although
although society is set up around
getting love instead of giving the love
the payoff comes and giving the love the
love hormone courses through your body
when you love not when you're loved
there's also great feelings when you're
loved and accepted and seen but you
can't get those when you're hiding huge
chunks of yourself because then you know
you're like well if they knew this about
me they wouldn't feel they wouldn't love
me we can create community create
connections that are resilient but it
means we have to as individuals own this
 in ourselves that we want a leader
we want outside mentors to look up to
and there's nothing wrong with that but
when we need them to be a mentor in
every area of our life so I need my
relationship mentor to have their
finances their health their everything
in order any by finance wanting to have
their relationships and health in order
as well we need to be able to allow
people to be real nobody's good in every
area I don't know anyone who's good in
every area and so they'd have to fake in
some of them and that faking it costs
the fans and the celebrity and I'm using
celebrity and fans very loosely it can
be anything any influencer I think
YouTube burnout and influence or burnout
and unfortunately when you're a
celebrity you can take yourself out of
limelight it a bit but you're still good
luck with Brad Pitt taking himself out
of the I'm sure limelight everyone's
gonna know who you are
there's no choice two below right so you
can go through burnout luckily have
millions of dollars to help you through
but it's not the same because you can't
just get unanimity back and a lack of
anonymity costs you your life is put
under a microscope and you're expected
to be perfect in every area we do this
to each other too but when you have
10,000 people doing it to you versus two
people doing it to you it's very
different feeling and so the celebrity
simultaneously I imagine it feels like
the love that's thrown on them is it
deserve because you don't know who I am
and yet
the hate that is thrown on you for these
little fractures in your persona you do
feel because you haven't done your work
you haven't like made the shield
actually there to be like right that's
your not my I just think
policies is empowering me because it's
before this realisation before this
stuff came to light I was looking at him
like a mentor and I didn't even know
that till he fell from grace like I knew
that I was reading his stuff and
watching some of his videos and they
would come out and listening to him more
than I would listen to a random person I
don't know I was still seeing if it
resonates with me so I was still I
wasn't like taking it as the biblical
truth or something it's the gospel truth
I was but there was still like he knew
how to live authentically more so than I
did so I could find out from him in that
area how to live and now I know actually
no because to be somebody who makes a
living off of authenticity and then not
show up authentically costs must have
cost a lot a lot of energy a lot of
love for yourself and sit out the stuff
is coming to light he can heal the
community can heal but but collectively
together humanity has to figure out how
to get done without leaving it up
to a central authority without leading
up to leadership and I believe a big
huge piece of that is individually in
our own bodies
owning where we're looking to leadership
we shouldn't be and where we're looking
to be the leader when we should be be
how can I be the leader over my own life
and have complete sovereignty and
empower other people to have the same
true sovereignty without just saying it
cuz Kyle says that all the time I'm not
your teacher I'm not a guru but give me
money and then I might try to sleep with
you what am i teaching our guru so it's
okay if that's not okay when you're in a
position like that it's not okay and yet
who else do you meet else do you meet
when you're in that position what's
going to dating out and be like I'm not
no don't use your real name
no don't River it don't reverse Google
don't Google me First Alert and so I'm
gonna be sitting with this this
leadership this morning's idea cafes on
this how do we cultivate how do we
collectively cultivate instead of leave
it up to a central authority or a higher
leadership how do we have groups without
leadership maybe we can maybe we can
we're gonna figure it out all right it's
a little bit what I've been sitting with
for the last few days take care