[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meeting crisis last time we were
continuing our exploration of sacredness
and I talked about that in contrast but
also in concert with geertz's notion of
sacredness as homing against homing us
against horror we have the proposal from
Otto that sacredness puts us into
contact with the numinous which
basically exposes us to what is
horrifying
at least the limits of us because it has
an aspect of awe with a little bit more
which is right to remind us humiliation
in the original sense of the word to to
keep us to give us humility to remember
that as we are feeling that sense of
expansiveness with awe that we are
precisely ultimately limited creatures
and so I propose to you that these two
opponent aspects of sacredness can be
seen very readily within the light of
the machinery of relevance realization
where the right the worldview attunement
is a form of meta meaning and therefore
meta assimilation ultimately compression
integration right things fitting
together we get an opposite which is the
meta accommodation afforded by
confronting the numinous in awe and
potentially horror and we talked about
how horror is about exactly the demand
the confrontation with that which
demands from us unanswerable on
achievable accommodation
so I propose to you that what sacredness
is is to play with seriously play with
the machinery of relevance realization
as found within the primordial aspects
of religio and that doing this would be
deeply advantageous to us because it is
so foundational to our agency to the
world as an arena for our action to our
capacities for self transcendence and so
forth but caught up with that when I
invoked music as an example of this
right was the idea that we often do this
serious play by engaging in symbolic
behavior and so I'm putting the symbol
here as something that has the capacity
to write and function both ways it can
bring us into Metta accommodation but of
course it can also bring Metta
assimilation it can bridge between these
two and it can go in both directions and
so we're starting to unpack what the
symbol is and then I propose to you to
first of all emphasize its distinction
from a mere sign a symbol doesn't just
refer a symbol exemplifies it has a
participatory aspect to it right from
the beginning and as I've already
mentioned that's going to be central to
what we're what we're talking about here
because these are at the level right of
our ultimately our participation in the
agent arena trans Jen
relevance realization processes so
suggested to you that at the core of a
metaphor a symbol is a metaphor already
we know that this has to be
participatory we'll come back to that
and I pointed out that the metaphors
we're talking about here are profound in
the sense that they are pervasive in our
cognition and they right are highly
functional and pointed to here to the
work of lay coffin Johnson and their
idea about their work yeah right in
metaphors we live by and a whole bunch
of other books that about how much our
cognition is metaphorical I then said
there's some issues here and this goes
to some critiques made by Verve icky and
Kennedy and Kennedy and Verve a key
basically saying that they have this
sort of purely bottom-up notion that the
the physical sensory motor domain is
just projected up into the conceptual I
suggested that it's more complex than
that
and we took a look at that and I
suggested to you that instead of just
the machinery of projection which tends
to be this one way that we should think
of the participatory relation as
reflecting our capacity to play with
exaptation we can we can go sort of both
ways with our executive machinery and I
try to bring all these ideas together
the notion of participatory no Sh
knowing the notion of exaptation with
this idea that what a symbol is it's a
it's a metaphor that allows me to hold
something in mind that I normally can't
hold in mind so that I can activate the
machinery the machinery that was at work
in AK septation and I can and since
reverse go back through it I can
have a symbol of a scale and right now I
could just stay there and think that
well what I can do is I can actually try
to participate right prospectively I can
engage with actually balancing and then
what I can do is reverse that process to
some degree by which right my capacity
for balance has been exacted via right
and some executive processing on my
cerebellum so that I actually use it to
find complex contingency relationships
between any areas of my brain so what's
been happening in fact in neuroscience
over the last 10 and 15 years is this
revolution of our understanding of the
cerebellum we used to think the
cerebellum was primarily about balance
and now we know that the cerebellum has
all these terrific cognitive functions
because what it does is it basically
here's two areas of the brain that are
often correlated together the cerebellum
picks up on trying to improve smooth out
find the patterns of contingency and
dependency between them and so what I
can do is I can activate if you'll allow
me this way of talking my cerebellum and
that machinery is which is precisely the
machinery I need to practice the skill
of being more just I need the ability to
coordinate to find to sense complex
contingencies between multiple variables
and make that better and the cerebellum
is exactly the machinery I want to write
and I want to activate I'm using
activation sort of as like the reverse
of exaptation I want to activate it
because that will actually allow me to
participate in the processing that will
allow me to cultivate the skills that
will make me just that will then
ultimately ground my conception of
justice
so this holding in mind activating
process right allows me to deeply
participate in justice because I'm
literally becoming more just the symbol
is affording me by making use of the
excitation machinery which is to see
that this is bi-directional in a way in
which the projection isn't right the
symbol is doing that for me in a
powerful way and you're saying well
how's this is so really come on
okay you are much more symbolic in a
participatory fashion than you might
think
okay look at these quickly without
thinking which one is booba and which
one is Kiki which one is boo-boo
which one is Kiki overwhelmingly and I
mean because this experiment has been
done by Rama Chandra and others this is
booba and this is Kiki I do this all the
time of my class what's going on there
why is this booba and it's you've never
heard these words before they don't mean
anything for it to you and people will
say things like well this is sharp and
spiky and so is this and I say to them
what do you mean how is this sharp I
can't cut myself on it and how is this
sharp and spiky and they're doing all
this bridging and this cerebellar
coordination between different sense
modalities and different ways of acting
and you're doing it like that there it
is now this is playful all right I'm
just activating it to no purpose but of
course I can activate this machinery to
a purpose that's what I'm doing when I'm
holding up the scales but you have to
participate in it you have to live with
this symbol you have to internalize it
it's almost like you have to savor it
the one of the one of the things we need
to pay more attention to I would argue
is the work of Jonathan pazzo
I mean his work on the symbolic world is
largely about trying to get us to
remember the symbolic aspects of our
existence and I mean this in a deeply
respect to for way and I hope Jonathan
takes it that way to get us to savor the
symbolic and how deeply functional and
active it is in us all right so symbols
are participatory in this fashion that
I've tried to explain to you and then
because of that symbols have a capacity
to put us into this relationship with
something so here's justice here's the
symbol here's me right and as I try to
do art we've got the symbol and what
it's doing is it's actually transforming
me in a powerful way it is
reactivating reconfiguring my machinery
so that I become capable of interacting
with the world so that I now start to be
able to see through the symbol here's
the original remember like how you're
looking through the pig at Sam I'm
looking through which means beyond and
by means of the symbol right I get to
see more and realize and make more
justice so I'm becoming and activating
the machinery of balance that's allowing
me the perspective of awareness the
sensitizing me to the contingent
relationships we variables it's actually
helping me to cultivate the skills of
justice right and of course as I start
to get better contact with this this is
disclosing itself in a new way and it
discloses himself more through the
processing I'm doing and so what starts
to happen right is this interesting
thing that's going on so let me try and
give you an another example
of this and let's use something at the
other end something that's not so
conceptual at least in one sense so I'm
meditating and I'm following my breath
in meditation breathing in and out
following my breath some of you have
seen perhaps the videos I've given on
the instruction on how to how to
practice the past not now what's
happening is normally I am focusing on
my breath right and that act of focusing
and following my breath is helping me to
scale down and we've talked about that
scale down my attention and for a long
time it can stay that way but what can
happen is I can become sensitized by
scaling down because you increase your
sensitivity to how much in process my
mind is so I'm not only thinking of my
mind that they think I might even think
of a that my mind is a container that
contains things like here's my mind and
in it is an experience of pain for
example but when I practice watching my
breath I start to realize that that's
that's I start to realize but that's not
actually how my mind is unfolding my
mind really isn't like I think a
container in that sense it's much more
like my mind is is a very fine-grained
process and even something like pain
isn't a thing
there's painting and it's it's multiple
when I'm watching my pain for example
I've got a pain in my leg while I'm
meditating there's all these different
layers there's all these things
unfolding and happening in a complex
fashion it really isn't a noun is much
more like a verb and it's really not
something I possess it's really much
more something I participate in and so
do you see what what I'm saying the the
the breath starts to become a
participatory symbol of the impermanence
of things how much they are
interconnected and flowing
that can then of course have an impact
on my sense of myself that maybe I'm
much more impermanent and interconnected
and so the breath can become in that
sense symbolic for me I can start to see
into impermanence and then I could start
to see into I see I look through the
breath into impermanence in
interconnectedness and I start to look
back and so of course what's happening
now you can also train this deliberately
is in addition to scaling down I might
suddenly find myself scaling up and
seeing how all of reality including
myself is impermanent and interconnected
so notice what the symbol is doing for
you here right and here I want to go
back to Michael Polanyi again
let's take another symbol here's the
Patriot looking at the flag right it's
Canadian flag perhaps well this the
Canadians have a weird attitude towards
their patriot let's make an American
flag because that's that's more
prototypical there's an American flag
okay it has to do with America was born
out of a revolution where what we sort
of were birthed from from Great Britain
and a much more familial relationship
there's nothing that's just there's
nothing deep there I'm just pointing out
why I shifted my example so Plan E says
when you're looking at a flag of course
you're always doing that thing he talked
about all their subsidiary awareness is
being right integrated together into
your focal awareness now normally what
I'm intrinsic I'm doing all of this
because what I'm interested in is what
I'm focally aware of I'm interested so
when I'm when I'm normal when I when I
want when I want to drink I'm doing all
of this subsidiary integration into my
focal awareness of the bottle because
what I'm actually interested in is the
bottle I need to get the bottle into
Drake right but sometimes and again
notice my language we play with this we
look at the flag not because we're
actually intrinsically interested in
using the flag in some fashion we're
using the flag symbolically right I'm
looking at the flag because by looking
at the flag I'm actually integrating
different aspects of myself together so
although I'm doing this process normally
what I'm inherently interested in is the
focal object but sometimes when I'm
acting symbolically when I'm act
although I'm focusing their attention on
this like focusing my attention on the
breath what I'm actually interested in
is playing with the process so by
contemplating the flag right the patriot
is
bringing up all kinds of emotions and
associations and other things and think
about the cerebellar activity here right
and integrating them together by looking
through all of these and think about a
metaphor looking through by looking
through all of these things like I'm
looking through all of these different
subsidiary things onto the flag and by
doing that I'm actually integrating all
of these aspects of myself together and
I'm becoming more patriotic I'm actually
participating in patriotism
now that's powerful right now put that
together with what I just did I'm
looking at my breath and I'm doing all
this and the point about all of this is
to write so let's change this now this
is my breath
I'm looking at my breath but the point
is to get all up to integrate all of my
processing together but what can happen
right and that's one way in my twin
which my breath is symbolic so one way
in which my breath is symbolic is it
gives me a focal thing that I'm aware of
I can activate all of this stuff and I
can you know integrate myself on to the
thing I'm becoming somebody else but as
I just said a few minutes ago but the
thing is the breath can also suddenly
disclose reality to me the breath can
also reveal an aspect of reality okay
let's try and put this together right
it'll very carefully here
at one stage I'm doing this and what I'm
acting what I'm interested in is this
this is my inherent interest although my
vocal awareness is here I'm focusing for
Tracy because I'm trying to write via a
metaphorical process by looking through
all of these subsidiary elements and
right I'm actually integrating them
together I'm not actually trying to get
an insight like I normally do in
metaphor but what can happen is right I
can actually get an insight this can't
suddenly reveal aspects of the world to
me the impermanence and
interconnectedness and now I'm actually
interested in my breath because my
breath is a symbol in another sense my
breath is a symbol in that it allows me
to see into the impermanence in
interconnectedness of reality notice I
could what can happen is I can resonate
between these
okay let's do it I'm looking at my
breath I become more integrated and
precisely because I'm much more
integrated my processing becomes more
powerful and then suddenly what happens
is I see something in my breath I get a
realization the world is disclosed to me
and that opens me up in powerful ways
and then now now like when I refocus on
the breath again now I'm reintegrating
all of that but then what can happen of
course is right now as I reintegrate and
recored innate again I can more deeply
see into what the reality of that my
breath is disclosing to me and I move
more deeply do you see what I'm saying
you get this symbolic resonance that's
going on as I see more deeply into the
object it draws me in and then that
affords much more powerful integration
but the much more powerful integration
actually coordinates my cognition much
more so I can see more deeply into the
reality if I'm relating to it
symbolically
cymbals are in this sense capable of
affording and a GOG a they are capable
of giving you this capacity whereby I
get inner optimization and then I see
more deeply into the thing and then by
seeing more deeply into the thing I get
more inner optimization and the whole
process flows and agog eclis so I'm
looking at the balance and then I
activate all of this machinery and then
I looked through it out the symbol and
I'm looking through it at justice and
coordinating all the things right but
then I start to see aspects in the
balance that I hadn't seen before
precisely because of how sensitized I am
to this symbol I thought I start to see
how right it's actually never completely
stable if you look at the pictures the
scales are often always off balance is
something right very much a process not
a thing and then that causes me to
activate different aspects of myself
this is like you remember when the
mother-in-law has the bi-directional
insight the sensibility transcendence
not only seeing her daughter-in-law
differently but seeing her own seeing
differently that trans framing
so
cymbals
have the capacity to do this let's
return back to something that I think is
purely symbolic in the sense that I mean
which is music right so you're listening
to the music right but it's not like
when you're listening to a sound and
you're trying to make out what's what's
causing that sound is that an is it a
tiger was it a noise in the book you're
listening to the music and although
you're focusing on it right there you're
not trying to get behind it you're
focusing on it because the way in which
you're being integrated it together by
right onto the music is crucial but then
what happens of course is that aspects
of the music are disclosed to you and
you realize things you see things that
you haven't seen before
and that changes and alters how you can
then understand and listen to the music
and so you get drawn in in a very
powerful way
now let's put this together with all of
this machinery together with another
aspect of the symbol that I've already
hinted at right which is of course the
way in which symbols are putting you
into confrontation with what is
potentially mysterious so here's your
frame right and here is a frame you
aspire to more comprehensive one now you
need something that can reach you inside
this frame but it can't be totally
captured by this frame because if it's
captured by this frame you'll stay in
this frame it has to insinuate itself
into this but change stuff such that you
are capable it actually drives you to
expanding your frame so it has to both
activate you but draw you beyond
yourself to to a state of trijet like
I'm trying not to use some technical
terms here what a symbol has to do right
is it has to reach into your worldview
but remember what the Gnostics were
talking about here remember how your
existentially entrapped you want to be
in another world view you want to find
that worldview viable you need something
that come they can come into this world
view but won't won't be stable within it
it has to be trendy right it has to be
transgressive it has to shake things up
and and then right put you into all of
this machinery all of this machinery
that we've been talking about but in a
way that is making you move to move to
and become capable of dwelling within
that more expansive worldview in this
sense symbols are deeply ecstatic
we get our word ecstasy from this but
what this literally means is a symbol
helps you to stand beyond yourself so
even let's go back to the example right
that I'm trying to use as many examples
as possible I've got the scales I'm
activating balance that allows me to
start doing the skills that gets me some
sense of justice I start to see I start
to be able to see justice and realize
justice in the world that I couldn't
before because of my sensibility change
my skill acquisition my sensibility
transcendence and that starts to make me
more just and and then what's happening
is I'm my world is being opened up and
I've be in a coordinated fashion I being
transformed to fit that expanding world
is of course why symbols often are
associated with Wonder and awe etc so
symbols are ecstatic in that fashion as
I've tried to show you throughout this
they're participatory and I try to show
you how they're integrative not just in
a simple part whole but in the antig
accents sensibility transcendence there
they're integrating you together
integrated right they're whole language
slows you down so much I they're
integrating you together they're
integrating a new world together and
they're integrating that new world
together as they're integrating you
together in an integrated fashion so
when a Christian sees the cross of
course first of all the cross is right
it's tapping into that exemptive
machinery it's taking all this
perceptual machinery and it's playing
with it the vertical and the horizontal
that's being exerted and all of that
machinery that we normally look through
is being exact and it's being used and
then we're looking into there and if we
are receptive and of course the question
is why some people are why some people
aren't right but if we're receptive then
that interact
chené starts to affect us we start to
become a different kind of person as
we're integrated in our attention on the
cross but that of course starts to also
disclose to us aspects of reality that
we normally might not be able to hold in
mind like suffering like the
relationship between eternity and time
and and those go from being ideas to
things that we are confronting engaging
with and they can draw us in which then
of course integrates me more powerfully
while disclosing a world and if I if I'm
willing to play the serious play with
the symbol I will start to be
transformed in a coupled fashion to my
world such that perhaps Christianity
becomes viable for me for example this
is how symbols work so they're
integrated in the an agogic sense this
is of course what if you remember why
people do things like Jeep form finally
symbols are complex
and we have to remember I'm using the
scales to stand for for justice but
justice isn't a single thing and even
when I talk about the breath and it's
relating is showing me impermanence and
interconnectedness those aren't single
static things there are complex
unfolding realities so symbols often are
multifaceted you'll get Athena she's the
symbol of wisdom but she's also the
symbol of you know weaving she's the
symbol of warfare all these different
areas are actually being drawn together
because the symbol is also the potential
for radically reconfiguring
reconfiguring the shape of your salience
landscape connecting things that you
normally do not connect together such
that you might have an insight into
reality notice how the symbol is trying
to do all of this because trying to set
you in motion it's trying to get you to
do this
and in that sense if you'll forgive the
little bit of playfulness it's epic it's
trying to draw you into something epic
it's trying to afford a way in which you
can radically open up your world in met
accommodation triggering it
participating in it confronting it but
also trigger your best machinery for
being able to draw it in to relate it to
right
who and what you are so that you can
become capable of dwelling within that
expanded world so meta accommodation and
meta assimilation are both at work
within the symbol so symbols are
inherently Transjakarta
two worlds the world you're in the
framing you're in and the world you're
trying to move to the world do you
aspire to
they are transgressive in all the ways
I've tried to suggest to you they try to
trigger trance framing their
transformative
now how does all of that machinery
relate to sacredness well I've already
shown you how it can be bound up with
awe and horror and wonder but let's try
let's make this a little bit more
precise I'm going to propose something
to you I'm going to propose that we can
use this term as I have been throughout
this series differently we don't mean
I'm gonna use myth us rather than myth
to keep that distinction by mythos I
mean I mean something that's always
deeply connected to ritual where ritual
and I've already argued this doesn't
mean some neurotic routine that I engage
in ritual means inactive analogy
inactive and agar gay it means the
processes by which I try to activate the
machinery of transformation okay so what
I'm saying mythos don't just hear
patterns of representation here patterns
of interaction these are deeply enmeshed
together and then what we have of course
are symbols and the way that I'm
describing right and these symbols right
are always going to be a messed with
story because you have to bring in the
perspective all participatory knowing
and we've talked a bunch about how
important narrative is for participatory
and prospective lenore-- and of course
the story connects to the ritual because
of its storied you can enact it okay so
this is what I mean by mythos this is
what I mean by mythos
when we have a mythos that is about
religio such that we can activate
religio and seriously play with it in
order to enhance it enhance its
capacities for met assimilation met
accommodation that sacredness
that sacredness
of course we can in vote we can make use
of mythos right for other things we
could write for other patterns that we
care about we can of course our religio
is always at work just in our day-to-day
interactions with the world but when we
want to activate accentuate articulate
religio itself
we rely on mythos to do that because our
relationship to religio is one that can
only be born symbolically because of the
primordial participatory nature of
religion now here's something else of
course at the core of religio as I've
argued as relevance realization and one
of the things we know because of the
phenomena of insight and the phenomena
of flow is one of the things that
relevance realization is intrinsically
interested in is itself
relevance realization because it is a
self-organizing self-transcending
self-correcting process member and
insight you are correcting for a
misleading salience pattern given an
incorrect problem formulation relevance
realization is intrinsically set up to
be interested in itself it is it this is
part of its structural design if your
relevance realization machinery is not
right directed toward to be interested
in itself it's ultimately not a
self-organizing self-correcting self
developing process which would mean it
would cease to be relevance realization
it is constitutively necessary of
relevance realization that it finds
itself inherently interesting
so we can find the process okay so this
is just deeply valuable to us because
it's constitutive of our being or being
in the world right we can use this
mythos to activate articulate accentuate
celebrate religio and of course we find
that a deeply interesting thing to do
because we relevance realization is set
up by its evolutionary heritage to be
intrinsically interested in itself and
so we're gonna find all of this deeply
valuable deeply meaningful this is the
machinery of meaning making and then
we're using myth offs to celebrate it
and trigger the fact that relevance
realization is constituted to finding
itself interesting
so what we have is I think a way of
talking about a lot of the aspects of
sacredness we get the experience of
sacredness out of the deep machinery of
religio and when we're using the
centrally important machinery of mythos
to activate it accentuate it articulated
celebrate it and that in itself is
developmentally important to us but
serious play is the way in which we go
through development but we also find
that process intrinsically interesting
like an insight or the flow State
precisely because relevance realization
is constituted to reflectively be
interested in itself as a process
now the question is yes okay maybe all
of that right maybe what I'm doing in
sacredness is using mythos in order to
like to celebrate and appreciate and
accentuate religio and I and I'm gonna
find that valuable because religio is
inherently valuable to me and relevance
realization is inherently interested in
itself I get all of that and I get why
this can be so deeply transformative of
people and why it can like open up their
world and open up themselves in this way
that feels like making love with reality
but still still you're not getting the
essence of sacredness because the
essence of sacredness is in the sacred
and the sacred Rite takes us back to the
metaphysical proposal the metaphysical
proposal is the proposal that what
ultimately generates the experience of
sacredness is something that is right
a final hmm that might that might be
misleading something that has an
absolute that's what I want value
because it has a particular metaphysical
status
namely it is super natural it is above
nature and it's above this means that it
is always inherently valuable to us and
therefore we will find it
sacred because of its absolute value now
this carries with it a particular way of
understanding the process of meaning
making its to claim that ultimately I
think that's what people are claiming
that this there are things maybe that's
the wrong word but I don't we languages
really well use this word as neutral is
like it there are things that are always
of relevance to us what I'm suggesting
to you is that this is the claim that
there is an essence to relevance that
there is a final formula for being
relevant and that that essence in here's
in some particular thing object and so
if I come into the relationship with
that object the relevance the essence of
relevance is in hearing in it and I will
therefore find that object sacred
i I'm trying to be respectful here but I
think this is ultimately a mistake the
reason why I think it's a mistake is
because there is no essence to relevance
there isn't there isn't even a thing
there is only the ongoing process of
relevance realization there is nothing
other than itself that is intrinsically
interesting to relevance realization and
the relevance realization isn't even
absolutely interesting to relevance
realization because of course your
salience machinery can actually lead you
to kill yourself you may even find your
own existence is no longer relevant or
salient to you so again to say its
intrinsic even that is not to say that
it's absolute the notion of sacredness
here seems to me to be a category
mistake it seems to me to be saying that
there is some thing someone someplace
that essentially absolutely always is
relevant but that is to misunderstand
the nature of relevance it's to confuse
the products of relevance realization
with the process of relevance
realization and that of course is a
hallmark of one of the ways in which we
make mistakes we get fixated on the
products of our cognition and not paying
attention to the process let's go back
to the Gnostics
remember that one of the things that
they're contemporary apostolic
Christians criticized them for is that
they were constantly indenting new myths
in this sense of mythos because they saw
the relationship to sacredness as an
evolving one a deeply transgressive one
the one that was supposed to always be
launching you into a trajectory of trans
framing might this suggest another way
of understanding sacredness that I think
would be respectful to a lot of the
texts considered sacred without
committing us to or needing the
supernatural as a category
or maybe it's gonna mean an ultimate not
that's oh wow that's so arrogant sorry
that's not what I want to say maybe it
means a significant yes
transformation of what we've ever meant
by this term supernatural I don't know
there's an inexhaustible Ness in this
whole process there's a sense in which
reality can continue to disclose itself
to me it's inexhaustible that's
ultimately I think because of the
reality that reality is itself
combinatorially explosive there's an
inexhaustible nough stew the process a
relevance realization not in the sense
that I'm infinite that's ridiculous but
in the sense that the process is
constantly evolving it is constituted by
its evolution it is not something other
than its evolution
what if sacredness is not about finding
the completion the Ella the essence the
stabilized final form
what if sacredness is actually an
experience of the inexhaustible nosov
reality and the inexhaustible nosov the
relevance realization machinery in
within it's coupled response to that
reality what does that look like more
concretely let me give you an example of
where you could see these two concretely
distinguishing from each other for me
Plato is sacred that doesn't mean that I
think Plato has some absolute or
supernatural value that he has an
unquestionable Authority Plato is or
that my understanding of play dough
should be stabilized or finished or
complete right instead what happens is
exactly the opposite I read some Plato
and I understand some Plato I get some
insight and that has an impact on me and
that does all of this to me and then I
go out in the world and that
understanding in a perspectival and
participatory way transforms me and I
engage and I become and the world
discloses in a certain way and after
that process I return to Plato and then
I can see and Plato what I did not see
before
I can realize things I did not see
before and those realizations reach
deeply into me again and then then again
there's an engagement there's that
transformation and then I go out in the
world you see I'm doing the a Nagoya
King right I go out in the world and the
world is disclosed to me in ways I
hadn't seen before and then I go through
transformation I become something
different the world becomes different at
the level of Co identification agent and
arena are being opened up and then I go
back and when I replay oh I see
something again that I didn't see before
and that has happened to me throughout
my life there isn't some final form
there I'm meaning this very carefully
this this is a mcnaught stick not in the
sense of the two world mythology or
something like that
there's Nasus Here I am constantly right
finding Plato to be found an
inexhaustible fount of insight
transformation an inexhaustible source
of trance framing of my world and who
and who I am if it's ongoing that's
filled with a kind of developmental
wonder for me
I don't think Plato is supernatural
I don't think Plato is absolute I don't
think Plato has the final account
I don't think Plato can give me a final
definition of what is relevant
but nevertheless again and again and
again I get into symbolic resonance with
the text I see through it and then the
world reaches back through it to me I
mean even Nietzsche has this right if
you stare long enough into the abyss it
begins to stare back through you he has
a kind of sacredness around that but
it's of course open-ended deeply
symbolic read also sprach zarathustra
but as I said I think it's bound up with
a problematic grammar of simply
inverting Christianity I don't want to
invert Christianity that's not what I'm
proposing to you at all I'm trying to
suggest to you that the idea I proposed
to you about what sacredness is can be
connected to an alternative proposal of
what the sacred is the sacred is the
trans jected relationship between the
combinatorially explosive nature of
reality the reality is ultimately a no
thingness that ultimately it is not a
thing that you can frame reality will
always transcend your framing that's
what combinatorial explosion says and
this is right linked to the no thickness
of yourself the eye that can never be
captured the framing that can never be
captured in the frame the ongoing
never-ending not in you particularly but
as a process right it doesn't come to a
completion is what I meant by
never-ending process of relevance
realization there's a deep non-logical
identity a deep symbolic resonance
between these two I think it's what a
lot of the Mystics we're talking about
this is a deep participatory
identification the inexhaustible nosov
reality and the inexhaustible nests of
relevance realization are deeply deeply
coupled at the primordial levels of
religio this is the sacred as this the
inexhaustible that powers the experience
of sacredness in a deeply profoundly
participatory fashion thank you very
much for your time and attention
[Music]
you