can you train somebody to be a writer
and does training somebody to be a
writer just sand the edges off you can
create the conditions for good writing
but you can't force yourself to create
good writing Twitter is a is a real mind
eraser this is something that Kurt
Vonnegut used to say about television if
I'm not writing good stuff then there's
no purpose to my breathing air on this
planet so the thesis of the book is that
the world has to be destroyed it's a
reverse dystopian novel you know the the
way things are between men and women in
America has to be the worst it has ever
been in any human civilization in
existence most normal people who are
given my books actively hate if you need
a job a corporation has absolute power
over you they can control whether you
eat whether you pay your mortgage and
whether you can turn on the lights and
your beautiful home you can you can
write whatever you want as long as you
don't need to eat
hey everybody it is Jack Murphy and you
were back on the Jack Murphy live
podcast we had a little bit of I hate
it's there over the holidays and then I
got sick and then it was my birthday and
I've been lining up guests for the
upcoming spring season here and I'm
super excited about it you can follow me
on Twitter at Jack Murphy live go to the
website at Jack Murphy live.com sign up
for the mailing list go to amazon.com by
the book Democrats a horrible sales been
really good on that lately as a matter
of fact had a bunch of tweets go viral
over this last week and got turned on
people turn me on to a Nigerian
Twittersphere Indonesian mom
Twittersphere it's been quite an
experience going viral a couple of
things but go to Amazon get the book go
to Twitter Jack Murphy live.com and
subscribe to the podcast wherever you're
listening so coming up here I have got a
great guest that I have been dying to
have on the show and I'm just completely
thrilled and honored that he's here he
is a multiple time author a successful
writer the creator of about 50,000 blog
posts and has just been an extremely
prolific and well-known underground
writer and we're hoping to sway to
change that a little bit here but
without further ado let me introduce to
you my favorite writer the best fiction
writer in America today my good friend
delicious tacos how you doing buddy hey
man Jesus Christ that's a very kind and
undeserved intro I would hardly call
myself successful well-known or the best
fiction writer in America today but I'll
take it
you know I thought people always ask
what kind of fiction are you reading
these days jack and I'm like well you
know I don't really read too much but I
read everything that delicious tacos
puts out and you guys should too and so
we're gonna talk about that because I
know that you have been working very
hard to develop your craft and this is
not a sideline thing this is not you
know something that you're just doing
for fun here and there this is like a
real dedicated lifelong passion that you
have and I really would like to get into
a little bit up about that because I
just my assumption is that the listeners
don't really know anything about my
guests and then that way we can like
sort of dive into your backstory a
little bit and you know the first thing
I wanted to talk about
you know how did you get to this point
where you're putting out a book which I
for sure think is one of the best pieces
of fiction that I've read in a long time
and it's something that everybody should
read like how do you how do you get to
this point where where did you start
with your writing what what was you know
was you know like on the school
newspaper or like how did you get into
it and you know what's been your which
been your journey to get to this point
so far okay well again thank you for
your kind words about my book I got to
writing what I consider to be a good
book by writing horseshit for decades
like everybody else that's what you have
to do and I worked at it really hard I
got up early every morning I wrote every
day and then continued doing that for
years and years and years cranking out
horse after horse and this
book is the culmination of many years of
work it's an extremely short tight
little book and it took me three years
of intense writing to write know when I
wasn't writing it I was thinking about
it I was failing to write it but you
know the idea behind it in the feeling
behind it was big enough that I could
never with all with all kinds of
self-hatred and self-doubt I could never
doubt that the essential idea behind the
book was true and that the essential
feeling behind the book was true and
it's a book about hating modern American
life and being very frustrated with it
and wanting the world to be destroyed
and I keep waking up and I keep feeling
that way every day so so it's not it's
not some ephemeral idea that that can be
easily dismissed there was a real truth
behind it that I sort of had to had to
find right so look first of all the name
of the book is finally some good news
and on the cover of the book is a giant
cartoon mushroom cloud and at first the
image to me look a little phallic so I
wasn't sure like what was going on and
what was gonna happen but you know you
started get clues throughout the book
but I don't I don't want to get into the
book just yet I want to get I want to
back up I mean like you're not you're
you're like a writer you're like a
trained writer aren't you like what's
your what's your writing history
well am i a trained ricchan there be
such a thing as a trained writer you
know what I mean when I was reading this
morning was the Christian repenting book
you know the person that wrote a cat
person in The New Yorker the right
the viral sensation who was that's a
trained writer she was an MFA candidate
who went to who has a Harvard ph.d and
has an agent and has a publisher and got
a million dollar advance and his writing
scripts for HBO and selling horror
scripts to a 24 that's a trained writer
I did not go through an MFA program I
you know there's there's two ways to
approach it I mean can you train
somebody to be a writer and just
training somebody to be a writer just
sand the edges off it's it's impossible
to tell you know would I be would I be a
better writer if I had gone through an
MFA program maybe what I did you know
I've always written and I've been
writing since I was a kid and it's what
I wanted to do since I was able to form
memories but the reality is from ages 18
to 28 I didn't do it for 10 years and I
gave up on my dream and I went to go
work in Hollywood is a development
executive reading other people's
terrible writing for ten years and I
only got back into writing in my 30s
really and it's you know had a blog
that's even more obscure than my current
blog for a number of years before I
started delicious tacos dot-com and as I
said I wrote absolute horseshit
horseshit for years and years and years
and I always thought I'm never gonna be
a writer I'm never gonna be any good and
you know I'm barely there now I mean
this book my my status is an underground
self-published author you know this book
last month it paid my rent my utilities
my car payment this month had one nice
well yeah I mean I sold a lot of books
in the first month I'm selling less in
the second month and it'll kind of you
know these they I think for me to make a
living I'd have to have ten books out
that just kind of constantly my I wrote
another book called the which is a
collection of blog posts and short
stories in that book when I launched it
didn't sell virtually anything at all
but it picked up some word-of-mouth and
now it cranks out like I sell a couple
of the everyday and I sell a few
of finally some good news every day and
they don't they don't pop they don't
become viral sensations Hollywood is not
calling trying to option the film rights
and publishers are certainly not calling
trying to give me a book deal but they
don't they don't die either they keep
going people tell other other god bless
you know those of you out there that are
telling other people about my
books and I sell a few of them every day
and the number grows and grows and
someday I'll be able to pay my bills
with it and then God knows what I'll do
with the rest of my time right
well I mean one of the things that I
always looked at is you it's like income
properties and you need to have multiple
of them giving you that that constant
income stream for it to before just to
slowly start to build but you know like
you know a guy that we both know goldman
unleashed he wrote a book like five or
five years ago called the introduction a
camera game or it's like he talked eyes
like how to get a camera how to use it
to you know make friends and socialize
and meet women and mike you know it's a
very short book but like five years
later all of a sudden it got picked up
and people started talking about it and
boom he had like a windfall you know and
it like it it light exploded so you know
you never you never exactly really know
but i but i think that the quality that
i read and finally some good news stands
with anything that I've ever read and as
I think it's one of those things that
just needs a little bit more attention
and it's it's timeless it's fiction it's
not tied to the latest new cycle and
whatever so you know what's the word
there's a word for that o evergreen
right it's ever like people are always
gonna you know be able to read it and if
it's not for like a contemporary
analysis it's for like a historical
analysis and you know I like to think
that you and and me and some other guys
were writing books that are gonna be
part of a can in one day that you know
when people want to examine the this
time period in this era they're gonna
look to these books and it's gonna be I
think part of the historical record we
just got to sort of get that get it out
there
but you you said you worked on this for
three years man and getting up in the
morning so like just tell me tell me a
little bit about that because you know I
can I can totally relate so I'd always
wanted to write a novel one of the
things that you and I share in common is
is being doxxed and having our
livelihoods threatened and that actually
helped me tremendously you know I worked
on this this book you know I say I
worked on it for three years meaning I
kicked around the concept for three
years but really I wrote it by
woodshedding
on Sundays for maybe a year and a half
after I got doxxed because somebody
snitched about my dirty blog about
 and drugs to my workplace which
meant that I had to go even further into
an anonymity and there was a moment
there when I thought well what do I
really want to do you know I've so
delicious tacos calm as my blog and I
wrote mostly first-person essays about
getting laid for several years and
there's only so much you know there's
only so much milk in the tit on that
subject and I've sucked out more of it
than anybody else you know three
thousand pages of talking about you know
drinking and getting is enough for
any man and so we'll never die it's true
but what I really wanted to do was be a
fiction writer and so getting Docs was a
beautiful thing for me it forced me to
transition into a direction that I had
really wanted to take and that really
was my dream and just to say that I
worked on it for you know I tried you to
work on it for that long most days when
you try to write absolute garbage comes
out of your fingertips yeah this what
you see in this book represents 1% of
the total effort toward it it's the
things that stuck you really can't force
it and you it's like the weather you
just have to accept you can create the
conditions for good writing but you
can't force yourself to create good
writing you have to try to fill what are
your what are your conditions for good
writing like how do you get in the zone
okay number one wake up in the morning
and
look at Twitter don't look at me don't
look at tinder Twitter is a is a real
mind eraser it's something that Kurt
Vonnegut used to say about television
Twitter is is satanic garbage when you
mention things being evergreen Twitter
represents the very opposite of that and
now I say this is somebody who loves
Twitter and has a great deal of fun on
it but it is a machine for distilling
the essence of the ephemeral and it's
agitated energy and when as you said
when you write a novel you're really
trying to put something into the ages
you can't expect any of meat you know
there's not going to be an immediate
payoff for it it's good you put it into
the Canon and see if it sticks
god I sound like such a pretentious
English I would definitely be the
English professor that was fired for
 my students yes so why I've
never applied for that position I think
but the rules to create good writing to
create a conditions where you might
create good running you wake up you take
a reading a good book you meditate
a little bit you maybe walk outside and
you observe nature for a little bit and
you try to obtain some kind of mental
clarity and quiet and then you just sit
down and make your fingers move on a
keyboard for several hours
I wrote the back stretch of this book I
wrote in eight-hour days on Sundays only
Saturday you know Monday through Friday
don't exist because I work a difficult
full-time job Saturdays don't exist
because I have a hangover from work so
Sunday really is the only day that I'm a
living human being um those are the days
that I that I got to write so I wrote on
Sundays in the in the back stretch of
the book like it was a full-time job and
it worked out you know but now I'm in a
weird position because I edited this
book so much and I worked on it so hard
and then I you know I I self-published
it meaning I formatted it I did all this
other horseshit with it and so I don't
know if it's good or not if I was just
looking at it before this podcast to try
to remember if my own book was good if
my prose was good if this is something I
can really promote and defend and I
really don't know I can barely recognize
the letters as English characters at
this point because I've been looking at
to long it's gratifying that people like
it but I'm in a weird place because I'm
creatively exhausted after writing it I
got nothing to say if you read my new
blog post it's all recycled from
2013 I haven't really started on the new
novel yet and so it's it's odd to have
to promote this thing that I can't know
whether I should believe in it or not
you know yeah what did you deduce did
you send it up to the Amazon Kindle
direct publishing beginning of December
I had hoped to get it out on October
31st because that's around when you know
I'm gonna just use I'm gonna use full
spoilers for the book and if you're
listening to this and you don't want the
book spoiled like sorry but October
around October 31st is when the nuclear
first nuclear bomb goes off in the book
and I wanted to put it out on that date
but it got horrendously delayed for
weeks so yeah well I mean you talk about
a creative hangover I mean I remember
writing Democrats as deplorable it took
me probably a year and a half and by a
year and a half that's like you know a
month of a fitness start and then two
months of like outlining and then going
back and not winning again and then they
are writing a draft in another draft and
I wrote like five five full light drafts
and you know by the time you get to the
end you're like I hate it I
don't even want to read it ever again I
don't care and you just want it to be
done like there's parts of my book that
I wish that were better right like I
wish the ending was a little bit better
but you know you finally something you
just get to a point where you're like
good good is better than not finished
and I just put it up there but you know
that creative hangover you talked about
I mean I think about writing another
book all the time but I don't actually
think about writing another book if you
know I mean yeah you know it's like oh
yeah I'll do another one but there's no
energy for that just yet I mean give
yourself a break do it if you got it
like three weeks ago or four weeks ago
you know you made me have like a few
more months before that happens yes but
if I'm not writing good stuff then
there's no purpose to my breathing air
on this planet oh right yeah if I'm not
writing something that at least has
something true in it
then why the am i alive I mean I'm
not I don't have kids I don't have a
wife I do my best to be nice to other
people and be of service to other human
beings but that doesn't mean I'm a
taxpaying citizen I'm a supportive
member of my community that doesn't mean
 either I do my best to be a good
brother son and friend and that doesn't
mean either if I'm not if I'm not
writing something then that's then
there's a sense of real why am I here do
you do right for just for yourself no
like non-publication not blogging not
anything do journal I try to do that
that's where all my blog posts come from
I try to never think when I write that
this is gonna be a blog post because
that immediately ruins that if you
started to think about your audience and
especially this is I think a topic that
we'll cover later particularly uh what
is in part a quote manosphere end quote
audience if you start thinking about
their reactions to things you're
immediately and if you start
writing thinking about how something
might play it's going to be dishonest
and you're immediately right you
have to get all of that out of your head
the good news is my level of energy to
be contrived and to try to do kind of
like homework assignment writing that
serves a purpose is very low so I have
maybe a page of that before everything
just devolves into stream of
consciousness about you know my dick or
whatever else is going on that day right
right so in the in the book and finally
some good news the latest novel by
delicious tacos everybody should go out
and get it it's on amazon.com it is the
it is the highest-rated book on
amazon.com the high is rated yes that's
right in a particular category or no
it's just it has all five star reviews
read all five star reviews it's like a
movie saying they're a hundred percent
on Rotten Tomatoes it's like great - two
reports no just kidding I'm sure you got
a lot more reviews than that and I'm
gonna go put my own 5 star review in
there for sure - because I give it two
thumbs up and five stars for sure but as
summary as I'm reading it I'm thinking
to myself this is fiction it's also a
critical social commentary it's also
fantasy I think
and I got the sense that some of it was
autobiographical as well so like how
much how much of it was is is really
drawn from your own experiences and how
much of it was just you know plucked
from thin air the job
parts of it are partially based on a job
that I had I did used to work for a
marketing firm that provided data-driven
solutions to market leading brands it's
so funny to hear you say that I forget
in the book and then a few months into
that job my entire department was laid
off in a merger so I feel no guilt about
you know retro actively trashing that
company because I owe them nothing so
yes a lot of his little bit
autobiographical all the parts in the
Philippines except the parts about you
know shady prostitution stuff which were
completely fictional are true I mean I
wished I went let us know part of the
book takes place in Southeast Asia in
the Philippines and I traveled there I
talked to interviewed prostitutes by the
dozens I went to I went to the island of
Palawan which was under State Department
warning for Americans not to travel
there because of the terrorist threat
and a lot of the stuff that happens
there involving Filipino Isis was really
happening there I went to the nuclear
missile defense bunker that really
exists on the outskirts of Los Angeles
and I really broke into the bunker and I
climbed down into the missile hatch and
looked around because I wanted to set a
chapter there and you know there's a
there are guns that are fired in that
book that I went to the firing range and
rented and just to see what they were
like and that experience went into the
book so a lot of it has really lived and
but especially the job portions and that
the you know the parts where he's
commuting to work are all true and yes
those are all you know heightened
third-person diary entries in a way I
really was cold calling to brand
managers about their goddamn detergent
to try to sell them services rating and
rank
they're branded entertainment and things
of that nature
well the observations the the the pithy
very pithy observations that you would
throw in just one sentence in the middle
of a paragraph you know about like I
paid eleven thousand and eight thousand
of it was interest yeah just like little
things like that all along the way
really felt so relatable and I think
will connect with people because these
are the little bits and pieces of modern
life that eat away at your soul
eventually and Oh got another one that
comes to mind is like giant on the
highway going to work driving behind a
pickup truck with the pole sticking out
of the back of it yeah I think we've all
thought about that pole Rio ramming into
our chest or our face or something like
like that and that being the end of the
day there but you know I think aside
from the story itself I think that the
the ongoing commentary social commentary
that you that you have throughout the
book is really spot-on but I will ask
you it does seem to come with a sense of
bitterness would you describe yourself
that way absolutely I would describe
myself is the most bitter person I've
ever met how do you you know why why
delicious tacos you're blessed with such
talent and you got a job you got a job
that you want to protect that's very oh
I do have a good job that's why you
never hear me complaining about it now
my new job is pretty good um its genetic
I'm genetically miserable I come from a
long line of mentally ill alcoholics and
there's no getting away from it look I'm
sitting in my beautiful house right now
in Southern California it's sunny
outside I'm watching trees waving the
breeze I'm being interviewed on a
podcast about my novel that I managed to
release and a man is saying nice things
to me about it later I'm gonna go to the
train station and pick up my 19
year old girlfriend I just got my STD
test results back and they were all
negative unbelievably things are
wonderful for me my life is wonderful
and I'm still miserable and there's just
no way around it my thermostat is off
there is no curing it it's just the way
I am
miserable person and I hope that you can
all enjoy it in the form of wonderful
art that I create as a result
well it certainly did come out and you
meant you brought up something I'll call
ISM and if I remembered some of your
earlier writings you definitely went
down some dark paths but then decided to
make a big change and is that still sort
of the you know your daily living like a
abstaining from all those things that
writers have tended to sort of praise to
high heavens as a fuel for their art
yeah so this is one of the things that I
probably can't go into too much detail
about I can't admit in the first person
to any felonious behavior anymore but I
am you know a sober alcoholic I've been
in Alcoholics Anonymous for almost five
years I have enjoyed to the maximum
extent every recreational substance that
that exists and you know like half the
people in LA I mean a and you know a
whiny writer in AAA and it's wonderful I
love being sober if anybody wants to get
sober go to my website find my email and
email me and I'd be happy to talk to you
about it it's a much better life as much
as I complain you should have seen how
 was before yeah and how did how did
and the reason I brought that up is
because you know lot of people Bukowski
especially it comes to mind immediately
sort of glamorized their alcohol abuse
and how it relates to their art did you
notice any difference in your production
quality capabilities your output your
outlook your prose anything like did you
write and get better yes so that's what
I thought when I went to quit drinking I
thought if my writing gets worse as a
result of this I'm going to just keep
drinking aha and unfortunately the next
day when I woke up after being sober I
wrote and the prose was crisper than it
had been that I was drunk and that's
when I knew that I was and I
would have to stay sober well I think
you know good for you I'm making good
choices I think that I remember Stephen
King also said that he thought that he
was writing better
he was drunk but it turns out he was
just drunk so I think you know for me
personally I can't write if I feel bad
if I feel hungover if I've been didn't
get enough sleep it's like I have to get
up early be fresh and my mind clear and
clean I've never had any success with
art under the influence and when I was a
kid I used to DJ and you know we would
do some things and and that kind of
maybe helped a little bit but probably
not so that that's an interesting sort
of changed for you and then your
productivity went up and you came out
you know this book that really by all
accounts you should be 100 percent proud
of and I you know maybe uh maybe the
bitterness will will go away one day but
hopefully it won't hopefully that you're
writing it's interesting that you
mentioned the fragility of your ability
to write this is a problem that I have
more with the time of day than anything
else you know I had I had a rotten
infected cyst in my asshole
that's almost killed me and I was and I
wrote the morning that I ended up having
to go into the emergency room to have
emergency ass surgery I was writing and
I just had to stand up instead of sit
down to write you can read there's a I
think it's called ass part 4 on my blog
and I'm talking about how my asshole is
feels like somebody stuck a bottle up
there and broke it and my balls felt
like two doorknobs rattling together and
it was in I was in intense physical
agony but writing is the only way to get
through it I think it's the only way
that sort of makes the feelings real and
puts them outside yourself oh that's for
sure
no God my writing certainly I don't
think it was as good when I was
up but I was more prolific when I was
 up I think that's probably just
because I had less standards about half
of everything that's on my blog was
written when I was drunk
even though really I was only drunk for
a year and a half when I was writing it
and then I've done five years sober
writing it I certainly wrote a lot more
I was more willing to write about
topical stuff
more willing to try to go for a straight
comedy stuff and then suddenly when I
sobered up I got some hoity-toity
standards that things need to have some
some reason to exist yeah well you know
I've found that Twitter especially is is
a place where I get sort of my inspired
writing you know the writing that just
comes to me or cathartic writing and
I've really been taking advantage of the
sort of micro blogging feature on
Twitter lately I'm stringing together
you know like 15 and 20 tweets at a time
to do like a little short stories and
those are the ones that are like
emotional that are just like outpouring
that probably would have gone in my
journal you know ten years ago and then
I found that the research in writing for
the nonfiction that was much more
mechanical man that was much more of a
process where it didn't matter if I was
feeling inspired it didn't matter if I
was needing to you know have a catharsis
it just was like you got you got to get
this thing done so you better just start
cranking and cranking and I found a
little less joy in that process to be
honest do you see is your personal
reward any different between your sort
of cathartic writing writing that you
have to get out of you or writing that
you're writing for a book that's like
hopefully gonna pay you or you know do
you feel any differences there I never
think about any of my writing paying me
I assume that I'll never make a living
from it and I'll never make any
substantial money from it yeah and
that's not like a doom and gloom thing I
I think that way because you can't you
can't make it a workhorse you have to
let it be a wild animal you can make
writing till the field you have to let
it wander around in the woods eating and
killing and doing whatever it wants
I can't also separate catharsis from
mechanically writing the book because
the book really was
it had an emotion behind it and that was
its reason for existing in every chapter
related to that emotion in some way it
was described well so the thesis of the
book is that the world has to be
destroyed it's a reverse dystopian novel
most most apocalyptic fiction and this
is an apocalyptic book not a
post-apocalyptic book you actually get
to see the real apocalypse is about
civilization collapses and then people
are left in a dystopia so there's this
implied our lives were great before when
we had running water and electricity and
Xboxes and now things are terrible that
the bombs have fallen and we're being
gang-raped by you know Lord humungus and
his hockey mask this book is the reverse
of that it it's it's the reality that we
live currently in a dystopian
soul-crushing world and it would be
better for those who survived if a
flaming atomic Holocaust happened killed
most people who exist currently
destroyed civilization and most
technology and our lives were returned
to the simplicity of simply having to
survive so that's a very that's a very
interesting thing they've laid out and
now that I've heard of like that I'm I'm
just sort of pondering some of the
passages and what I think my favorite
line in the whole book is when you
describe the day after a nuclear
holocaust is feeling like a snow day
that's exactly right that's that was the
big feeling behind it you know I would
find myself sitting at work
wishing you know whenever you you don't
live in Southern California so you don't
know this feeling like we have
earthquakes out here and you'll be
sitting in your office and you'll be
like it'll be like is that a truck going
by and then it'll keep going by for what
seems like a long time you're like oh
that's an earthquake and part of you
thinks every time oh it's gonna
be the big one and it's not oh no
what'll I do
it's oh yeah we're all gonna die
baby today and there's a relief in that
right yes exactly the relief of not
having to participate in this horseshit
anymore they're not having to get a bill
from your cable company to call and and
ask to speak to a customer service
representative press zero and have it
say I'm sorry that is not a valid option
goodbye in a real kunti voice that is
aren't our entire societies like that
everything if you go to your mailbox
90% of the in there is trying to
sell you something 90% of the calls that
you get on your phone are robo
calls trying to scam the elderly or sell
you some horseshit 90% of people's
tweets are sales messages for
their garbage self-improvement webinars
everything our entire society is based
on people selling you the opportunity to
buy more it's all garbage it all
has to go the other element of
the world that I wanted to destroy and
that I talk about a lot is modern dating
as you as you mentioned earlier there's
you know the chapter about seeking
arrangement and there's you know the
character is going on all these dates
which are completely autobiographical
all of that stuff 100% happened exactly
as it is detailed and you know the the
way things are between men and women in
America has to be the worst it has ever
been in any human civilization in
existence because no civilization could
have survived with things as bad the way
they are now yeah you know I interviewed
dr. Jeffrey Miller the Evo psychologist
a few weeks ago and he and I came to the
conclusion that our current dating and
mating markets are dis genic and that it
is an existential threat and no
productive society fails to provide the
conditions in which you can have a
market clearing mating mechanisms which
is what we do not have at this point
what is it market clearing mating
mechanism you know it's a fancy way of
saying that everybody who wants to get
married and have kids can yeah yeah at
the same time I bitch constantly about
oh I don't know woe is me I'm you know
in my 40s I don't have a wife and a kid
if I really wanted one I could have one
and it's my own fault and I
acknowledge this it's you know there's
there's an element of personal
responsibility there too I complain
about it because I live in Los Angeles
well I continue to live in Los Angeles
I'm not I'm not moving to Crested
Butte Montana or wherever the I'm
not moving to Southeast Asia where I
could have 10 wives you know and live on
a coconut orchard then maybe six
months from now that's where I'll be
well you know as sales pick up you know
you only need like a tenth of the income
to live over there so there you go
that's right well I tell you that image
of the night the day after right because
I mean you bring up such an interesting
point that most of your post-apocalyptic
or apocalyptic literature and stories
are are afterwards and then how you're
gonna put it all back together to the
way it was and you have a character in
your book that represents that right
exactly right yeah yeah so that you have
a character Kent I think it was Kent yes
who can it's not Ken stop calling me Ken
if you read the book you'll you'll
you'll get that who's like already
trying to like rebuild the hierarchies
and the dominant structures and whatever
in order to facilitate the rebirth of
America the way that we knew it and you
totally throw that out the window and
you know the final the final scene I
gotta tell you I had trouble
interpreting it you know you want to
talk about that or like yeah what was
the sense for your characters and their
fight in the final conclusion there are
you talking about the final sentence not
the final sentence per se but like you
know they're they're walking on the
beach and then they find the abandoned
mansion they go into the mansion there's
no food but there's a dog like that's
feeling are people supposed to get when
they walk away from that so all of that
all of that is set up in the first
chapter right yeah the house and the dog
are mentioned that are on the last page
or mentioned on the first page and I
don't know how much do I want to explain
what that represents it's sort of the
first chapter details just how bloated
and marketing-oriented and our
entire culture in society has become and
the last chapter maybe represents a
return to the primal purpose of all of
those things so the house becomes a
shelter the dog becomes something other
than what it originally represented
let's say that and what's more you know
when they're walking along the beach
there's a flock there's a lot of birds
in this book though the log line of the
book is
is to birdwatchers survive a nuclear
holocaust so the last chapter they're
walking along the beach and a flock of
birds flies overhead that has
significance it's it's a species of bird
that has been displaced from its natural
environment taken prisoner and then got
free and flourished in spite of its its
you know the difficulties that it is
faced and has returned to primal nature
a lot of this book is also influenced by
Ted Kaczynski and his manifesto because
I kept thinking you know if Ted
Kaczynski could if you read industrial
society in its future it's a brilliant
book that has no ending it just stops
and I kept thinking if Ted Kaczynski
could write a narrative ending he
wouldn't have had to blow people's hands
off all right you know all right if his
story if he'd been a little bit of a
better storyteller he wouldn't have had
to hurt people when I read books fiction
and then I hear people giving commentary
and critique and they say oh well the
authors use of you know this bird in
this situation is meant to represent
blah blah blah and I always kind of
thought that the artists just sort of
wrote what they were thinking and
feeling without it being premeditated
but you're telling me now that in your
fiction book that that reads spontaneous
which means it's you've done it
masterfully was also premeditated and
its symbolism was that right yeah you
know I have bad memories of English
class where they made us pick out all
the symbols and books and it really
ruins them so I'm loathe to do that with
my own book but yes everything is
absolutely premeditated and a lot of the
work was burying it deep there's a lot
of setups and payoffs in it that I
worked on Barry like you know the one I
just mentioned in particular is the
there's a dog that shows up in the first
page never shows up again until the last
page but I knew the entire you know when
I wrote the beginning of the book I knew
the ending and you know which isn't to
say look there's a lot of birds in the
book and
all of them are symbolic and Roman
augury there is an L like really don't
don't look at it as a homework
assignment let it wash over you but the
birds in the end and particularly in the
last chapter is called birds of the
Amazon and and I'm glad that you know
thank you for the way you've described
it because then what you worry about is
it being too heavy-handed and being too
on-the-nose
which it shouldn't be like things that
you put in their images that you put in
there that mean something should be
absorbed by people's subconscious
instead of things that they feel like
they have to academically track and pick
out right then you know the reason that
the book is told out of chronological
time is to bury a lot of that stuff is
to defuse it and you know you're meant
to sort of let it wash over you
right yeah so let's talk about one more
piece of the technical aspect of the
book is the I didn't it didn't strike me
as being sort of like out of I guess it
is out of chronology but mainly I took
away that there was like multiple
timelines but they both were leading you
up to the conclusion so yes talk about
that because I mean I found that to be
exceptional technique and craft
something that I've not been able to do
even in my doodlings at home is is
create parallel nonlinear timelines but
that are all on the same path leading
you to the same sort of final
destination yeah that was the thing that
I worried about the most or one of the
things they're really worried about and
and again it brings me great relief
whenever people say that they understood
and appreciated it because if I it
up this book would be but so
there's there's there's three timelines
it's real complicated and the
timelines were laid out this is another
thing that I when I wasn't writing the
book I was walking around on my lunch
break like dictating into the notes and
my phone like how these chapters might
fit together there were certain beats I
wanted ahead there are certain can you
hear that siren in the background I
can't but manages you know it's greedy
dude really
exactly that's right
I'm in the I'm in the hood here
so I bet that's the cut the cops on
their way to pop the master criminals
that live in this neighborhood you know
the the real point of the chapters being
told out of order is so that certain
emotional beats can be next to each
other so that you can contrast the
intimacy that the two main characters
experience with the distance that they
experience and in you know so they're
they're really close after the bombs hit
and they're really distant before the
bombs hit and those two those two
moments are next to each other but it's
there's there's three time lines in the
book there's also there's also each time
line has its own structure that leads to
a different place so the first time line
one kind of leads nowhere like the
character doesn't experience any growth
he doesn't experience any success
timeline to almost gets there and then
he backs out and then time line three
which chronologically happens at the end
but which is peppered throughout the
book is when he really experiences in a
Hollywood character arc sense some kind
of triumph and it's corny as hell to say
all that but I really hope so it's
so true though and it's so evident like
I said the craft and the technique that
comes out in the book is so evident and
the writing is so tight and there's not
there's not one superfluous word and all
the copy anywhere and in fact there's
some sentences that don't even have
verbs that's really like my editing
process is cut and cut and cut until I
can't cut any more yeah and it
reads better you know things just read
better that way people need to you know
learning how to edit as the so here's
the good news about writing right or for
me it's extremely hard for me to write a
good honest flowing first draft I will
do that once a month you can edit any
time of day you can tell good prose any
time of day so you don't have to be on
to edit and
thank God for that if I had to be on to
edit you'd be reading this book in a
hundred years all right
well and I think editing when you're
first learning how to write and people
are telling you editing is so important
to go to edit you got to edit you got it
you're like what the I just want to
write what are you talking about I want
to edit and it seems like the mundane
the mundane bit of the writing process
but I think really that's where the gold
is in the editing and the paring down
and the owning of it all the way down to
just it's essential and you can tell you
can tell when people don't special
editing their work whereas yours is just
like punches to the face like every
sentence and you know I remember reading
a short story that you did where the
character was a man and a woman and and
the guy had like I think it was like a
fantasy right and he had looked up his
old flame on Facebook or something there
and then they magically like get
together and then at the very end like
she like turns into I don't know some
sort of monster or something and kills
him right I I thought to myself that I
don't know about you but I thought that
piece was sort of like a turning point
and when I had been reading for me like
that stuff was so punchy and so clear
and the turns and the payoffs are so
great it felt like you have sort of
elevated with that one and then I think
this book is really that's why I just
well that's why I wanted to talk to you
man and I want to get it out there and I
know that there's people that listen to
my podcast that don't will never have
heard of you before and hopefully
they'll go out and read the book I mean
I've got to I've got some great you know
guests coming up to like big big name
journalists people from large research
institutes stuff like that and you know
I wanted to want to slide your name in
alongside you know these people these
neo verify and to blue check
professional large organization people
and and you know try to strategically
help all these you know you and some
other guys that I know sort of you know
get that credibility by association you
know I think that you know I think that
we we have a problem these days creative
creative types of discoverability is
probably the hardest part of the of
making it work and obviously F that's
how it but like getting people to read
your stuff and then and then know who
you are
then pay it take take time like make the
election to pay attention to to your
product is the hardest part and your
book has the chops for that so I can't
wait to really get it out there but I'm
gonna stop stroking you now on the book
and I want to move into a couple other
things because I know that we don't have
unlimited time here I first discovered
you and I first discovered sort of this
online universe out there that has
developed into this thing called the
manosphere for lack of a better word I
don't really love that name but I think
it is symbolic of a loose network of
guys that have sort of kind of tackled
the modern culture and modern
environment from all different angles
whether it's a married guys or single
guys or pickup guys or you know from
nonfiction or fiction and and I think we
all kind of had similar roots and I
wanted to ask you about your online
experiences I mean I used to see you
around on the old forums and stuff like
that like how did you first get into
this sort of universe and would you even
consider yourself part of the universe
and what do you what do you think about
it okay that's a good question
the manosphere is a weird thing do I
consider myself part of it now
no was I back then sure I used to write
about kind of like what you described
Goldman's book was like how to get
I wrote about how to get online
and I was popular and successful doing
so and then when I became more of a more
of an honest artist I became vastly less
popular and successful oh hold on what
do you mean more of an honest artist
well so let's let's let's go back the
concept here's how I learned about the
manosphere I used to write on OkCupid
journals they used to have a blog
function as part of your OkCupid profile
and I would write on those and they were
just like a regular blog except people
would actually read them and this horny
Chinese girl from Australia wrote me a
note one day and she said hey your
reminds me of these two guys huazi and
ruch you should check them out and this
was 2011 and I did I read what is now
called the heartiest blog rich is
C&D Seebeck that right yeah it's and
it's weird to even say now because he's
degraded into the jew is using the black
as you know the muscle for white
genocide and right back then he used to
write the best analysis of getting laid
anywhere and he was poetic about it and
it's so so now there's all these cut you
know conspiracy theories that he's
actually now ten people that the
original guys sold the blog to etc and
early ruch much the same way he was a
candid you know journaler who wrote
about trying to get laid in a way that
you could all relate to he was the first
guy that really wrote about failing to
get laid this is the thing that you know
neil strauss was always a little more
polished and he really had a message and
you still you know that book was also
sensational to me in its time but ruch
had another level of self deprecation
and honesty to it and i loved both of
those blogs and i wanted to make that
one that was like them and it's weird to
say now because those guys have gone on
to fame for political reasons Roush is
getting banned from everywhere that the
Queen of England is on the money
and you know heart East really has
become a Nazi it's not you know there's
people that are unfairly maligned as
Nazis and then there's actual people
that are you know hold racist but which
I look I don't give a what people I
don't care if people hate other races
like who cares good it's not my job to
 tell anybody what to believe I'm
not the message my work is not be like
me and think like me however it's
important to talk about it blew up into
this absurd thing now absolutely every
other person that I remember from that
scene back in those days has now gone on
to be self promoting professional who
makes their living off it and good for
them but it's become really political
it's become really right-wing which I
disagree with and it's what I had hoped
was that all those guys what I tried to
do was try to have it make me a better
writer doing all you know blogging about
 is a great way to write about at
least something interesting right
everyone loves everyone can relate
to the act of trying to couple up yeah
he and universal human experience and
you know if I've learned anything it's
like if you can write about something
that's a universal human experience
whether it's a nostalgia coming-of-age
parents dying for having kids or kids
leaving the house trying to get laid
this is this is what good writing is
because it's Hasker and that people can
understand and then the most famous guy
from that scene was certain of it
can you believe if knowing Mike from
yeah back in the early days what a
phenomenon he has become but it's weird
because it you know he's a good guy and
it pains me when people trash him and it
doesn't pain him he can take it and he
in fact probably loves it in some way
but it's odd that he became a political
celebrity by trolling it's weird
yeah that's a weird I mean so we I mean
we we read all the same stuff Roy see in
DC DC bachelors what that original blog
from Roush was called right and you know
and and Mike danger and play and I of
course we probably both remember Mike
posting a ton on on the roof forum back
in the day and like I haven't been on
that forum in years
you know I 100% say that heart East is
just completely off the deep end in a
psychopath that I can't believe that you
know I ever publicly sort of associated
myself with his writing also same thing
with Roush I feel like Roush is really
lost the plot and it's sad to see and
you know I feel bad for the guy living
and like some third tier European
country with no wife and no kids and you
know no nothing that nothing that he
ever said that he wanted he never got
any of it can I can I jump in here that
you know I there's a difference as the
distinction I you know between brew
shoes still does honest philosophical
work I will I can't comment on either
man's life but on their work like Rich
Roush turns out a good philosophical
treatise once in a while he's not you
can't equate him with quasi who by the
way whose advice I still take I
don't care how much he hates Jews where
in Russia
Russia is not necessarily responsible
for
his persona it got out of control but
he's he's still a guy that is trying to
get at the truth in some way I'm not
saying that I agree with what he's found
I also don't think it's necessarily a
bad thing to be living in Ukraine if you
know what you want is some traditional
blue-eyed woman I mean that's where they
 live you know that's where they
go I know but you know the reason why I
say that is because in this day and age
of where you can be you know I
understand why you're anonymous right
I was anonymous for some time and I
understand a hundred percent why I was
but now now that I'm completely public
and a lot of the guys that I know in the
same sphere are completely public and
they're all doling out advice life
advice you have to start judging people
by their own lives you know to see
whether or not this what they're talking
about is productive and has any real
value and it's just getting harder and
harder for somebody like ruse to have
any credibility about how to build a
good life or how to find a woman or have
a traditional lifestyle when he's been
unable to do any of the above and so is
he how to guy though now I think he's
more of the doomsayer about obligation
which is something that I love to read
people saying that Western civilization
is going to annihilate itself yeah I can
read stuff that has that as its thesis
all day long and that's what he's doing
I don't I think he is not necessarily
giving life and although I guess he just
did release a book called game yeah but
you know III don't think Roush is
putting himself out there as an example
I think he's very self-aware about his
own the various disasters that have
befallen him in recent years and I think
he's got he's he's got a perspective
about it I would now lump him in with
the type that you're describing which is
and you know in general social media men
giving male advice is always complete
garbage with very few exceptions you
know you know who's great is 30 days to
X who writes online businesses and
making money and
he writes about only about things that
he's actually done successfully and you
know there's a few other guys but in
general I have an instinct that when I
see stuff like that it makes me puke
like guys talking about make money start
a business lift weights like yes
do but I lift with you no look I'm in
great shape I'm still a shlump
like lifting weights it's not gonna
solve your problems no but it is a good
place to start my friend yes it is a
very good place to start and it's been a
really fascinating thing to watch what's
happened in the last 10 years from this
these little I say niche so these little
niches I can't stand people say niche
don't don't tell me he's a major I
finish oh God I say Uzi instead of roisy
and I say that and you're gonna get me
say it down that niche yeah what's
happened in the evolution that's taken
place and watching it the growth and
watching people that you know you know
just started writing blog not even
Blancos forum posts explode into big
prolific bloggers and then to you know
certain bitches case like a national
political figure it's really just been a
fascinating sort of we're definitely
like on the cutting edge of the this
cultural zeitgeist in many respects in
terms of engaging with active current
dating mating markets your professional
lives the social media the online in the
online universe writing blogging what
art is what what does writing art even
look like these days anymore
you know what would the what would the
beeps do with Twitter and with blogs and
you know what what would it you know
various other writing generations and
scenes have done with the technology
that we have and that we're all
generally like experts on at this point
social media use blog writing
self-publishing podcasting all this
stuff you know we're pushing this
technology to the max and using it to
connect in ways that we're never
possible before and I often wonder what
what previous writing scenes would have
would have looked like you know 400
Hopsin had Twitter like what would that
I think what would that have been like
you know or social media or
the technology you know that we have the
power of the cell phone etc and so you
know it I'm happy to talk to you about
your experience in that evolution and
you know did you I'm just changing
course real quick here did you ever meet
up with any of those guys did you ever
go to any of the social meet ups or use
the the Internet and social media and
stuff to connect in the real world and
network did you or did you always just
sort of do it online and steer clear
that real world ship I met a few people
and they were interesting experiences I
mean I met Mike I met you met other
people that are now so anonymous that
they probably don't even want me
mentioning their old online names right
and you know it was okay
those guys all those guys that blew up
that really became almost household
names were Canaries in the coal mine you
know the kind of fame that they had
seems terrifying to me I'm not saying
that I'm even equipped to get it if I
wanted it but I don't want it and I
would not consider myself a success on
social media I would consider myself a
deliberate failure on social media yeah
I would I would agree with that I don't
I'm a terrible self promoter and I'm
proud of how much I suck it's self
promoting and marketing and I think that
the act of marketing something taints it
you know I think anything that has to be
sold is not good I don't say this about
anyone elses work but it's how I feel
about my own I don't want to have to get
out there and plug it create a
larger-than-life persona or you know
pretend to be something that I'm not
meanwhile watch my Twitter which is 90
percent me shilling my book again and
again but you know well let me let's
drill down on that a little bit there
buddy like you want you don't you want
to be a just like a full time
professional writer wouldn't that be
like the dream it would be nice to not
have to go to work in the morning yeah
this is it's a weird thing because I
wrote this I wrote I've now written
three books while having a full-time job
and what's more
hating having to go to work gave me a
lot of the energy necessary to write
those books yeah so it's a weird
question I mean I've also been
unemployed and I look back at my writing
from those times and some of its good
and some of its not and a lot of it is
you know I look back at my old journals
and a lot of them are about being bored
and having nothing to do think about
experience or write about I don't know
what the answer is and I've forgotten
the original question do you remember
the question is like you know if you
what I guess your priority isn't
becoming commercially successful because
then you'd hate yourself for it here's
what I want someone else to plug
my for me while I write it I feel
like I wrote the book and that
should be enough like yeah waking up and
going to work 40 hours a day to pay the
rent and then writing a book on the
goddamn weekend is plenty of work for me
I would just as soon play xbox
with the rest of my time I the other
thing is that you get the sense that
like okay I want to have a viral tweet
what would I have to do to make it
happen well it would be something about
you know Donald Trump and the Russia
investigation or some other topical
horseshit and blah blah blah and you
know I'd try 10 of those and one of them
would stick and that would make me
famous a the idea of doing that is
repulsive to me be it's just not what am
I so how am I gonna use something that
is dishonest and I think all marketing
and sales is fundamentally dishonest and
I'm gonna let you finish how are you
gonna use something dishonest to promote
something that is whose point is to be
honest how is I don't think that that's
universally true I mean I would like to
think that I've been successful in
promoting both my sort of first-person
narratives and like personal experiences
as well as a nonfiction book and I feel
like all of it was completely honest and
I feel I find personally that the more
honest and more authentic I am the more
revealing and true I am the easier it is
to spread the message that's interesting
and you're hunting a different beast I
think you have a different personality
and it's something
that I've struggled with the concept of
a character and a persona you know this
is something that people ask me a lot
about blogging is like well you know do
you ever get tired of the persona the
delicious tacos persona I don't
have a persona this is what I'm really
like right and do I ever get tired of it
every day every second I'm
extremely tired of it yeah I didn't mean
that to trash you although I realize I
said it in a way that was deliberately
dickish but you got to understand that
it's directed at myself against the
against the instinct to compromise what
what I might say in order to please an
audience I never want to be working to
please an audience I love my beloved
readership every single one of you
anyone who's read my book I love you and
you can also suck my dick
I will never change as much as a
conservation mark to please you and if
you don't like it suck my dick
go read Twilight asshole this is
this is this is mine this belongs to me
right this belongs to me and I will not
you know I would rather watch my child
be thrown into a bonfire than have
somebody edit my work so at the same
time what would be nice is if I had a
publicist who would sell it you
know however my you know my AAA sponsor
has always asked me why don't you submit
your book to publishers and the reason
is because publishers it's not even
about the money even though every time
you buy my book I make five bucks and if
I had a publisher I would make 4% of the
cover price which I don't know what it
is but it's a lot less than five bucks
but also what publishers want is
somebody that can promote themselves
they want you to be your own marketing
department so what what the do I
need you for right what are you why do
you exist then um right unless unless
you're already unless there's someone
you want they want to promote which
means they're already famous there's no
there's really very little payoff to it
tell the other thing is especially so I
really only have three things
I do blog books and Twitter my blog is
delicious tacos calm my Twitter is
delicious underscore tacos for those
listening but I think all of those
things need to exist for their own sake
and not as a promotional tool Twitter is
a place to post stupid pictures and have
fun if I didn't enjoy it I wouldn't do
it and it's not you know it's not a very
effective promotional tool for me either
it doesn't drive a lot of traffic to my
site it doesn't move a lot of books my
blog moved a lot of books yeah I mean
that's your primary primary source weird
out there right yeah yeah if I don't
keep blogging my book sales go in the
toilet right away so I mean if I if I if
I keep blogging that's why I put up
fuckload of posts in December and that's
why it's old zit well in December huh
yeah very interesting and so and for me
it's like almost III can't even
delineate because of Amazon doesn't tell
you where your sales come from you can't
see if they found your book by searching
in an amazon or if they followed a link
you post it from your blog or if you
follow a link that you post on twitter
there's yeah but you can see on your
website who clicks out to amazon yeah
definitely and I can also see the more
Twitter impressions I get the more book
sales so like there's a direct
correlation but it converts really
shittily I mean I did like almost 10
million in the last month and you know
it's still not enough 210 million
impressions on Twitter in the last month
and it's still not enough book sales to
you know mean like I'm comfortable yeah
twitter twitter used to drive traffic
elsewhere but twitter doesn't it's not
good for Twitter if you click on a link
and go to another website so Twitter is
built to keep you in Twitter yeah it
doesn't use Twitter used to drive
enormous web tracker traffic I got one
click one tweet from quasi which I'm
going to say in the French way over and
over again to irritate you quazy which
is the name of the actual chateau in the
story of oh why we will explain
something but one tweet from him when he
had 6,000 followers got me 3,000 views
can you imagine how 50 percent of
someone's followers clicking on a link
now No
No it's like it yeah one or two percent
so the other thing is I don't want to I
don't want to change one punctuation
mark in a tweet to please people
who might buy my book either like buy it
or don't you know it's the thing that I
make is not a marketable thing it's not
does not have a wide appeal most normal
people who are given my books actively
hate them this has been an issue for me
where a friend of mine is a woman like
the women in my life love my books the
men that are acquainted with those women
hate me and you know will always say
that I'm a rapist and all this other
horseshit whenever they find out that
I'm a writer I don't find anything that
you had written to be any more offensive
than anything I'd ever read from
Bukowski for example yeah well we don't
live in 1972 yeah isn't that a thing huh
you know it's amazing how much more
puritanical we've become
whereas I thought that part of the
liberal revolution in the eighties you
know 60 70s and 80s was about opening up
our norms and allowing people to be a
little bit more free with their
sexuality and the things that they do
but in fact there and this is a great
segue to one of the last things what I'm
talking about it's it but in fact what's
happened is people can write about sex
even less people can talk about sex even
less and I'm I think it's also sort of
dovetailing with private sexual
practices that are even maybe crazier
than they were in the past but yet you
can't talk about it and if you do write
about it somehow you're diminished
professionally or you know I always joke
it's like what why is writing about sex
like somehow less professional then
writing about like local news stories
like I don't understand the comparison
there and I've read I've read many
articles recently that say men can't
write about sex anymore how me too
killed Playboy and penthouse how you
know there's no men out there who are
writing about sex and it just you know
my first instinct is that's complete
horseshit cuz I know guys that are doing
it but what what's your take on that
what's your take about our current
culture and the way it
lates to writing sex writing men writing
about sex men being honest about their
experiences as men and putting that out
there rather than wrapping it in some
sort of politically correct packaging in
order to assuage the you know the PC
monsters and the me to maniacs out there
well it's interesting when you say men
writing about sex you I think I take it
to me and you talk men writing about
being horny that's one of the things
that I do a lot is writing about just
the insane intensity of the state of
horniness and the the things that you
get horny for for instance young teen
girls I mean 18 plus of course of course
right so it's a so it's a very big
question that you asked my take on this
topic is there's no difference in the
law the government is not going to throw
you in jail for anything you're right
however if you need a job a corporation
has absolute power over you
they can control whether you eat whether
you pay your mortgage and whether you
can turn on the lights and your
beautiful home and it's very easy to
scare a corporation and America is a
corporate state that a that is run by
these satanic institutions that have
complete power over their employees and
I don't think there's any solution to it
I think it's going to get worse and
we're gonna continue to be you
can you can write whatever you want as
long as you don't need to eat right
right I mean you've got you've got a
wife and kids right so you're you
really have somebody that you have to
take care of and protect I don't even
have that and I'm terrified oh yeah
being unemployable yeah I became
unemployable about a year ago right then
you're the you're the famous anti-semite
and white nationalist Jack Murphy that I
was late eventually yes the half Jewish
anti-semites who ran schools for poor
black kids in the city yeah that's right
and you were from what was implied
you're those schools or extermination
camps for
all right what your genocide of views
that's right I was rounding up poor
black kids and instead of giving them
better education I was shipping them off
to some sort of horrible death and
destination yeah so I became
unemployable about a year ago and it was
because of sex writing it was because I
wrote things that were challenging to
feminist orthodoxy I even even in my it
was a do feminists have rape fantasies
peace and I even cited feminist
literature and still people weren't
taking it as a response to existing
literature an intellectual dialogue that
was laced with society SATs hired
sarcasm I couldn't understand that so
instead they just fired me also because
I questioned you know open borders like
oh let's let's just least have a
conversation about it and they fired me
they banned me from coaching Little
League they took away my income they
took away my stability for my family
financially in some respects and you
know luckily luckily I've got you know a
history of financial activities that
have allowed me of some calm comfort and
I have a lot of great support so you
know I'm still living in the same house
but I could see how for somebody that
wasn't as properly set up that you know
this would be a devastating
life-changing you know in the gutter on
the streets kind of thing like they did
they did really strip away my main
source of income and destroyed my
professional reputation forever now I
say they I wrote it there's no question
but it's like the impacter
interpretation the malicious
interpretation and the reaction is what
you know I'm feeling the consequences of
I hope they have a child molester
coaching a little league team now oh
well I actually have a meeting coming up
when this thing is published all I've
already had the meeting and see if I can
get back into the coaching because I do
miss that quite a bit but you're right
we're people that work in corporate
America are definitely slaves to the
corporate system they have complete and
total control over your life they can
you know pull the plug on you at any
second there's no loyalty there's no
dedication there's no safety net work
and I can see why people don't want to
take risks but like I don't know man I
can't not like I
uncontrollable urge to express myself to
write things down to talk about
sensitive issues to to digest
complicated matters and and spit them
out back into the world dripping with my
own emotion and personal experience like
there's just I can't I can't stop it
well what can you do if I had it to do
again I would have had better
operational security I would have stayed
more anonymous in a sense I mean you can
you know either of us could have not had
any problems if we hadn't shown our
 faces if I if I hadn't told all
my OkCupid dates about my blog
and my books but then I wouldn't have
got laid which was even worse than
getting fired you know right what can
you do it is of course it is always not
to victim blame but it's my own
fault I put my face out there I
put my voice out there which I'm now
doing again on this podcast and I did
not protect my identity at all look I
just moved but for seven years you could
go on my blog and find my exact not
necessarily my address but you could
definitely find it in Google Maps and a
couple people did show up to my
house weirdo no no yes one guy came to
my house to kick my ass I wasn't how oh
my god is this like triangulating the
duck pond some other this is the
guy that came to kick my ass was a
personal thing he was mad that I was
trying to bang his girlfriend so it's
not then there was one other weird
elliot rodger esque weirdo that showed
up and ranted in front of my apartment
again I wasn't home but I had a friend
staying with me who pointed this out to
me that there was this young man
pointing at my apartment screaming and
ranting while I was at work now if
you're gonna do the research to find out
where I live you also know that I have a
job so you can't show up between 9:00
and 5:00 on a weekday and expect
me to hear what you have to say stupid
dummy
yeah well you know some people reading
is challenging some people so it was
easy it was easy to murder me back in
the day but less so now
so what's what's next for delicious
tacos so this book finally some good
news
yeah is a rocket blast of a novel it's a
straight fiction laced with purely
historic like accurate autobiography you
know social criticism modern commentary
excellent tight prose complicated
structures you know really a masterpiece
I think and thank you
what what's coming up next what do you
what do you see for yourself your
creative output what kind of what thesis
do you want to write about in the future
what's up my next book is called true
love and it's a it's a fantastical novel
about true love
is that right yes and it's gonna say I'm
gonna take my time with this one finally
some good news is a very short novel I
think this is gonna be I mean finally
some good news in terms of word count is
in novella it's very quick I was gonna
use that word but I didn't want to be
insulting so yeah yeah like a novella
it's meant for what I wanted with this
is something that people could sit down
and read and zip through it and then
start it again and read it again yeah
this next one is gonna be maybe a little
bigger a little longer and I kind of
have an idea of the tone of it and I
maybe have to last it's like the like
you know when I conceived it finally
some good news I had the beginning the
last two sentences and the cover and
this one I kind of had the last sentence
and in a concept of what it's like but
it's going to take a long time and I'll
probably put out another collection -
I've got a lot of uncollected stories
and essays that I'm gonna do in another
collection maybe in 2019 and that's it
man I'm going to keep doing it I mean
you this is I wish I could say if people
by finally some good news I will write
another novel but the reality is I'm
going to write another novel whether
they buy it or not
so you know please buy a ton of the
goodness of your heart but I'm ready I'm
gonna keep doing what I'm doing anyway I
can't not I'm gonna continue working for
a little while for as long as I can and
saving money and living prudent
and then we'll see man maybe this time
in a couple years I'll be sitting in on
a beach in Southeast Asia with my
beautiful golden teen wife pregnant with
my child and spearing fish for my dinner
right well that sounds pretty nice
I hope you can get there I think that
this book is fantastic thinking
everybody should go out and get it I
read it straight through myself
I'm definitely gonna read it again my
girlfriend is gonna read it she's very
excited about it
it's called finally some good news you
can get on amazon.com where can people
find you out there on the Internet's
mr. tacos delicious tacos com is my
website I also have another book on
Amazon called the which is popular
my twitter is delicious underscore tacos
it's locked
because of my doxing so if you request
to follow me don't follow me for
malicious reasons please and that's
about it that's my entire social media
presence that's well it's been working
for you and I hope that things continue
to move forward in a positive direction
sounds like you're not doing so bad
living in Southern California with a job
that you like and want to protect a
brand new book that's been released and
is selling very well with nothing but
5-star reviews I'm gonna put my own
five-star review on there thank you very
very much sir for coming on the podcast
I know that you don't do these very
often it's been a pleasure to talk to
you about your technique and your
process and our mutual sort of shared
experience in the manosphere and online
and with writing so again thank you
sincerely for coming on I really
appreciate it and I hope that we can
have a chance to talk again soon thanks
brother all right I appreciate it again
Jack Murphy live.com Jack Murphy live on
Twitter subscribe to the podcast sign up
for the mailing list go to amazon.com
first by finally some good news and then
also by democrat to deplorable buy one
for your mom and for your dad that's how
I try to make my money these days so
please guys do help me out there and we
got some great guests coming up on the
podcast I will be announcing them on
Twitter things are really moving in the
right direction there and if you anybody
has any suggestions of people that
they'd like to hear on here please
just shoot me an email I do read and
respond to almost everything know that I
get so do reach out thank you everybody
and thank you again delicious tacos and
we'll talk soon
[Music]