welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
all right check-ins I'm feeling uh kind
of like aggressively playful oh and I
feel a little bit of a joy saying that
so welcome to the stoah I am the Stewart
of the stoah Peter Lindbergh also known
as DJ delicious sometimes and we're here
at the knife's edge to discuss
collective presencing and Raya Bach I
hope I'm pronouncing that correctly is
here today and she's gonna share her
thoughts on her practice that she's
developed and I was a little bit of a
naughty boy because last minute I tagged
in Richard to see if he wanted to host
the thing because he's more familiar
with Rao's work than I am so Richard
will be hosting kind of facilitate in
the question period and after Rao's talk
so how for sharing after she shares her
thoughts so I'll look ray will share her
thoughts then we'll open up for Q&A got
a question just write in the chat box
and then Richard will call on you to
mute it and facilitate that discussion
unless he wants to take me back in
alright so that being said I'll head
over to RIA just this to say my name is
Lea means Maria I'm going to skip M&A
yeah so that's that's my first name
officially Maria on my passport but it's
probably one of the reasons why I wanted
Richard to host it's well I could
probably ask more interesting questions
even then what is your name and how do
we pronounce it the first one that comes
to mind having some familiarity with
your work but I still feel like I'm a
novice is you've written this book
called collective prison sing and maybe
you would be useful to talk before we
get to the collective part about what
what is presence what is it for how do
we get there why do you like it what do
you know about prisons can we visit
there well what is presence
for me presence has to do a lot with
being embodied being in your body aware
of your body and being feeling grounded
and centered and open it's the whole
thing about collective prancing is like
can we use the stance of that you
cultivate let's say in meditation or in
any practice basically can we cultivate
that stance while being in a
conversation with each other and dance
that was the driving question I think
which maybe not articulated at the
beginning of the process but that's what
made us move into this whole project
let's say that bro
eventually brought this whole model and
practice out so does yeah I think that's
the practices do you okay yeah do you
realize do I realize when I'm more or
less in presence or am i taken up in
ideas or am i more in emotions or and if
I notice I'm not really present do I
know what how I can come come back
that's how I see how it can come back to
presence and openness being in this
engagement with the world if
you say that you you know you've kind of
stumbled into this research question of
how do we cultivate a stance of
meditation while we're in relationship
and conversation if that question wasn't
clear when you started what was guiding
him how did you know what to do that was
very interesting it's at that point in
time which is like I know them years ago
um and some what we call circle practice
in the conversation in the dialogue it's
sung in some Co conversations you feel
like something's happening you feel like
there's a certain quality in the
conversation that's let's say beyond a
normal conversation and at that point we
were so intrigued to be called it the
magic in the middle because there was
something about when you just attend to
the middle and not really speak to each
other or not really like yeah I agree
with you but kind of being aware of what
was going on through the conversation
through the dialogue this was some
something that happened that we were
fascinated about or at least some of us
and we call it the magic in the middle
and so we were kind of hoping that it
would happen yeah I'm not knowing what
it actually was or or how to get there
or the first ever gathering we did we
had a I think a three day gathering
where finally as facilitation team we
said like we don't have any program we
don't have any proposals we just drop it
all and then in that afternoon and some
people went walking and some people did
whatever and somehow magically
almost everybody converged into a circle
at some point and we had like to our
dialogue which was like with that
quality and uh yeah that sets me off on
finding more finding out more about it
mmm so if if you found the way to this
magic by giving up on your role as host
there could be a way of experiencing
that as a disappointment like it could
be an impossible riddle how do we get
back there and so I'm curious what
you've learned in the in the subsequent
years have they had to what's the what's
the pathway back to the magic like if
what you were doing didn't work and it
was only your surrender and release they
caught you there is there something more
active and intentional that you know how
to do now as a host of this process it's
still you have
not much control or influence but it's
how you are present in the group itself
and what are the questions you're
bringing what how is your presence in
the group can you invite people to maybe
a deeper sense of presence but if you
really need to let go of any attachment
because what I noticed because we use a
practice not to meditate or to have a
nice dialogue we use a practice to
actually get to some new insights around
a question that really matters so it's
not just for the sake of doing it we
actually want
some real insights and if the question
matters to us then you get a whole bunch
of attachments let's say on all kinds of
things so you first need to work that
true like things need to be spoken needs
to be checked out with each other
dropped maybe there's some tension and
can we still again again go back to
presence and it's not easy especially
when you have a stake in the in in the
question in the topic well that's
another puzzle yeah I wonder if you
gonna keep throwing paradoxes at us so
you've got a question that really
matters but then you're not attached to
the outcome how do you how do you
discover a question that matters where
do they come from and that's indeed a
whole art in itself I come from from
let's say lineage it's called art of
hosting hosting conversations that
matter and there it is one of the real
crucial capacities you need to train
yourself in or as a team you've trained
there something like if people want to
have a conversation that matters many
times when you ask them like what is the
question
they stayed a question but many times
the question is kind of on a deeper
level so you need to have a conversation
about but what is it actually and my I'm
trained and worked at subsonic therapist
and the coach for long so I know what
people bring on a level like this is the
problem many times what is the problem
is something that's on a lower level so
I'm kind of used to look for a level and
when we
organize a retreat or a workshop or with
collective prancing we do that work
let's say up front with with the team
that is hosting the event like what is
the question that we're really careful
and yeah but that word is not right and
we really take time to to craft that
question really well until we are also
like yeah that's the question do you in
your everyday life like today right now
do you have a stable of questions and
development like do you do you wake up
in the morning and you've got the sense
of this you're kind of farming these
these big questions that I've been
hovering around and your sleep and your
you're really gonna like do you have one
that you're you're presently now that's
taking your attention it's not that I
wake up with them but yeah I'm sitting
with this question these days so I'm
very at ease with all these circles and
dialogues and conversations and but what
I don't know is how to build the
business that's like really foreign to
me that's like I I really feel like I'm
four year old and I don't know anything
about it and I have a huge intuition but
on that in that topic
it feels like my intuition is not
working please guide me take me by the
hand and so we were talking about with
my partner with other people who in the
collective fencing world let's say and
we came to this question recently like
could we find a collective practice
where we actually built that
entrepreneurial spirit together like we
know we have built consent
relatives decision-making processes that
we can describe and that we can
disseminate and everybody can learn it
but can we do so can we develop can we
find a collective practice where this
entrepreneurial spirit is actually
helped supported by in all of us by all
of us and doesn't mean we need to be in
the same company at all because many of
us have like very at their own company
or with two or three or I mean I think
lots of people here just have their own
private business I guess so that's
something that's on my mind and that I
can feel that it's like and that works
in me you know taking your own advice
that this you arrive with a question and
there's a question underneath there
could be what I mean what I know if you
work you're an author and a teacher and
a facilitator and a therapist and you've
got tons of different competencies and
skills and in this for some reason even
though there's some billions of
businesses out there you're finding an
obstacle to you making your own business
that's kind of puzzling to me when
you've got such other you know plenty
about the competencies is there yes
there's some obstacle it's it's between
you and their entrepreneurial spirit
good well be and it's pretty unknown
territory for me I mean I am
self-employed as they call it since the
90s has always gone well I've never done
marketing or PR or anything and a couple
of years ago we started with I started
with three others to fund a cooperative
because how can I be real and
have integrity to advise others on
collective presence on collective
practices on decision-making or
conversations not matter if I'm not in
the business myself yeah so we have this
company you would try lots of things out
but this doesn't mean that my income
goes up or at all and especially not now
because people cancel all kind of events
so there's something and I can see some
people have eat something that I don't
have and I wonder can we spread it
because there's I see so many people who
want to build a better world don't want
to go to business as usual and are in
this spread like yeah but I need to feed
my kids and I need to pay my rent and
there's not enough income coming in and
we are like in between two worlds like
what is the collective practice that we
could help each other but I I don't know
I can only all the question more helpful
the question I can feel I can feel that
I question matters right like it's got
some yeah it's measuring to me as well
uhm so with that question that's the
starting point then if you were applying
your own methodology to yourself there I
say what would be the next step once
you've got this question how do you how
you do collective presencing about it we
actually started with our little let's
say core team of of collective prancing
and a few friends
I can say we didn't come out with what
clarity yet it's an ongoing process and
that makes me wonder like what are
assumptions that we may be holding that
we haven't uncovered because for me a
dialogue and collective prancing is a
connective dialogue and let's say the
words a photo charmer
it's like many times s in therapy many
times it's like when you can uncover an
assumption suddenly like aha
the world of possible solutions of
insights it's way bigger than I do about
my question so yes it feels as if we
haven't we haven't uncovered some of
these assumptions that are actually
holding us back from new insights
that's jump in so rich was warming up
the room right now some because it's
really tight questioning at the knife's
edge which I appreciate and so if you
have any questions it's right in the
chat box and then I'll unmute you and
you can read it or I will read on your
behalf and we just got one from Tyson so
Tyson if you'd like to read your
question yeah thank you rich Andrea I'm
enjoying this dialogue and I'm very
interested in the magic in the middle
and I really enjoyed being in that space
curious what you do to create a
container or a shared intention or
context or dial on like language to
invite people into engaging that unknown
in the middle rather than maybe speaking
from like what they already know maybe
the temptation like if a question comes
up the temptation to give advice and to
solve it
rather than like really am being merged
in the question so I'm just curious if
you have like agreements or what type of
things you do to create that space yeah
I mean you can offer some guidelines or
some principles but it's really hard for
people especially when the conversing or
the topic the question matters to them
first of all we we work with the talking
piece like whenever somebody holds the
piece even if that's a pen or whatever
it is that means this person speaks and
the other ones listen and you can move
the piece from one to one but to slow
the conversation even more down you can
put the talking piece in the middle in
the middle of the circle and then say
you can sense whenever you need to speak
and I always explain it doesn't we try
to speak from a place where that you
haven't been thinking about it
beforehand
so it's not an idea I already had before
I entered the room that's where I wanna
go
can I speak something I haven't spoken
anywhere yet and that's pretty pretty
hard
it doesn't mean you cannot tell a story
or something that comes up because
sometimes a story comes up that you
might not even understand why it comes
up yeah and sometimes you have to check
yourself like I don't know why but it
seems like I need to tell this right now
here and then you will notice that
somebody else picks up a meaning from
that story and suddenly
reveals why it was meaningful in that in
that guiding question and so it's it's
really important that you inhabit that
space yourself or the ones who are
holding the space that you can convey
that with how you speak if you say we do
it like this and does this yeah it's can
you speak yourself and have you worked
with your team the one or the two or the
three others that hold it with you to to
be in that space together have you
trained yourself actually have you
practiced yeah
that's short so if you have any
questions and maybe you can practice it
to just go you know like lean into what
questions emerge and just write it down
and when I was leaning into that this
question number is right away
[Music]
can can you measure wisdom and I think I
asked that is a lot of people are giving
me advice these days like I should get
more sleep through this through that and
then the question that keeps coming up
can you measure wisdom and I don't think
you can and if a question or that
question is the foundation of wisdom and
you can't really measure the accuracy of
what question to pick so you have to
rely on a different source so I'm
curious what what comes alive so I think
measurement comes from an ordered system
if I can use that model well you can
measure more or less wisdom I don't
think belongs in that
[Music]
we do seem to have a capacity in
ourselves in
I call it subtle sensing that we have
where we can sometimes feel like this is
relevant not this this is it or this is
my question or this is what I really
need to do we do have an inner and
champion calls that a felt sense and we
write stupid capitals and I always give
this or he gets this like when Europe
somebody writes poetry and you write
your poem and you know like there is a
word but this is not this word I know it
needs to be another word for the home to
be good so if we do have a sense and
it's a very precise sense like it's not
this word it's goes but it's not this
one until you've found it then music
yeah that was so that kind of sensing
capacity that we have where it's it's I
don't know somewhere in us and it's not
not at all rational it's not evil
emotional there's something energetic
about it although I don't want to be new
agey about it but that kind of sense is
what you need to do you start to
recognize in yourself and start to
practice and check things out like I I
used like to train myself like being in
a big workshop or a conference and then
I would check like okay we go to eat and
there's a big dining room and I was like
I go with my sense
I need to sit like that table that chair
that's mine for this noon for this
dinner and then see whoever shows up and
sometimes that was amazing or sometimes
it was like I don't know why I was
sitting here but you can you can have
these little tiny exercises for yourself
to kind of train yourself so um I have
another question that is burning up it's
just like wrestling out of me but I'm
gonna place it because rich said Abby
had a question so I might say that for
the end we'll see the how the suspense
goes but Abby if you can meet yourself
and ask your question Thanks hi RIA I've
been reading your work collective
presencing the book and it's been great
it's really resonating especially coming
from a focusing background I you
mentioned a lot about you know inner
process and doing the deep work and so I
guess my question is I'm wondering the
modularity of the circle format in
various different organizations and if
this is only if you've taken it to
various different locations and maybe
expanded to organizations because it
seems like I don't know if it's a
prerequisite to have done that personal
work and be willing to look deep in in
order to participate or or maybe not
yeah we do have roads let's see what I
called art of hosting which is a
community and a practice and we'll field
of practice it's about conversations
that matter and it goes always which
starts always with the three-day
training and we it has been brought in
like until the European Commission
although it's called participatory
leadership didn't like all the first was
a bit too fluffy or whatever so
it's practices about conversations and
about dialogues in all kinds of ways
sweet big groups small groups
conferences stakeholder gatherings but
what I want to point to is that if you
have like let's say the biggest thing we
ever did was probably a two-day
conference with 800 people you do have a
team then of 6 7 8 10 people and what we
tried in these themes is to come to that
level of co-creation like what only
sensing what is the client saying what
other people what is the actual question
like and from that sensing capacity in
this core team that's from where we do
the work yeah and now after 10 years you
can see how this practice is spreading
because some peach is having which is
like ministries within the European
Commission have adapted his approach in
him as their way of working so I'm not
saying that collective prancing itself
is like known anywhere but like the
leading up to it like can we actually
start to listen in meetings instead of
wanting to fight or wanting to win
that's getting some ground even in the
European Commission so yeah so it sounds
like the participants don't actually
have to have this sensing capability to
begin with actually everybody has it but
we just not used to use it yeah but if
you are at ease with inviting people
into that space and in naming it in
whatever words you can give it then you
think they can kind
relate to you if you feel comfortable to
invite them into that space most of the
times people come with you and are
actually happy that they can finally
talk like no not debate but have a
conversation many sometimes you need to
like in the Commission you need to say
like hey people you're not representing
your company or you're not representing
your country you're here as a person
with your expertise of course but you're
here as a person and can we speak from
that level it's of course it's different
yeah I have another follow-up question
if that's okay
in the book you talk a lot about
following aliveness and follow what it's
alive and it could be something that if
I just don't feel alive to do it now I'm
just not going to do it I kind of wonder
how that plays out because something
else that's in my mind is like focus and
discipline and that I don't know how
that you can really blend together
because it seems like I'm just following
my feelings if I'm just following those
alive or maybe it's kind of a fellow
sense like the somatic piece so maybe
you can dive into that a little bit yeah
what is I would say howdy discipline and
what is feeding yourself up yeah
what is doing even stuff like for me
it's like doing my accounts needs to
happen now and then I really don't like
it although I I can do it well but I
don't like doing it
from psychology is if you put yourself
under stress like I need to do this now
and when the discipline is that kind of
stuff that kind of energy it will always
trigger the opposite that will say
it I don't know because there is
pressure then something comes to balance
it but if the discipline is like lost
yesterday at the conversation with with
my partner that one not well I had to
discipline to go sit on the meditation
question because I want to I want to
step out of the emotional charge and I
want to come back to balance that's also
discipline not because I still need to
but because I choose to do them not easy
that's also discipline but it's another
it comes from a different place well if
you're like a writer and you're like I
have a writer's box but then like
actually having the discipline to write
out things help me push to the next step
what about in that scenario I think it's
because you want to and you know that it
helps to start writing anyway it's not
because of authority that says now you
have to work even if it's an inner
Authority it's more like I choose to do
this because I know it has if you look
it's not easy
Thanks
and I'm always impressed to hear that
people read my work with this some good
stuff so Zack can you put yourself from
you mash your question
mr. sack I'm going on I don't see his
face okay he just jumped on oh there is
John some other questions come up in the
midst as well but unless Peter says
otherwise I'm going to follow the
directive announced a question that I
posted initially yeah RIA when you were
when you were speaking closer to the
beginning you were talking about like a
workshop or like retreat context I think
we're on I think you've said something
to the effect of like on the front end
of that there's a lot of work for like
refine the question where people want to
circle around and from what I'm
remembering like there was some
suggestion that there to me that there
is like a point at which there's like at
least relative group consensus around
like what the like what the question
really is that people want to dig in on
I'm wondering like in your experience
you know is reaching that consensus
typical on these kinds of settings how
necessary is it and you know if you
don't reach it how does that change the
experience like can you speak to the
relationship between like finding that
group consensus and like the quality of
the circle maybe okay I first want to
speak about that word consensus because
consensus many times mean like oh we
need to talk and talk and talk until
everybody can agree with it and from
what I'm talking about
is not about agreement in these themes
let's say hosting claims facilitation
teams when we try to come up with what
is our guiding question for the next
retreat indeed is more like is our
felt sense of everyone is it in
alignment with each other that's
different than agreeing it's more like
it feels real it feels right it feels
the right question it's not like oh yeah
I can agree you know okay let's go with
that
it needs to be alive in each of us and
many times when PD groups useful sensors
it's more like in the area of we first
had a conflict and now we need to come
to consensus and there is most of us who
have been there I've done that we don't
want to go to consensus but then there
is the consent decision-making but I
won't go into that but for collective
presencing and how we in teams that
hosts conversations for others it's not
that kind of consensus where we agree
it's more an alignment of sensing that
this is the question that is at its most
meaningful I'm not sure if I can explain
it for one it's very sometimes I find
subtle subtle new ones
yeah do you have a follow-up question
Zack because what if your question was
to be these circles the most generative
the question of course you need to speak
to people who are joining the
conversation or the dialogue but to have
a generative conversation or a
generative dialogue in that regard it's
really informative to to
understand or learn about the four
levels of listening and conversation at
auto genre users and to really
understand what generative means what
how it is different than agreeing or
being even understanding each other on
an emphatic way but it's more like
indeed like with heavy names like please
does this bring more life into our
organization or our circle or does it
generate energy so um since there's no
questions in the chatbox I think people
a little bit for some reason maybe me
and rich can start plumb about sourcing
the question that feels most alive can
you hear me
I just changing Mike Mike okay so the
question that's coming up is how do you
make a love to the unknown see them
again how to make them maybe I'll reward
it they're like how do we make love to
the unknown yeah in the beginning when
we were in this process of uncovering
visual um we talked a lot about the
future and Auto Shermer also talks about
the Futurists already here somehow I see
myself and others like yeah we we look
at this it's now in the future and it's
like linear and I wanted to get rid of
that linear idea and that's how I came
up with like a potential there is always
potentially
and relationships any groups of people
and organizations there's more potential
than what is already present but then
you actually need to get kind of love
that that thing that is not very yet now
that unknown potential of yourself or
from your organization or your
perpetrator and I the best thing to do
to relate with it it's like when you
have children you don't know when
they're eight they want to be a
footballer or a teacher or a pianist or
but you you you hold them and you you
hold that potential that can look that
way or that way or okay and it's unknown
you don't know where they end up ten
years later and even twenty years later
and still mean you are in love with that
what's in them even you haven't seen it
yeah that's also for us I think
especially in this time like there's
something unknown that's going on
there's some unknown potential that
might come into manifestation it might
not but it might and can we just cannot
be enough with can we instead of like or
it's oh it should be more of this or
more of that unless of that that we
already know what if it's something
really different and that's what I got
from through Bonita Roy who has red cap
sir you can follow me when it talks that
about ever-present
origin like
it's not that we just evolved in a
linear way or with most of time we we
throw it like this goes up actually
every minute everything that exists is
there and we drop into particles origin
and it's possible to come with something
new with all that was already before so
there is there is a possibility every
moment to change and just not linear it
can be like a phase transition like some
people have you might have the
experience from like summary yeah I
understood
suddenly I realized or and you become a
different person at least in some ways
and so I think in in our society we
don't have that I can only live in love
for life actually like somebody I wanted
to say we don't have that yet and now
Raya is going to bring her sunshine and
ask a question yeah I am wondering if
there is a way to measure collective
presence and how do you know like when a
group has achieved it and if everyone in
the group can sense it like is it just
like a unknowing I wouldn't know how to
measure it
uh-huh but if I one of the chapters in
the book or pieces in the book is about
the one next elegant minimal stuff like
we're in such complex domain we don't
know where it leads us so if we through
a conversation to a dialogue we come to
an understanding of
that's indeed the next up we can take
not something very difficult but
something we feel like that's the that
follows naturally from where we are from
what we have discovered from what we
have been talking about and then you do
that stuff whatever that stuff is and it
might be like oh we need to talk some
overhead sometimes but sometimes it's
some action and I hope we get better and
better at something like this is a snap
we are going to take and that's in maybe
a small action but that for me that's
the ultimate purpose of this whole
practice to actually come to actions in
the world and not for the purpose of oh
let's have another good conversation
that actually doesn't bring us much
that's but but you have to practice a
lot of practice conversations to become
good that's the other path all right so
we have one more question
Tanya's feeling into something you have
a question that's a Georgian Tonya
yeah well I'm I'm connecting a lot with
what you're saying miss Nikki means like
gee I think and then thinking of
experience that I've had recently with
a housemate and we're part of a learning
community a larger learning community
and we communicate through slack and she
was encouraging me to just write into
the slack without knowing like what I'm
gonna say and it's similar to what you
were pointing at and I feel like there's
both that encouraging people to just
like what you just did Peter used to
invited me to just and I was like I'm
just gonna write I have something
region 2 I don't know what it is exactly
yeah thanks Tyson um
yak there's a question too around how do
we do this on zoom which is a whole
other thing
um and feel each other but I feel like
there's something around the like
holding each other in a creative tension
of our learning process
I really felt her doing that with me and
I and I've been doing that with her or
like she's had patterns that come up
they get in her way and I know I do in
groups too that where I like talk and
I'm talking from what we might call ego
or old patterns and attachment I think
you're using that but if we have this a
sort of agreement that we're like she
knows that I don't really want to do
that and I know she just she doesn't
want to go into her old patterns it's
like we're we're hold
we're holding each other and it's we've
made that vivid and clear it changes the
whole field I don't know what the
question is there's just this advice
hearing you connected to sort of the
individual process and then I was
feeling it in my experience of the
collective that's happening god I think
it's really helpful if you make that
explicit amongst yourself this is a
learning or a way of learning or a way
of getting other ways of learning and
knowing into the space since we're
Western mind trained it's most of them
very conceptual very mental maybe in
groups and circles it's emotional but
there's also that energetic knowing that
intuition that
other ways of Illinoisan I think we
desperately need to be in balance with
all the rest and if you say that's
something I want to cultivate there's
something that I want to Train or let's
all train it or make it access it
between you and then you have the space
to experiment and come back to it like
after three month or one month seem like
I'm gonna end it here and I'm I'm also
gonna send an invitation to Iria so how
how this emerged is that Richard put you
on my radar multiple times so you gotta
check out or you gotta check out RIA and
then somehow I got on your radar you've
been reading my journals and then you
reached out to me and just saying how
you like the process of honesty of me
putting myself out there I felt called
to bring you on and we're here and have
a very strong sense that your gift of
the world is finding the right question
and the stola we are you're talking
about the economy or Irit and that's
sort of like a difficulty so we're
operating on the gift economy here at
the stoah so we view stoah as a gift of
the world and whoever's inspired to give
a gift to the store can do so and people
have been spot you giving me money
they've been giving me help
they've even all kinds of things which
is very grateful for and was interesting
is people who are regular facilitators
are launching off with this model during
their own thing so Colin Morris from the
existential dance party he opened up his
own digital dance studio about
embodiment and it's based off the gift
economy and then he's sort of the
steward of that space and Tyson who's in
the room right now I imagine he's gonna
open up a digital rap studio one day and
then you know have have that he's if
Kearney to increase time for a pandemic
right now and so you're very welcome to
have a regular session here if you like
and you can be a fake based off the gift
economy people can offer you gifts I
have people's the regular facilitators
and if it works you can open up your own
digital campfire
thank you yeah we will have a session on
Friday anyway
yes sir yes if there's interest because
to really have a deep experience of
collective presencing one session of one
hour or one and Harbison maybe not
enough but yeah that's what we will
start so would you like to talk about
the session we're having I think
Thursday like what can people that
expect what's it gonna be yeah that we
have a question yeah this Thursday we
have an event with you actually practice
section 90 minutes its Crimea was
excited April 2014
yeah you're ready to try it it's ready
right yeah that's it the sunshine just
keep shining yeah we have to think about
the question that's really speak to us
that we'll still need to do um that's a
life in this face somehow and we will
just be in circle and have a talking
piece mainly in the middle of maybe it
should check in from everybody and see
what comes up I don't know what's good
in that's all trying to do and I would
be yeah can we feel each other in soon
you're amazed amazed me so yeah RSVP to
the would say to that event I'll make
some closing announcements in a moment
but thanks so much for you for coming on
and I look forward to seeing you again
on Friday so tonight we have a couple
events that I'll mention one that I'm
hosting called emancipate the day mom
6:00 p.m. I have no idea what that's
going to be about I'm waiting for the
demon to tell me so if you're interested
to find out feel free to do that then
right after that which I think it may be
the demon events foreshadowing this is
building an aesthetic movement which
Rachel haywire you know I think if we're
gonna steal a culture I think that's
gonna have to be fun and beautiful and
artistic that being said you can go to
the gift economy if you're Damon
inspires you to provide a gift to the
stoah and Oh Tyson would like to share
something yes because he has an event
coming up on Saturday so Tyson feel free
to go off mute I think you'd be yeah I
want to want to say 210 yeah I really
like felt you and heard you while you're
speaking and one of the greatest gifts
that I've been receiving lately is this
invitation to present something in me to
explore a leading edge that maybe I
never have before and that has been so
enriching and some of my newest like
deepest connections have happened by
someone allowing me that space and
freestyle or rap rhythm and poetry has
also been a tool for me to do that like
I've got something and it's stirring
inside of me it's coming up and so
freestyling it out to music with a group
of people be in there and hyping me up
has really been support up to that as
well and so I wanted to take in the
freestyle and let y'all know that on
Saturdays we do we have a freestyle
session at the stoah and it's a really
good opportunity to be invited into that
space and I really appreciate this
experience and look forward to
presencing next I mean let me hope that
I've end up a little bit more look the
first one was last week and it was
 delicious it was um yeah I was
so insecure so nervous but like just a
loving support and allowing what wants
to come out come out was was quite good
it was it felt really spiritual so I do
recommend that and might nickname there
I think is gonna be DJ delicious so uh
you know if you want him want to see him
and that Rhea also you have an event on
Sunday do you want to go off mute and
talk about that
yeah so we did our first one last Sunday
it was called the oxytocin party and
essentially it's just a way to deepen
our connection deepen our trust so that
we can challenge each other more to feel
more connected to really feel each other
and I like a fun way be a little
vulnerable and playful with one another
so it can really open up these spaces to
not play it safe and really feel safe
with one another to express in ways that
might feel a little bit charged yeah and
just have fun doing it so Sunday nights
eight o'clock and that was like the most
fun I've had in such a long time because
I'm so serious while I was freaking
gravitas and stoicism and then I needed
that and we had this one exercise I'll
say briefly like it was really well
designed and then we had to write a poem
to each other like we've got breakout
rooms so one person had to start with a
line like what love is
in person did it the other person did it
and then we read it out loud afterwards
I was was key and I got the freaking
giggles like no tomorrow is this what
was coming I was crazy so that is a
really a treat and I think you both
Dyson array of for finding someone
giving your gift
stopping said everyone be well and
thanks rich for guinea-pig doing