okay yeah it's I think the gradual
moving into and realization of these
different modes of dialogue is something
that's very very interesting and I know
something that is fascinating you at the
moment and I see it at tying in deeply
to the series awakening from the meaning
crisis and particularly of course the
sort of response aspect of how we come
to terms with and ultimately move
through ameliorate as you put it that
perennial problems we face mm-hmm and I
log is one of many modes of expression
experience response that we might take
to these perennial problems and and I
was trying to trying to feel back in and
sort of drop in to where where we are
now yeah I've been engaging we do a
series a lot to the last few days and
thank you yeah I've actually been
listening to you on occasion
double-time so I'm hoping that this
conversation will be a little bit easier
for you to follow along as funny venues
but when you flip back from double time
to singular Mike hello it feels so slow
for a few seconds yeah
okay but it's the double time was was
literally just to get through some
things I thought I need to make sure
that there are key pieces I'm missing
out on here before we saw em and I
definitely prefer that the single tone
version of it and you know John it's
it's it's a challenging thing and this
might bring us to a point of sort of
articulating some of the productive
nature of dialogue but also the
conditions which sort of have to be
present to engage in it because what I'm
feeling right now just to speak on my
state
is a mixture of extreme gratitude for
the opportunity to dialogue with you I'm
also feeling the tremendous breadth of
the whole series and an interest to
speak to that dynamic and context so
that we've got as much as we possibly
can have on the table between us so that
we can in some sense both together
orient towards what might be of sort of
mutual interest to explore and so much
of what you explore I find deeply
important and and crucial for me
personally to gain further insight and
familiarity with so that I can in
collaboration with others build the
kinds of communities and ultimately
experiences that facilitate some of this
deep development that is part and parcel
of meeting and responding to the meaning
crisis and so there's all of this
breadth and then there's at the same
time when it comes to dialogue a certain
sense of a certain sense of safety and
smoothness and being just where we are
and and so in some meta way I this is me
I suppose expressing to you a little bit
of where I am which is gradually feeling
into a way in here and so if I draw into
a question
hmm
where do you feel this notion of
dialogue
it's a Socratic dialogue but there's
also I sense a bit more of an intimacy
to what you're exploring could you uh
could you articulate how that is alive
for you at the moment and how you feel
that this may be an important practice
to situate within our ecology of ways we
can develop and ameliorate and move
through some of the perennial problems
we face as existential beings oh great I
think that's an excellent question
before I address the question I first
want to respond
I really appreciated your careful I mean
that in a very positive sense you're
very careful articulation of how you're
framing the framing you're bringing to
bear into this interaction I thought
that was a very very helpful thing for
me and I think also very very helpful
for potential listeners so I just wanted
to say thank you for doing that I think
taking the time that's in my mind that's
analogous to the importance I give to
problem formulation it's kind of like
dialogue formulation how are we
formulating the dialogue before we
immediately leap in and try to solve or
resolve or whatever we're gonna do in
the dialogue spending that time to first
formulate the dialogue explicate it make
sure that we share we have a shared
commitment to this formulation so I
think that right but I think that's an
exemplary thing you just did so I want
to commend you on that I want to express
my appreciation for that in both senses
of the word like the gratitude and the
understanding for why you did that so
thank you very much for that and that of
course is a nice segue into your
question the question that you're
actually posed to me huh so
bit of the genealogy of how it emerged
and and then it will give me a way of
getting a little bit better where it's
at
so I've been I mean in conjunction with
the awakening from the meaning crisis of
course I've been talking a lot about
this need for an ecology practice
ecology practices you know setting up
counterbalancing self-organizing systems
of cyclic tech in order to as you say
ameliorate the printing of problems and
perhaps also enhance and afford
increased sense of senses of connection
to oneself to other people to the world
all of that and I was in I wanted a
partial another motive for this has also
give appropriate credit and it and it's
not just a moral thing I'm doing I'm
trying to also show the role the vital
role of distributed cognition in the
work we're doing that often gets masked
by kind of individualistic ideology that
I want to challenge not only what I'm
saying but in what I'm exemplifying so I
was in one of these kinds of discussions
with somebody who I've who's I've come
to have a lot of affection for a deep
appreciation for Jordan Hall Jordan is
especially important for the manner in
which he converses I'm not saying he
doesn't have great ideas he does he has
great insights but people tend to focus
a little too rapidly on content and not
pay enough attention to the way he's
doing all this really important work
again around
the manner and the formulation of the
dialogue so I was in discussion with him
and I was trying to get at his notion of
coherence we're comparing it yeah and he
had this insight he said well what I
think I'm pointing towards is the need
for a meta psycho technology whose role
it is is to help generate curate and
organize the the the ecology of psycho
technology so I used this sort of
metaphor of shepherding I think it's
something that Shepherds it and I
thought and I that just struck me as oh
wow that's a that's sort of that's a
brilliant insight and it was in my mind
there's a relationship between our
individuals cultivate wisdom and you
know and then write this
needed meta psycho technology so then I
got thinking and then I realized that
the ancient world had something deeply
analogous to this which was the practice
of dialectic which came out of Socratic
and Linkous and it ramifies through
Plato and then it goes at all kinds of
important directions in them Neoplatonic
a tradition now the thing about
dialectic and if you read the
neoplatonist it's very clear that it had
this status of being a meta psycho
technology it is sort of the meta
practice you do so you know how to best
do the other practices and curate and
coordinate them together and the
interesting thing about the dialectic is
it's it's both something you do as an
individual sort of ontologically and
then something you do with other people
discursively and that these are these
two dimensions are integrated in a
powerful way so well all I'm saying oh
well I should I should better understand
that because that would serve as a
valuable template for trying to
understand what what Jordan was talking
about and that and and it was of course
deeply enmeshed with the wisdom project
which was the connection I was seeking
so then I thought oh that's really
interesting because that also ties in
with this stuff that's also been
happening you can see it up for example
on rebel wisdom about the rediscovery of
the power of the collective intelligence
that is generated by districted
cognition and you know there's now some
you know even some hard science it's a
little bit some of its ghastly about the
power of distributed cognition like
they've directly linked brain a rat
brains together and and and that
collectivity can solve problems that
individual rats can't solve with the
computational power all right right and
then there's all the stuff about the
brain synchrony between human beings I
won't get into the nuts and bolts of it
so there's all this emerging stuff and
then I thought oh and then I and then I
got to meet somebody else who I'm
forming a very deep friendship with you
just talk to him guys in stock and you
know at the so there's all these
emerging cyclic technologies and
especially guys circling
because guys circling is so impregnated
with the wisdom project of high
daguerreian and existential philosophy
that it's it's exactly the kind of thing
right I'm talking about as something
that has analogous elements
with ancient dialectic so I've been I've
been engaging with the help of peter
lindbergh and the wonderful people in in
my circling group so i'm doing
participant observation learning some of
these other discourse modalities did
some empathy circling recently uploaded
that video doing some insight that do
some insight anyways learning all of
these things and so it struck need that
dialectic was also the machinery in the
ancient world by which people were
tailoring themselves to and entering
into right the collective intelligence
of distributed cognition and they often
spoke of this in religious terms what's
really interesting to me when I'm in the
circling practice for example is how
spontaneously people often from a very
secular orientation will will thought
will find themselves using very
spiritual even religious terms to talk
about the phenomenology and the change
and functionality that's occurring in
these practices so I just saw that as a
massive convergence I saw okay here's
all this stuff going on about collective
intelligence and distributed cognition
here's ancient dialectic and there's all
these new and wonderful texts being
generated around this like sera sera a
rapid book on Socrates for example is
just amazing and they're right and
there's that the coordination with
Jordans idea about the meta psychic
technology and and then they're like I
said it struck me that well what we
could do is we could and that's what I'm
gonna do in the next series we could
explore right now all these current
emerging biological practices put that
into dialogue and I don't mean that as a
pun I mean that as a real thing put that
into dialogue with what I can get what I
could get glean from an garner for the
practice of ancient dialectic and see if
we can then bring you know some
elucidation some clarification some
insight some advancement of the project
because here's here's that here's the
key idea just like individual
intelligence needs to be exhausted up
into rationality and then that exact it
up into wisdom we need to take
collective intelligence and ratchet that
up into collective rationality and in
connective wisdom collective wisdom and
those two pride
deeply interpenetrating and so that's
what I think we need in order to get to
you the meta secular technology so I'm
doing a lot of work with Christopher
master Pietro by the way you should have
him on your you should have muted
interview Chris right I so Chris and I
are writing a chapter for the meta
modern anthology on just the stuff you
were talking about it's also going into
the book we're working on so there so
I'm doing a lot of work with Chris right
now to try and nail down some of the
theory and doing a lot of work with
Peter on the impunity Limburg investing
investigating it with through this
participant observation reading the
literature together so there's a lot of
people we're all working together some
of them I get to work with directly in
collaboration some of it's more of a
network that I'm contributing to to try
and I think get this I know that guy for
example is extremely excited he texted
me the other day he said he wanted to he
want he's really excited to do circling
2.0 because he wants to try and
incorporate all of this stuff in into
circling that I'm talking to you about
so that's that's why I'm sort of getting
very excited right now because there's a
lot of excitement I think there's a lot
of I think there's a lot of real
potential here to to create to cultivate
to help in advance this kind of meta
psycho technology and access ultimately
collective rationality and collective
wisdom so that we have something that
can really vet our attempts to create
the ecology of practices that are needed
to address and ameliorate the meeting
crisis so that's sort of a gist of and
and I asked for forbearance from all
your listeners and your viewers because
this is very much a work in progress
it's just um something I'm you know I'm
doing work on now trying to get the
phenomenology and the functionality of
all of this worked out but this is where
this is where it's at like yeah oh yeah
beautiful John thank you so much for
that answer that was that was that was
excellent
it's very exciting I feel that same
sense of of interest and excitement
about it and will continue to be
gathering with people here both in
person online and then around the world
in person eventually when I get off and
away from here for just a little bit to
be doing exactly that it's some attempt
to move into insight practice in a co
participatory way this this this
movement towards presencing wisdom about
that ultimately in which in some sense
we are already bringing to bear and
presencing in our own lives to get by in
the world this set of psycho
technologies that are already in play
the ones that are already emerging so is
it a fair formulation to think about a
meta psycho technology as the continual
renewal establishment and renewal of
participatory wisdom oh I think that's
an excellent way of putting it I think
it's it's it's participatory in both if
you'll allow me the metaphor is
horizontal between people and vertical
within a person because there's a sense
if with if this if this machinery isn't
already to some degree active in you you
need it to start to get into it it's
like a virtue
if you it's like you need the right you
need a bit of honesty to cultivate more
of honesty and then sort of thing you
need that germinating spark kind of idea
so I think you all altima Tino this kind
of wisdom by participating in it and
then like you said it's very much also
and this is what this is what has such
some of the most powerful
phenomenological effects on people that
sense of that's why it's often called
the we face the participation in some
right some emerging emergent thing
emergent presence I've got to be careful
with my language because I don't want to
invoke you know weird a weird
metaphysics but you get this you get
this wheeze face that is not reducible
to any one particular individual
cognition and so and your relationship
to it one is one a participation it's
not other
than you but it's not identical to you
you participate in it and it's I didn't
mean and again that's why it hurt khun's
back to you know sort of theoretic
language it's I mean and it even
survives in some of her metaphors we
talk about team spirit well at one point
that was really a phenomenological thing
it wasn't just sort of Yoho right it was
us and right so when you're when you're
doing something like circling you get
you get that but it's not just a
metaphor for our shared commitment it's
the extent aesthetic experience of you
know of the dynamical system that has
taken shape between all the people
involved and and that and sort of the
the power it has to alter and shift
individual cognition so yeah I think
that that that it's a it's deeply
participatory in both within you you
have to read you like you have to be it
you can't just think about it you have
to embody it and then it's also deeply
participatory in that you have this
relationship to the we face all right
the that is again it's not it's not
other and it's not me it's not I it's
it's we so it's deeply its its
phenomenology is inherently
participatory in nature mmm-hmm and then
as you said what that's all directed
towards and what I want to even more
direct it towards with the help of
people like Jordan and guy and Chris is
as you said towards the individual and
collective cultivation of wisdom so
that's why there's the subtitle so
that's the next series is after Socrates
the pursuit of wisdom through authentic
dialogue mmhmm yeah yeah that's that
battle seems right to me
so I wonder if this is an interesting
way in because okay okay so so in one
sense it seems like where we are to go
in dialogue which neither of us know
right now is in some sense is some sense
emergent and in another sense it's
latent already in each of us
individually our current maps of making
sense of things and also our orientation
and way we are willing to be that and
show up and embody that right to be
continuous between that propositional
and participatory level went to the
extent we can generate the spectacle
knowing so we can both participate in
that to the extent I have the words
right in to procedurally be able to do
that as well we are we are here at this
opening and I'd like to I'd like to
present a little bit about where I feel
myself ultimately going and that doesn't
mean we have to go there right now
there's this as this balance sighs
there's this balance that it's important
to hold isn't it between the being one
way of being where we are and being and
ultimately actually my my fundamental
goal here is to be helpful in a
collaborative way towards that very
project and and I would actually love to
talk to you about how that project
relates to a lot of how I am driven to
show up in the world and broadly
speaking these collaborations toward the
creation of communities that enable
wisdom enable the development of psycho
technologies the practicing of different
psycho technologies based on the
sovereign choice of individuals to move
towards that in their life and to
realize a deeper connection to
themselves each other and the world well
we also make sense of where we're at in
our collective moment for me this is
absolutely essential and serving that is
what my primary aim is yet that is it
that is something that's it's a live
project and
we have the moment of this conversation
I have my individual places of where I'm
at with considering for example some of
the deeper metaphysical aspects to your
theorizing because your theorizing has
been so important to me you're a key
influencer of mine because of me for
many beautiful ways it's we don't have
time to talk about it precisely today
and so there's all of these aspects of
myself that in some sense are desiring
zuv presents themselves yet there is a
threat that if I tend to it
is also one that can be between us that
is mutually interesting and revelatory
for both of us I think what you're doing
right now is already extremely helpful
so the interesting one of the
interesting dimensions I call it the
theory a theory dimension so one of the
things we're doing in this practice is
we're constantly moving right and it's
it's a matter of the way in which
attention and respect I will knowing or
shifting right but we're constantly
moving between theory in which we
advance propositional arguments right
and then but then then we do what you
just did we step back into the-- Oriya
which is we step back into a
contemplative frame in which we're again
ok where are we
what's the agent arena you know set up
here how are we formulating the dialogue
and then what we're doing there is we're
trying to come alive - we're trying to
increase our sensitivity and transform
our Sensibility so we can sense the
Cairo's so we can sense like the way in
which this is shifting and directing and
there's so much finesse here if there I
talk about it almost like there's a
musicality and you're trying to get the
rhythm you're trying to sense the tone
and so you have to you have to currently
shift into the OREA - sense and also you
but it's it's not just a sentencing
thing there's an aspiration thing you're
also you're also training your
sensibility like music appreciation so
you're doing this sensing and
transforming your sensibility to pick up
on the musicality of the dialogue so
that when you come back in it's not just
you and the other person both of you
like are sharing this commitment to
what's emerging between you so first of
all I think what you just did about
right and and so I think I think this is
a vital and I'm using that word to try
and resonate with as many meanings
impossible with it I think what you just
did is a vital thing that that theory
Theory has shift and I was talking to
Jordan about this I would see and and
and about how it's about sensitizing but
also transforming sensibility to pick up
on the musicality I think that that's
just like I think that's actually is
vital to what we're trying to do here
right now and it's important therefore
it for people who are interested in what
we're talking about to pay attention to
this exemplification and not just the
the explicit content of our propositions
so I think that that was a bit that was
a very that that for me that see that's
the kind of thing I'm interested in
right now I'm trying to get at like
what's in practice what's the
transformations of the phenomenology
that tell us something about how to
access and transform the funk underlying
functionality and and so just here just
now you doing that in fact you did it so
spontaneously and so well is it exact
exactly the kind of thing that I'm very
interested in and and I think is as I
say vital to trying to to get this the
idea and even the metaphor you had of
the thread is so good because right
there's a sense in which you know you
have you have to you to really play with
salience to in the midst of all the
other things to find the thread and and
then there's a kind of diligence and a
respect that you have to set yourself
into to to follow the thread so yes I
think all of that is important and
here's another word I want to use with
as much resonance as possible it's
important to invoke all of this on a
regular and reliable basis rather than
simply referring to it hmm yes yes yes
there's a sense in which so I am let me
see if I can use the term theoria here a
little bit in practice so that I can
further get it it's not every day that
conversations are available to use the
word theoria in hair ok so well so this
is a different way in there's a there's
a movement towards an erect and
unscripted mode because there is this
necessity I feel the language is
appropriate I feel to to presence
actually gently as we have almost an
opponent processing towards it yes we
have an opponent processing towards the
appropriate place of vulnerability and
that vulnerability is mourn but the
vulnerabilities involved and that
vulnerability from me in this moment
especially when we are skimming along
the surface of what our deep
metaphysical cogs and highly direct
ontology and epistemology is these are
the kinds of vulnerabilities that can in
fact as you speak about so interesting
me in one of your lecture episodes
invoke a sense of horror if they are yep
miss play or if they are dislodged
without the right bounds of safety and
I'm very attuned to this and I and I
actually have considerable experience in
deep metaphysical unsettling and
epistemological and ontological
unsettling over the course of many years
and in that sense I feel ready to be
here and do this but there's a sense in
which when I'm talking about this stuff
I I realize how effectively Laden I
looking to presents my words and it's
the affective component that you also
speak about an awful lot as being a key
characterization of how we should
understand relevance realization Oh
totally I mean it's the the coping of
relevance realization is in separately
bound up with a primordial kind of
caring yes beautiful carrot it's it's
precisely that and for me I was using
the language of an affective relation
before I became so acquainted with your
work to express to myself that there was
some important contrast between an
intellectual way of going at the world
and that in some sense our frames were
always and already filtered to some
degree by something like and you know I
was influenced a lot by your thinking
before I came to study you a lot because
I had engaged with it a little bit and
the term brother the term relevance
realization is itself it reveals you
know the more the more you understand of
it the more you can rock the whole just
through appreciating the terms I think
it's very very appropriate it's a very
very true thing the right terms is a
very important thing to do oh yeah yeah
and you know and that's something
actually that I think can be afforded
like the dialog can help I think
spontaneously to generate those terms
but it could also be not precisely the
place where you look for them and I know
this in my own experience because so
often I'm looking to communicate that
affective component to to enable this
sense of shared safety and care so I
will go about expressing things in all
these different ways coming out of this
like this like this with these different
emotional tones behind it but that's not
kind of I would sit down to write
something if I wanted to make something
analytically tight in the way that
relevance realization has to be
analytically typed for it to play that
role between the cognitive science on
the one hand and then also the religio
right yeah yeah so yeah I I think I I
wanted intervene because you made it a
couple of really excellent points I did
I didn't want I didn't want them to to
be left one look at the thing you just
said I think there's yeah I think and
and there's a big difference between
theorizing which I think we need to do
and there
where you need those precise terms and
you shouldn't produce until you've come
to precision yes I agree with that and
that is the appropriate place to do that
but I think to go back to two points you
made about dia logos and I try to use
the Greek now by way of the logos
because the logos right is much more
comprehensive than logic right it's it's
the gathering together so that things
belong together so but India logos
there's two things you said that are
very important first we're putting
ourselves on the edge of we're putting
yourself into a system that's dynamical
and and that is going to have emergent
features the the ongoing emergence of
what we have not pre-planned or
prepackaged or pre cognized pre thought
right is is again a vital piece of it
next you mentioned about the effectivity
and you mentioned the vulnerability and
there's a way in which I'm sort of
seeing these coming together because I
was really I I really liked what you
when you and I were talking about for
the distinction between ball nabilla and
exposure that had come up guy and I
talked a bit about that and then I think
he talked to at length with Jordan about
that because it's it's this notion again
of sensitization right the difference
when you're exposed right what that you
actually what the response is to is it
is a hardening right the response is a
hardening and because what you're trying
to do is defend and protect yourself
from further incursion
but in vulnerability if we're using it
as distinct from exposure because of
course people use terms in all kinds of
sloppy ways but if we're using it in in
the distinction vulnerability is a kind
of sensitization you're allowing
yourself to the things to penetrate into
you so it comes with that sensitivity
and I think that's exactly where the
affective component has to be our guide
because what our effect is often doing
is giving us the degree to which our our
ability to perceive and sense is is is
threatening or the degree to which it's
nourishing our effect is often you know
deeply attuned to okay what it what it
what is this doing and so I think being
able to
you coordinate you know courage and care
with vulnerability is what affords it to
be actually become that sensitivity and
so a lot of what we are doing is and
again to try and you know really make
this word resonate with people we're
trying to encourage each other and and
if you'll allow me to coin a new word
we're trying to in care each other we're
trying to create right caring between
and within each other so that we can
that the vulnerability stays at become
it stays as a sensitivity and doesn't
harden into a defensive framing of all
I'm overexposed and then that that in
turn you know leads me back to the point
you made about and this is this is one I
hope we can spend some time on because
it's it's kind of that the the tangled
but really juicy part if I can put it
that way which is we need we're not we
need a place for theorizing let's put
that aside I've already acknowledged
that and I do that and that's important
and people know that I care about that
so I'm gonna take it that that's a given
that we need nothing that we're doing
here challenges any of that or
undermines it in any way but when we're
doing deal logos right we do need to
bring into it
the depths of our ontology you'll allow
me we have this is what this is what I
see exemplified in Plato right you can't
if you really want to cultivate wisdom
and courage and virtue these are deeply
perspectival participatory things and
therefore your deepest patterns of
intelligibility your deepest patterns of
coping and sense making are always bound
up with your deepest patterns of caring
and concern and identification and so I
mean if we want this to have existential
depth we have to touch upon the you know
the the ontological um depths as well
and so how to do this and you can see
that this is a vital issue in Plato they
talk about it in the dialogue how to do
this you want to be
take people even to aporia where they're
like ah it doesn't make sense anymore
but but not tip them into as you said
horror because the point isn't to the is
is it to immobilize people because
they've now over exposed and they
hardened another stock what you want to
do is you want to take that and get them
to commit to it so that that becomes
Wonder and awe and it draws them forth
in an aspirational commitment and so
that is also part of the finesse of the
the deal logos and so I often describe
this to Gaia's I want to take circling
but I want to bring phyleus ophea into
it I want to bring in right so we're
doing all the stuff all this really
valuable and rich and juicy stuff we're
circling but we but if we get aware of
all of these dimensions can we then
bring them in can we then bring in
finally buy the assaut fiha because the
deepest and I mean guy is all on board
about this because this is heidegger's
whole thing right you can't actually
explore design without exploring being
those two are bound together in just
inseparable fashion and so III that's
why I wanted to dropped you there was
like four really important things you
had you had you had canvas there and I
thought it was important to slow down
and open them up and unpack them a
little bit yes thank you for doing that
I thought that was beautiful unpacking
and I continue to invite you to slow me
down and do just that and and in many
respects the point I was making was one
that was inviting you to jump in and
slow it sew it down because there's so
much and it needs to be as there's time
and care to be taken in presencing that
and also we're recording something for
the benefit of listeners and viewers as
well so there's all these pieces and and
my sense as well as that so the sorts of
meta reflection which not that theory is
precise I mean it's it's a reflection of
a kind it's but not so much an
intellectual and as it is this bearing
forth of where we are and our being in
the moment which can look
like a type of sort of meta taking once
out oneself out of the particular frame
there's there's a there's a deep well
that is that is a process that should be
gentle that is that is a process that
should be gentle and and and I'd like to
I'd like to continue it so okay so we're
may be interesting to explore is where
the perhaps where the jump back into
theorizing takes place within the space
of Peoria within the space of this
present seeing our beings effectively
cooperatively realizing a shared space
of care and vulnerability so that we can
presence truly what we are as much as we
can reveal of ourselves in accordance
with what we can in an integrated
fashion and respectful fashion be
together in a space as appropriate to
the setting and the setting isn't is it
important it's like not only are we
doing this thing we're also building the
table this is often what I'm talking to
people about it's like not only not only
are we present seeing sort of ourselves
in this dance at the same time there's a
construction of the table at which this
kind of conversation can take place of
course your éramos really for so much of
your life but with this with this online
element right and with this with that
with what seems to me that the genuine
novelty of this just because of how
actually of how existentially demanding
I truly feel it is to to move at this
level right there is you know I come at
this a lot as well from a perspective of
therapy and what education is him you
can aim you could have
so let's let's press ahead and trust the
trust the process anyway it's it's
really part and parcel of exactly what
we're talking about because you know
it's this constant dynamic of feeling
you know of the desire to participate
and then also accepting precisely where
you are and not going to further than
it's just breaching the boundary and
this is a big part of my my day to day
kind of process but where I believe I
was at just to pick things up for our
audiences presencing also this
therapeutic aspect and the conditions
which enable in fact trauma to be moved
through and positively developed or
growth to occur from this state there's
a sense in which we want to avoid that
which we want to avoid present seeing
that which locks us and freezes us and
stops us from being able to be in a
productive relationship with it and so
yes there's a deep importance to this
tenderly establishing this domain of
shared care and where I was moving
potentially in there is where I can pose
a question is so we we theory is in
aiding us to presence the the being and
the depths of our ontology and creating
a landscape of care in which that can be
done and then also also now we might
consider how we move back into the
theory and I wonder how you'd
characterize that tone so that's
excellent and and that's that I mean and
the thing of it is again we've got the
German of it because we've been doing it
and we keep cycling here and so it's not
a matter of creating something to novo
it's a matter of trying to vary through
participant observation trying to sort
of delicately extricate into sort of
stable Theory theoretical terms and
formulation what is it what it what is
that's going on here and so
there there seems to be some aspects
here the turn back to theory is the kind
uh the kind of thing I see going on
again and the platonic dialogue in which
you are not
there's never there's that there's never
Manav logic argumentation there's
argumentation but it's always bound up
with questioning cuz you're always
seeking to involve the other and there's
as much a again a a receptivity for a
seeking of insight as there is the
attempt to you know come to some sort of
argumentative conclusion so well well
there should be Theory the theory going
on and theorizing I don't it
III sound like I'm splitting hairs but
I'm trying to be very very careful here
well there should be theorizing going on
I don't think there should be Theory
building going on which is it which is a
different thing right so one of the I
mean again again I'm asking for
everybody's patience I'm trying to this
is very much work in progress but you
know what thira it we keep theorizing we
step back and we do this theory we weary
presence ourself we restructure the
salience the landscape we reinvestigate
weary sensitize we're doing all that
stuff right and then but then we also do
this we we bring we and this is where
guys invoke invocation of this phrase I
think is so pregnant we come to terms we
come to terms about what's happening
there we we try to it's almost like
poesis we try to put it into terms and
then and then and then we and then we
question each other we challenge each
other we we link things together but the
inference is always open to being
impregnated and redirected by the
insight and the insight is always open
to being challenged and right and we
structured again by the inference and
we're trying to get it's very much like
when I were there stuffer I talked about
you know and how in rationality we're
trying to balance insight and inference
and internalization off against each
other that's why I think it's you can't
really come into these practices in any
depth if you are if you haven't already
started down a sappy ntral pathway where
you've got some ecologies you've got
some individual practices for insight
and inference and
generalization and you've got some a
basic ecology for for for networking
them together because I I think that's
what you're trying to do in theorizing
so the izing is yeah yeah I'm bringing
up elements of theory in that there
there's inferential moves being made
there's insight and those are talking to
each other but I don't get it to
monologue right the internalization is
always present you're always there
you're always impregnating and I'm using
all these metaphors because those are
the metaphors Socrates is using right
and we still think about the how the
word concept originally goes back to
concede right and being the Midwife so
there's that but we're not trying to -
to - we're trying to stay with Plato and
not get into Aristotle not because
Aristotle doesn't have value but an
Aristotle I don't think it's due to
aerosol I think is due to an accident of
history but an Aristotle all we have is
the monologic treatise and we want to
stay in the Platonic dialogue elsewhere
when we're doing the science then we do
the Aristotelian thing then we do the
theory building we should theorize there
should be inference and insight and
internalization but we shouldn't be
theory building we should generate lots
of things that we can then look back on
and say right Oh from from within that
participant observation there's all of
these things I could take them out and
use some theory building or I can bring
some theory over here and cognitive
science to bear on this and that's why I
think there's kind of a meta dialogue
between what's going on in via logos and
the scientific study of distributed
cognition and collective intelligence so
I don't know that's adequate but I think
it's a good beginning you know that way
the turn back to theory is is that's a
that's that's appropriate and fine to
say but keep it distinct from the the
the desire to drop into monologic theory
building that that's one of the things I
would recommend yes I hear that I hear
that ok so here's something that may
open this out in an interesting way or
maybe bring it to a more fine point so
something that has been a key interest
of mine for some years has been the
you know a recurse you know seeking sort
of a recursive elegance to how I express
modes of orientation in particular
states of consciousness and the reason
I'm present seeing this is because also
as well I I believe what I'm looking to
do when I'm using some terms to refer to
these modes of orientation in
consciousness which may look very much
like particular meditative or
contemplative turns within your own
experience right
the mindfulness for passenger and the
the contemplation they're sort of
grasping out again of the sort of paying
attention to something beyond just the
well as like it is like the internal
quietening the paying attention to what
sort of flowing through and then there's
also it's moving again towards me it's
slightly more on the side of but it's
certainly more in touch with the world
in a little way at attempting to feel
into a deeper connection with it and and
I'm I mean to speak from a perspective
that's process philosophical so I'm not
looking to stress peak from a
perspective where we are sort of
identifying the fixed substances bashing
into each other and certainly not
because ultimately what what I would
like to move towards as well as invoking
a discussion of sacredness and a sacred
in here too because there's a sense in
which the sacredness as you articulated
in a series must be seen through a lens
of well of course it's forever
incomplete yet at the same time enabling
of experiences of deep connection and
unity so it's the relevance realization
that never ends its continued
transformation and this is
very much accordant with how it's it's
very well with me it's in my own
theorizing it's a deep constitutive part
of that yet I also feel I'm I'm looking
for and have been looking for some
reliable ways to refer to what is
experienced in cycles of transformation
which are something like waypoints which
could be mistaken for a certain kind of
fixation but they're not a fixation on
the substance side of things it's not a
finality it's not like this is all there
is and the process is complete when we
spoke last time we spoke a little bit
about teleology and I realized that the
way I was using teleology was in a
continual self making sense which is not
semantically how you how we how you were
using that word and I may not be
entitled to use the word teleology
precisely because I'm endorsing a
continued self making right but I'm
endorsing and continued self making in
respect of what enables like what are
the core orientation modes what are the
the fundamental features the almost the
minimal viable necessities for a
successful transformation that enables
further transformation it seems to me
like some houses do end fundamentally
and what we are in the process of
opening and closing as appropriate to
continue transformation and I refer to
that in my own to my own self as and
people as loving transformation and this
seems appropriate to me and its
relevance realization may in fact just
be that or it might be a key like a very
a deep piece of it and then in a
slightly more and I guess I have this
loving transformation or something like
a self making Tilos in perpetuity but it
also these notions of agape in there and
an agog a so it's a loving because it's
because constitutive goal element of
relevance realization which which it
needs
it's coming it's like it's like a given
Asst that it take like it takes finds
itself interesting for itself
I said you're loving for itself it's not
just the interest isn't enough isn't
enough for me it's not enough I think it
means I love okay and in this deep
interconnected way and what we're doing
it when we're caring for each other
it's the agape as you as you express
it's this love and so yes that's quite a
lot of thoughts I know I've jumped a
fair way ahead here but it may be why it
was wonderful though yeah it was real I
really I found out wonderful yeah I
found out wonderful yet there's so much
there yeah it's so so yeah the way you
woke that together it's I didn't want to
interrupt because it was flowing so
smoothly let me try and see if I can
riff on some of the the points that sort
of spring to mind as I review the course
of that um so this let's let's start
with the love and if this brings us back
to that notion I had and you invoked an
agape as well as a drop leg so I think
it's appropriate did this notion of
mutually reciprocal opening mutually
accelerating disclosure right and the
idea that you know if I understand
vulnerability as a sensitivity a
sensitivity to allowing not just my mind
but my identity to be restructured not
just in a cognitive insight but in an
existential insight that will call forth
that will adduce right and maybe there's
the vulnerability to the world that will
call forth or reduce from the world it
will disclose itself in ways it couldn't
disclose itself to me before there was a
way in which I was imposing on the world
and now and it would kind of will to
power romantic sense and now if I if I
do that restructuring of my identity
that that allows the world to disclose
itself in a way this is Wright's notion
of the sensibility transcendence and
that that in that we experience this is
Aaron's work we we experience mutually
accelerating disclosure as love that's
how you fall in love with somebody or
something or someplace
that's how it works because it's is that
deep that that's the knowing of yourself
and the knowing of whatever it is you're
right you're coupled to are so into band
together that your the the the the
inherent self loving which isn't the
same thing as selfishness of relevance
realization is bound up with the
relevance realization that is occurring
you know directed towards the world I
think all of that the way you put that
together yes I understand
also the thinness of the word interest I
tried to use that word and I'm doing
work with John Logan on this trying to
go back to the original meaning of the
word interesa to be within something to
be within something and trying to
revalorisé that like many of our terms
we've trivialized that we've thinned it
out dude we just must be a simple
referential label and not not something
that sort of more poetically discloses
the depths of something but to be within
interesa that right there yeah like so I
was I was trying to play on the idea
that relevance realization is
constituted by its consists within this
kind of relationship to itself if it if
it if it's not self monitoring and self
caring and self coping and self making
and self organizing it's not profoundly
autopoietic in that way it's not going
to be functioning as relevance
realization so I understand what you're
trying to convey with love what I'm
saying is I it was my intent with the
word interest sure that etymological
explorations get back to that deeper
meaning and and therefore give people a
term so let me be careful here give
people that term other than love for
trying to talk about something that
grounds what we normally call love but
now you've you've taken it in another
way you've said no I want to take the
word love and I want to deepen it down
to reach this transformative death I
think those two things are actually
converging I think those two points are
actually deeply convergent and then that
brings me into the other thing that and
here's in theorizing we want to talk
about it we want to do conceptual
analysis on it but in theory oh we're
trying to invoke it whereas you're
saying we're trying to present it and
what
trying to give it a like we're trying to
give it a functional role right a place
in a deep sense of the word
within the dialog and man as the sacred
ever that well at least sacredness is
that ever-present in the Platonic
dialogues as well it constantly in its
invoke like in you know Socrates even
ends the Phaedrus by with a prayer for
to the god Pan and and whatever other
gods were present throughout the
dialogue right so I think talking about
while trying to also simultaneously
invoke and that's what you always have
to do and participant observation right
right about the the sacredness I think
is also relevant because once we start
getting into this this idea of love and
interesa if maybe if I use the Latin
that'll be better and we try to get into
the so let's let's say that let's let's
you say the love aspect is the an agogic
mutually accelerating disclosure and
then the interesa is the sinking to the
depths right the sinking to the
ontological depths so we've got the love
and we've got the in right the interests
a they're going on I think that is going
to take us because it's taking us into
it's taking us into the womb from which
you know meaning as connection is born
it's taking us into sacredness it's
taking us into the experience that when
when we get this kind of deep coupling
the hebrew word to off comes to mind
here when we get this kind of deep
coupling with the love and the interesa
right we're we're getting into realizing
again playing light as you know that i
use that word to mean both a subjective
and an objective and thereby convey the
trans jacket if we're realizing in a
completely interdependent interdependent
fashion the open-endedness of our
relevance realization machinery and the
inexhaustible Ness of the of the
combinatorial explosive nature of
reality and that when those if we have
just the combinatorial explosive nature
that's horror that's terror if we have
just the open endedness
and it's not disclosing anything that's
that's a cop that's a kind of hunger
right that's kind of hunger right but
when when the two are coupled together
such that they are mutually revealing
usually disclosing the open-endedness of
the relevance realization and the
inexhaustible Ness so that I'm
experiencing the depths of reality and
the depths of my relevance realization
as a continually flowing fount of
continually emerging emerging
intelligibility that I think is I think
I could make a very good case that in
many mystical traditions and
philosophical traditions that's their
understanding of sacredness as an
experience I use the word sacredness to
talk about the experience and then I use
the word the sacred or sacred typically
the sacred to try to refer to whatever
proposal we have as to what the
metaphysical or ontological basis of
that experience is but I think this is
the experience of sacredness is very
much and that's why it's always filled
with awe and reverence and even a tinge
of horror because it's getting us it's
opening us up to that sort of
fundamental the no thingness of at the
at the I don't I want to get at the base
of relevance realization and the no
thinness at the base of of the way the
reality discloses itself to us and so I
think that's a new way of trying to
recapture so I'm trying to be very
careful here what I'm trying to bring
some new language to something that I
think nevertheless has an ancient
heritage and legacy I think a lot of the
mystical traditions and the wisdom
traditions speak about sacredness this
way because it's it's a kind as a sense
of sacredness that is deeply connected
to the cultivation of self transcendence
and wisdom and I offer this as an
alternative to another prevalent and a
long-standing notion of sacredness as
perfection where perfectionist
understood as coming to rest coming to
completion and that was what I always
I've always objected to the word Telos
because perfection and completion are
bound well etymologically to the word
Telos and so that that
sense of a TV ology is it that's the
aspect of that I was resisting and
challenging because I think the notion
of that what I'm experiencing sort of
standard classical theism there's a way
which I'm criticizing Plato here because
there's definitely places where he gets
into talking about this in terms of
perfection and I think there's there's a
mistake here it's unclear what he means
by that but it's fair that people have
come away from that and saying oh the
sacred is something that is perfect that
generates the experience of perfection
Descartes certainly does this in the
meditations right and that's what this
is all about and I think I think that's
just a profound mistake I think that's
just a profound mistake so I think that
one of the things that dialogo reveals
and here think about the logos now as as
the an agog a as the love and also the
interests say the deepening right and
it's taking on a life of its own and
then birthing us and giving us life from
itself
right I think the sacredness in diello
those needs to be the sacredness not of
perfection but the sacredness of the
inexhaustible hmm yeah I hear that John
that's beautiful I agree I agree
you know I so so what is so there's so
we are not we are not we are not
perfecting the sacred but we are
continually optimizing our capacity to
make sacred yeah yeah so that's that's
where the analogy to evolution
biological evolution is so helpful to me
if you I mean and people do fall prey to
the temptation to think that evolution
is a ladder that there's a TV ology in
it I've done a biological evolution we
have a cultural evolution aside I
understand that if that's different I
just want to use the standard model of
biological evolution to explain my
analogy right right there isn't a ladder
evolution isn't evolution
isn't seeking the perfect final complete
design what it's always doing is this
has worked for a moment or two in
geological time which means it's a
reliable basis for me to make something
new now from that which will then if it
works will be a reliable basis for me to
make something new which if it lands to
use Peter Lindbergh favorite phrase the
phrase I hear encircling if it lands
then it gives me a a stable platform
from which I can make something new
again and so on and so forth I'm not
trying to bring it to completion and
here's where here's where I want to say
another point because this this relates
again to dialogue and the difference
between dialogue and story even though
we put dialogue in story but so I think
narrative is psychologically
indispensible for us developmentally I
think if we don't cultivate narrative we
can't narrative teaches me to grasp
non-logical identity it teaches me what
it means to say I'm identical to that
four year old and I'll be identical to
the 75 year old man who's retired so
narrative gives me deep practice in a
temporarily extend itself that has non
logical identity and that is so
important for my rationality and my
cognition of my metacognition
I think narrative is indispensable but I
don't think narrative is final or
complete a lot of the traditions and so
there's some psychological work say that
people can move to sort of a post
narrative state in which they operate I
think you can see various friends of
Buddhism Taoism and stoicism advocating
moving to a trans narrative state now
why do I say that because the thing
about narrative right is right if you
try to impose a narrative on biological
evolution what people do then they get
it fundamentally wrong because narrative
is teleologically oriented it moves
towards closure it moves towards
finality it moves towards perfection and
they live happily ever after
narrative right ultimately while
psychologically indispensable to giving
us all of the machinery we need to exam
for wisdom ultimately I think has to be
left behind
if we're going to operate within
dialogue the way it does that's why
although you there's clearly sort of
some narrative elements
dialogue many of them don't end with
narrative closure they're not they're
not they're not resolved completed
stories and the relationship between the
dialogues is not one of narrative it's
one of sort of an ecology in which
they're talking to each other and check
it's a dialogic relationship there's
there's a meta dialogue between each of
the individual dialogues and I think
that we have to be paying more more and
more attention to that and I think
there's been a deep connection for deep
historical reasons between the ontology
of perfection and the symbolization of
narrative we've tended to think of
narrative sacredness and perfection as
as as inextricably bound together again
I want to be really careful about this
I'm not denying right I'm not denying
the importance of narrative I'm not
denying the fact that often what people
are trying to express with perfection as
they feel as something is perpetually
transcendent to them I'm just saying
there are post narrative post reflection
ways I think of referring to what people
are standing towards in a way that
doesn't misrepresent the kind of as I
said it before the kind of formulation
we need the kind of yep the kind of as
you said that the way we're presencing
in order for deilogos to work mm-hmm yes
yes and and we've and then we find
ourselves here and now in a
collaborative always collaborative
participatory making realization of the
course that we can be on together in
coherence that enables us to continue to
be on course together is still this
notion of course the Darth you speak
about and yeah and so very much sir
let's let's bring this in here because
what because because yes try that's why
that's why we use the word discourse
mm-hmm that's what we use the word
discourse we're we're we're picking up
on the fact that there is a can
there is a coursing there is a coursing
go
and and of course das was also bound up
with the sense that there's a course to
history right and of course we use
course of course we use course as a way
of pointing to a a pedagogical half all
of these things yes very much okay now
I'd now I'm going to see if I can bring
in a frame here that that may well be
concordant it may be meaningfully
different but it is if I want to bring
it forth then I'd be leaving something
important to the side because I'd like
please I'd like to take what we've
present here and then see if if again we
can cap because I'm still I'm interested
in let's say for the sake of this
conversation
seems part of what seems to be driving
me I'm interested in in in saving
keeping what is necessary and helpful in
the notion of Tilos while while already
already in some sense absolutely
changing it by by saying okay we are
only going to take forward for the
purpose of this conversation that a self
making I continually self making T loss
and it's not a finality of thickness
that we're looking for okay Evan
Thompson Thompson talks about this and
living things as an imminent TV
teleology beautiful right and he's
harkening back to cos there and so and
that living things because they're self
oriented it's they have an imminent
idealogy and that the TV ology is
completely recursive the t the the the
purpose is to maintain the ability to
like it's you say is it's it's it's the
purpose of maintaining the self making
yes yes beautiful so we are absolutely
on the same page with that what very
much I have no objection to that sense
of teleology I have no objects on
whatsoever
I think it's integral if we're going to
understand Otto poiesis and aspiration I
I think it's integral beautiful okay
okay excellent
what we encounter in experience and what
we are also containing within our lives
is the supreme depths of our lineage and
the vast unknown of the future and also
the inconsistency of duration as we
experience it different experiences we
can you will commonly hear people refer
to you know like it felt like three
years but in that few short weeks or
whatever it felt like hours and it was
just me a seconds or minutes and we can
talk about this thing perhaps from the
perspective of the brain and the release
of chemicals and stuff like that that's
that's fine but but there's actually but
I I am I am very influenced by bugs so
on as I know you are as well I heard you
in a conversation I heard you really
appreciating that notion of jus ray and
for me there with JP yeah yeah with yeah
with rupiah and given my interest and
exploration with psychedelics as well as
other kinds of practices I am I am well
aware of the the a temporality and the
vast expansiveness that can seemingly be
experienced right and become very very
difficult to integrate into a coherent
theory but perhaps and the right
dialogue in fact we can begin to work
with these things because okay so here
here here here we are this self making
to enable further self making must
realize itself according to patterns it
must like it must be it's its humble
before and within the patterns that
already enable it and yes and it deeply
participates in the realization of
patterns that will continue to afford
its flourishing if we were to step back
and look at that we're not seeing chaos
we are with the right tools in mind
seeing a certain pattern and the certain
kind of pattern that can be beautifully
artistically represented people might
use a mandala they might use just a
beautiful image of you know a human
being I'm I'm I'm struck I'm struck by
feminine beauty
and I'm struck by how there's a sense of
timeless alluring drawing forth beauty
in it and a magnificence and and there's
a sense in which there's a sense in
which there's a sense in which if I
attend to myself I am I can become a
more caring a better person in whatever
way we want to wrap that up over that
over a period of time I want to be I
want to be able to be more and more
appropriately realize my potential and I
and I feel very strongly that in so
doing I can more effectively contribute
and be incurring in a caring
relationship with the world and I want
to look at that aesthetic and go this
here to me is meaningful and there was a
course here that would there was a there
is a way that was walked which had a
pattern to it which while itself is not
in any deep sense the only one it's not
fixed that's not what there is there is
there is there is was a cycle of
development there you know I loved and I
let go a probe really and I open myself
again and I faced courageously the
depths of experience and so ok so the
final thing to add into this Ike and
then I'm would absolutely love to hear
your responses is this is this you don't
put the modes of orientation which
enable that continued pattern making the
humble for the past that you know
learning as much as possible and then
opening up and creating that future
because we must create our future we
must create it in an important sense by
not making many of the mistakes we've
made heretofore I follow the line of
thinking of a Jordan Hall an awful lot
with respect to civilization design and
what have you but it's so ok so that's
how I stopped there and then there
there's another piece they introduced
but let's see if how that sort of sits
ya know so there's lots of points of
residence that are coming up for me so
there's there's a you were talking about
sort of the deep connection between
temporality and how ontology can put a
call upon us
so if you see this you see this in
higher states of consciousness when
people experience the really real they
experience what I call on to normativity
they feel because because meaning is
about being connected they want to be
deeply connected so they want an
increasingly more intimate conformity
with this really real and so they will
transform their lives and their identity
so it deeply empowers the aspiration to
transformation then you're talking about
I so and that again I think that's very
much a platonic model and then you were
looking something that of course Plato
sees is bound up with that well how this
is we are bringing Plato and birdsong
together that's the district bees are
very interesting and odd thing to
propose them that way but Plato of
course talks a great deal about beauty
and that it has a capacity to to inspire
us to aspirations Ascari talks about
this in her book about how beauty
prepares us for truth and justice
because of the way it transforms our
sensibility and transforms our
motivation so that we become more and
more capable of seeing the truth we
become more more capable of acting
justly and so well there while beauty
isn't truth it is a deep affordance of a
aspirational path to becoming more
truthful and to becoming more just and I
think all of that I mean and I think
Iris Murdoch saw that that was clearly
what was in the center of a lot of the
Platonic and the neo platonic tradition
so I think all of that is very
interesting it resonates with everything
you just said and then let's bring it
back to the thing that started it which
was the the difference experiences of
temporality because what we're talking
again about what we're talking about
this Anna Garden process we're talking
about the process that the way Beauty
couples me in such a way that my
identity is restructured my my
sensibility my salience landscape is
restructured so the way the world can
disclose itself because beauty and love
are bound intricately up together you
get that usually accelerating disclosure
and beauty is often a call to that it's
often right if it's right it has that
kind of call upon us it draws us forth
but then there
there is this and then you know and of
course this is a high to gary notion too
i suppose but there's there's the sense
in which we're moving and and this is
something I've talked about with JP JP
Lamar so I've had a bunch of really
excellent conversations with him I'm
gonna have one very shortly with him and
with Mary Cohen so I'm looking forward
to that a lot but there's a sense in
which I think about white head because
in white head white weighted of course
is deeply a platonic he he clearly
indicates that but he's also very deeply
consonant with a lot of Brooks song so
maybe he's somebody we could use to to
talk about this bridge between them but
what I see what I see in Whitehead as I
see this bipolar ontology let me try and
articulate this a little you definitely
you know he says that you know there
many are gathered into the one that
becomes something new so everything
everything is interpenetrating
everything else and and then it causes
new emergence so you've got this if
you'll allow me these metaphors if you
have this bottom-up emergence but he
talks about the fact that you you put
your finger on this the way right the
way things emerge they emerge in a way
that again we get the sense that
possibility and you know that I take
possibility to be a real category of not
just a conjectural category that
possibility and this is this is
whiteheads notion that the Platonic
forms were in some sense a way in which
possibility is structured and if you'll
allow me a neo platonic notion that that
structuring of possibility emanates into
the patterns that are forded to emerge
within the emergence and then those
patterns of course access the structured
possibility there's a way in which the
bottom-up emergence and the top-down
emanation are completely inter
penetrating with each other this is why
I've been so deeply attracted to the
work of John Sakata Sarah Gina from
within the Christian tradition he's this
Titanic figure and it like in from the
ninth century and that he but he's also
regarded as a heretic that it's
interesting because he's seen as the
great synthesizer of eastern and western
Christendom Christianity and
Neoplatonism he was he
is elevated to very high status in the
court and then he was asked to produce
the dolphin in and he did the para fusee
on the division of nature and then when
this came out controversy swirled around
him because he tried to articulate this
idea of creation right as something that
should be understood as being the
complete interpenetration of e emanation
from eternity and emergence within time
and that instead of thinking them as
opposite we have to think of them
so here's metaphysics he doesn't just
use a dialectic as he writes there his
pair for Seon as as a dialogue but
dialectic is the ontological structure
he feel he sees like in reality itself
that it's inherently dialectic precisely
because of the complete top-to-bottom
interpenetration of emanation and
emergence within creation and and so and
then and then - and then to top it all
off because of the particular notion of
god which i think is where the heresy
comes in um he sees all of that as one
with god's inherent self creativity that
when god is creating that that is always
just an act of self creation so it's
that this dialectic of that the
dialectic of creation is is is
inseparable from god's ongoing self
creativity and so he see again again
it's a different notion of the sacred as
this ongoing inexhaustible production of
intelligibility as opposed to the at
rest perfection that's why i imagine he
was regarded as heretical he's now sort
of come back around and people are
starting to consider him much more
carefully even within theological
circles precisely because this this
ontology that he talks about seems to be
so apt for talking about these these two
things that were trying to bring
together within our worldview and I
would add apt for providing a deep
grounding a deep ontological grounding
for
discursive dialectic like what you and I
are doing right here right now hmm yeah
it's beautiful it's beautiful okay so
two things come to mind both take a long
time to say let me see if I can reduce
both quickly so that hopefully we don't
lose either the first is that I would
continue to like to hone in on what I
mean by modes of orientation yes I would
and the second is just how much I'm
interested in the continued discussion
and careful experimentation with with
the embedding and invitation of more
people to participate in community
regarding what we're speaking about in
such a fashion that well that that well
does it justice cares for it but I'm
also interested in the I do feel a sense
of urgency and I appreciate the
importance of being slow and smooth I
deeply do and I also feel a sense of
urgency and I and I feel that in our
culture we are lacking the pillar we're
a polis can be together and mutually
inform each other and disclose
themselves in this fashion so that we
can become more in touch with the state
of our collective moment and our
connection to ecology and how we can
actually begin to take powerful
decisions powerful decisions must mean
they should be taken from from an
already exhibited capacity to presence
oneself in relationship with this very
process of the generation and
development of wisdom if they're not
coming from that then it's it's it's
deeply it's is actually horrifying it's
horrifying
yes and which is why we're okay so
that's that and but it maybe we could go
the
the modes of orientation route first
which is easy first of all I like the
terms I think it's excellent
and I'd like so okay I want to turn back
things to you very momentarily I've
noticed that at crucial points you
invoked this as something that was
paying a pivotal meaning the capacity to
turn things you playing a pivotal role
in one note one moment if the OREA by
the way it's important to step back and
in a high to garyun fashion like I just
didn't like you've done to step back and
to degree to which you can and sometimes
we make mistakes about this and I've
made some myself but did agree to which
we can and so more education is needed
but didn't read to we can pay attention
to the etymology try to give life back
to the words so that they can resonate
in a way that is beyond our normal
everyday manipulation and control of
them give them back some of their being
so they're not just words that we have
so like I said so we've got and we're
trying to do this right now I think with
modes of orientation and I was trying to
do when I I was invoking this term
pivotal that you invoke modes of
orientation because it's a pivot it
allows us to move and shift things that
are otherwise heavy or hard to move
because we've we've we found a balance
and a point at which such redirection
becomes possible for us so you know the
ways in which mode of orientation is
pivotal I think is what what I was
picking up on and what I want to try and
explore with you I just wanted to make
that note again that the OREA note about
the value of rien pregnant our words as
much as possible by paying attention to
their meta ferocity and to their
etymology yeah that's that's beautiful
and it's something that you evidence to
a incredible degree in your lectures and
I think it's one of the one of the many
chief reasons why they afford people to
open up their conceptions so much and
yeah it's great so so okay so modes of
orientation then fundamentally at all I
know fundament a key piece in
the role that these modes of orientation
are playing is in our relationship to
death and dissolution and broadly
speaking the chaos that can enter our
experience the horror as well right
there dislodging yeah how is it how can
we find ourselves again how can we find
connection again from a place of
disconnection in some respects that's
one that's one thing that's important
and the other is also how we can front
up to change how we can from a place of
sort of coherence that's become
stagnated and stultified decide bravely
to move over the boundary right to
confront and attend and it seems to me
that the capacity to attend in different
modes is is sorts of um it's it's it's
hard for me to imagine the pictures with
that we're speaking about without those
fundamental building blocks of just how
also poetic processes can be in
relationship which is other than their
immediate domain of auto police's at all
how can we how can we transgress and
trance frame our boundaries without in
some sense there the courage to be with
and not knowing and ultimately to to
surrender in some sense and also to
confront the two terms that were pivotal
for me in making sense of some deep
psychedelic experience I had were
confrontation and surrender I'm not
attached to either there is a negative
and positive mode of each but they're
just what the terms are maybe I would be
interested to hear how you would take
the this kind of discussion and I'm not
attached to having to do it through the
lens I'm bringing sure so there's a lot
there's a lot there I like so let's
let's let's gather together logos gather
together so the things belong together
that that you know there's this there's
this there's this encouragement and in
carrying the
is bound up with the modes of
orientation as you said because what
we're facing is we're facing the real
possibility of dissolution a kind of
death and so it's interesting there's a
term of course in dynamical systems that
tries to point to this which is
criticality our system is critical when
it is undergoing enough dissolution that
it can restructure and reframe itself
but if it takes too much then it will
actually fall into this dissolution so
that's why it's called critical it's
it's playing on both senses of the word
critical I think in a very nice fashion
so I think one of the things that's
critical one of the things that can get
us into criticality and that we don't
our culture is not good at and that's
why I've spent some time on I keep
coming back to it is serious play and
serious play I think is I think I think
it's it's it's it's something that has
been exacted you see in mammals not just
in us right serious play is I think
indispensable for qualitative
development the kind of development
you're talking about here the
development that the kind there's
development that is quantitative where
you just acquire more and more knowledge
and more information and then there's
qualitative development which I think
you can best understand as development
that must pass through criticality to
get to the developmental stage you can't
just keep sort of more of the same and
acquire more you actually have that you
need new functionality and so you have
to put the current functionality at risk
it has to go into a period of
criticality and what we see is and you
know and I think this just is convergent
with the brilliant work of La Paul and
the brilliant work of Agnes Khaleda but
we can't sort of and and and voter's
work about you can't infer a stronger
logic from a weaker logic you can't
infer yourself through these
transformations you have to you have to
aspire through them and I tried to argue
that this is that the notion of serious
play was part of what was at work in in
nos in the Gnostics or at least that in
within nauseous because gnosis is again
the Greek word for that deep kind of
participatory knowing and and of course
the Gnostics they sought to place
themselves into exactly the kind of
existential risk that you're talking
about here the conic talks about that
how transgressive of their so the point
about the the serious play is it's it's
how I think human beings it's it's how
we put ourselves into a a what's called
metastability a state of criticality so
that qualitative development is actually
possible for us while also setting up a
whole bunch of constraints and systems
so that we can back out or reverse out
if needed we don't over and completely
commit so that like we there we create a
situation within serious play in which
we can taste and touch the criticality
but error is not completely disastrous
for us there's there's more error
tolerance so the child is playing with
the plastic sword right and you know and
perhaps you know and I'm not saying we
should have it in military militaristic
culture I'm just using it for ease of
export of explanation you know in the
point about the play I do Tai Chi with a
wooden sword there we go
I do shoot country with a wooden sword
it's serious play because you know I'm
putting myself into you know clumsiness
following I can hurt myself for sure but
because it's a wooden sword then there's
it's done within a particular context as
opposed to combat with a military sort
error isn't quite as disastrous there's
much more error tolerance so that I can
and I want to use this we're very very
deliberately I can play with the
possibilities to try and get that that
sense of okay how do i how do i course
my way through this how do i course my
way through this and i think why it's a
problem for us in our culture's we don't
have we we don't we don't think about or
talk about or do a lot to valorize
validate serious play play is either
trivialized into fun for us or we think
if it's important and serious it must be
work and then with there's a step and an
algorithm and a recipe for getting there
which of course is not how development
works and the place where cultures
generally do serious play for adults and
also perhaps for children but primarily
for adults is ritual that's what ritual
is it's the place where we do serious
play I mean if you go into church and
it's in and you open yourself up mode of
orientation to the serious play that's
going on there if that's viable for you
I'm not saying it is why I don't think
would be viable for me but if it's
viable for you right and you get
involved with the serious play of the
Eucharist or let's say it's Easter the
portrayal of the crucifixion and the
resume like whew like you're playing
with your identity and you're playing
with some of your deepest effective
machinery and you're really allowing you
but you're you're involved with a kind
of profound serious play that
nevertheless there's a community around
you there's a tradition around you
you've been taken into a space outside
of the ongoing profane space of the
world so you you're safe from the world
for a while so there's a lot more error
tolerance there's a lot more support and
there's a ritual that other people have
tried so you're not just starting it in
an other didactic fashion from scratch
and so I think there are there are deep
connections between the meaning crisis
and our inability to take up the
appropriate modes of modes of
orientation precisely because our
culture is really really poor dealing
with serious play like and notice how
how poorly and I mean that even
economically we reward people who who
live lives in which serious play like
musicians and artists and other people
who have decided that serious play is
something that needs to be exemplified
and enacted we tend to say but that's
not as important as work you know
there's Protestant work at work we're a
card maker you know all that's not that
we shouldn't work I'm not saying that
uh but we I mean again another symptom
of the meeting crisis and this has
become a pervasive we have a culture and
work workaholism right we're call ism
what is it workaholism is i think it's
all accepted workaholics yeah it's it's
basically people people do not know how
to be other than work so they do not
know how to become really because they
can't engage in serious play and han
talks about this in the agony of ecstasy
they get into a you know a mode of self
exploitation where they're constantly
driven to achieve to achieve to achieve
and they can't engage in actual
development in serious play so when
they're not working all they can do is
to drop into a kind of super almost a
lethargy of luxury they like so the idea
that that something really important
goes on all you're doing is basically
recovering so that you can go back to
work and so i think that's also a very
important social problem that is feeding
back into the meeting crisis because of
the way it is foreclosing for us access
to the modes of orientation that are
most appropriate for deep development
yeah that's beautiful
and it's remarkable to me because you
tied the link there between modes of
orientation and the development of a
space within culture where people can
precisely come together and seriously
play in the fashion the way to describe
doing it we're doing it right now and
this is what I mean about and and this
is why I often so I vertically don't
respond to comments in the videos
because first of all there's too many
and I couldn't I can't and secondly
people are people are often just exempt
Irenaeus you know expressing and that's
fine I don't that's fine do that and
they often they want to talk to other
people all of that and there's all those
reasons sometimes if somebody catches me
on a factual error then I'll admit it on
that way or if there's a there's
somebody else that I'm like you if you
call
did I respond because we have an ongoing
dialogue and I know that I have access
to you in a deep dialogue not the
superficial format of commenting on
YouTube which I think could be very
irresponsible in in so many ways so but
right I've replied a couple times when
people have commented in my dialogues
with Jordan Hall and they say like this
isn't going anywhere and I'm trying to
it's like no no stop thinking of this as
work right what Jordan is doing is he is
exemplifying a very profound kind of
serious play he's showing us how to
participatory knowing what serious what
serious play in dialogue is like because
he is trying to afford development much
more than he's trying to come to a
conclusive proposition and that's what
needs to be paid very careful attention
to yeah beautiful I absolutely agree and
that's certainly a deep reason why I
respect Jordan so much for he's doing
and I feel that I feel a deep resonance
actually on that point you know
generally speaking moving around in the
world I'm engaging with people much the
same as this I think usually with more
with a bit more lightness not that I
haven't felt light in this but there's
also the sense in which that this is
recorded and I'm sort of sitting still I
actually like to move around quite a lot
you know I'm yeah yeah and but but but
fundamentally the way in to meaningful
relationships with people is almost
always and maybe it is always I just
want to have a bit of humility and
speaking extemporaneously like this is
to meet someone precisely where they're
at with present seeing the part of
themselves in relationship to you that
is ready and able and willing to
transform itself in a developmental
fashion even in a small way like you
want to show up as Who I am with what I
have and the way into all of these
things is so I mean it's it's its myriad
it's info
because it's precisely where that
particular unique instantiation of a
person is in their life yet
fundamentally we're all going through
the same cycles it's still the theory
theory a dance it's still checking in
and being there and making sense of
where we can together cultivating a
shared space of care and sense relying
on much of what our culture has given us
yet at the same time drawing in some
create co-creating some potential
together that is joyous in its opening
up of the world in that way for us in in
there John I'm conscious now that we're
coming to I don't know how long we have
left so I can go a little bit after six
to make up for my time a little bit past
this schedule two hours to make up for
that gap that we encountered so that you
can have a more complete thing but let's
say about another sort of 25 minutes I
was okay beautiful okay excellent okay
then so let's let's see how let's see
it's you know it's it's an incredible I
feel so grateful to have this kind of
opportunity and I have worked fairly
hard to have this kind of opportunity
but there's a thing in dialog that I
feel I'm bringing people together to do
this kind of thing and contend with deep
issues and I would love this so many
beautiful areas of dialogue and places
we could go but it almost feels like
I've got a special power right now
because I can drop in I can drop into
myself and drop a question and I can
throw it over to you and you've sort of
agree so it's hilarious it's like the
world can open up to me just from doing
that and it's it's quite remarkable so
so I'm going to if you don't mind take
that opportunity to do just that and see
in what way we can we can unleash what
you can have to offer
hmm
hmm oh this is it so hmm okay so there's
a few areas of inquiry that have come to
mind first of all I was really motivated
by this notion of joy and in what sense
in what sense we you can create for us
here or speak to how of how of how or
where may be ripe you know
creation of a an element or space within
culture that can afford a sort of joyful
opening of people's expression and then
you know what came to me John I felt
that maybe they are you know
metaphorically they're the sort of
opponent processing of that and I felt I
felt into a a difficulty and a certain
trauma of our time and and that is going
to be a bit of a lateral jump but it may
be somewhat resonant and that for me is
one experienced I think by both men and
women by both but in a both masculine
sense and a feminine sense but there is
a the the whole world of me too and just
not what me too is specifically but what
it's tapping into in sort of a certain
disconnection and in some sense and
inappropriate kind of relationship and
an environment fundamentally of not
caring there's a there's a deep sense in
which an interlocking sense of care has
not been managed for whatever reason for
the psyches of people involved in this
millio that we find ourselves in and
something I've experienced is that there
is a there's a particular I don't know
and what maybe not a particular but
there's a deep sense of a a woundedness
for both masculine and feminine but
that's maybe you've concentrated on the
feminine perhaps they have to be taken
together that's crucially important
I think people don't do that enough
really speak to both masculinity and
femininity together but there's a
there's a block there's somehow an
environment of safety that must be
cultivated so presence a certain kind of
I would like to say and it has to be
metaphorical is a distinctly feminine
kind of energy a feminine kind of
vulnerability in certain spaces for that
to be presence but not in not to be
looked for that not to be an exposure
for that presence seeing not to be seen
then as prey you know what I mean it's
like it's there has and it's enabling of
that vulnerability because without that
and the appropriate relationship there
in men and women seriously playing
together you know joy is going to be
hampered joy is going to be concerned
with whether or not it's vulnerable
expression is in some senses unsafe so
what are your thoughts on that mode of
inquiry oh that's that's very that's
very very important one of the things I
try to do is in order to discharge some
of the reactivity around the words I
often shift to yin and yang rather than
feminine and masculine because that
those tend to have a more ontological
Association as opposed to they're now
highly politicized understanding of
masculine and feminine not that there
aren't important political issues there
are not I'm not denying the history of
feminism or its value I'm just saying
that sometimes it's hard to talk about
the things you want to talk about I
notice how there's trepidation yeah how
you're moving around these words so the
yin and yang aspects to me call me in so
wonderfully when I move from adversarial
Procera framing to an opponent
processing and then I see this very much
at work in circling in which I men and
women in in the circling right and and
you know the
there is all kinds of overly simplistic
things Oh everybody's the same that's
ridiculous
being a man being a woman that makes a
difference pretend it doesn't is
pretense ah but also to come up with
simple you know categorizations of what
that means is also that's why again I
try to use this you know yang because
these these are much more comprehensive
and deep and you know multi vocal terms
right and and and there and and and
there they in the Dow in the symbol of
the Dow they are represented in dynamic
relationship and inter penetrating each
other with no with no sexual intent
meant there and and so I see I see that
the people that come into circling and
I'm deeply grateful to to meet these
people and I can even see it within a
person like when when guy is doing his
thing or a Jordan is doing his thing and
I mean that thing with respect I don't
mean if I like I see there's a deep
reverence for the expansion of the yang
and the traction of the end the the
variety the the attempt to project of
the yang the attempt to sensitize at the
end and that and if they're there if
they're flowing and you get descent of
there they're both sort of parametric
constraints on the self-organizing
process it goes on and people aren't
trying to pin them down or position
themselves as representing one of this
constraints rather what they want to do
is they want to participate as fully as
possible if the rhythm of the process
that's taking place within the space
that is constituted by the by the
constraints so they're trying to hold
the constraints within opponent
processing rather than position
themselves adversarial as representative
of the polls and put them into some kind
of competition with each other now I
think all of that is very very important
now we have to take great care because
that that that is a very real
possibility and it is a possibility that
both the men and the women I think in
the circling deeply value I that's that
is my I
I've come I have a strong conviction
that that's what I'm seeing in the
circle
so are you still there Tim yes I'm here
I think they're first yes yeah you fro
yeah okay did you hear everything I said
about both yes both the men and women
are deeply value okay
and so I I want to acknowledge all of
that and I want to acknowledge it
reverentially and I want to recommend it
as something you should be paying more
attention to that instead of positioning
and adversarial we can we can hold the
opponent processing and move to the
space given by the constraints right I
want to acknowledge that reverentially
while also acknowledging that we have to
address all the traumatic damage that's
been done by the kind of disconnect
you're talking about the way in which we
for all kinds of cultural historical and
psychopathological regions have hurt
each other around you know issues of
gender and the masculine and the
feminine III I think I think I think
what I want to say there is my one
criticism about how many people talk
about for lack of a better adjective and
it's not quite the right adjective but
it's the one that I'm gonna use right
now how people talk about the political
aspect if that's the one criticism I
have is it seems to me that the
expression of anger and resentment on
both sides or multiple sites I guess is
being prioritized over trying to create
a shared goal of bringing about healing
from the trauma and here's how the two
points connect together I think if we
recover the in yang dynamism that can
tell us that it that healing is really
possible and that therefore we should be
balancing the needed criticism with the
ultimate prioritizing of the goal of
healing and that is not to trivialize or
equate everybody's suffering or to do
anything simplistic like that all right
I'm not I'm I hope I'm not being stupid
here in that fashion but I do think that
you're running out of time and we've got
to figure out how to more deeply live
together and love together and work and
play together and develop together if
we're gonna save things and so we've got
to give more priority to the healing we
just have to do I mean I don't see a
real alternative for all of us together
yes yes yes and the movement we not us
in terms of us and them this how come we
are part of this yeah this opponent
processing is like a the rhythm I I love
the metaphors I speak so much most
mostly to open up to people about where
I'm where I'm thinking and feeling and
how I'm being in the world is through
the metaphor of rhythm and music what
I'm finding most powerful is this notion
of the deep drums stuff tap in and feel
into the deep drums that are present you
know all the noise all the noise it is a
it's an innate capacity of all of us -
yeah and I like the shamanic
associations that it's calling forth I
think that's I think that's very
wonderful that's wonderful thank you
that's very I like that metaphor a lot
too deep drums yeah so I think I think
you know I it worries me because we're
you know the adversarial processing is
becoming so so prominent and such it's
being sort of indicated as so mesh with
the only way to have power and influence
I do worry about our ability to get back
to
the sense of opponent processing see the
to me one of the one of the crucial
differences is an opponent processing
and this is again the difference between
dialogue and monologue it's the
difference between fie Lia Sophia and
fie Lea
nykeya the love of wisdom versus the
love of victory right is that we what we
should share about both of us always is
a commitment to the process as opposed
to the victory of whatever position
we're advocating and see democracies
were supposed to and they did for a long
time work and people being committed to
the process and the idea that the
conflict within right between the
parties was ultimately the best way to
embody self correction that what we were
actually invested in was because I think
the ultimate value of democracy is its
capacity for self correction that's what
sets it above the other systems and I
think once it loses self correction it
becomes what Winston Churchill I mean
it's the worst - next in which the
Churchill said it's the worst system
next to all the rest but I think if you
remove that the commitment is self
correction then it just simply becomes
the worst system right and and so I
think that you have to have a commitment
to the process because of an unwavering
understanding and appreciation and
reverence for how much self correction
is continually needed by all and
therefore why the opponent processing
must be respected above and beyond your
own particular party and position at all
times and when democracies have that I
think they function very very well and
when we lose that which I think we're
losing all around and especially in the
sort of the major democracies like in
the United States and and Britain I mean
we seem to have lost this capacity for
understanding the need by all for self
correction and therefore the commitment
to the superlative valuing of the
process and the self correction they're
in over our particular goals and our
ticular party in our particular position
if we the reetou which the democracies
have have lost that commitment is is
ritu which we've entered into very
serious trouble and I think you know the
fact that it's becoming difficult to
take a stand above ones party for one's
country how difficult that's becoming
United States's how is I grew up with
the Americans being the epitome of
patriotism that Americanism was almost
like a secular religion and now
Americanism is dead and people oh no no
no if you are not committed to the
process into the country over your
position in your party Americanism is
dead it is dead dad-dad
Oh John it's it's very very powerful
there's um there's there's there's
something we can presence here that
brings this to life in a way that's even
in some sense more horrifying which is
which is that you know I follow English
politics quite a lot particularly in
this brexit period watching Parliament
and what-have-you and what's what seems
to be one of the key markers of a
successful politician in this combative
sense not in this deep sense my god not
in this deep set is the capacity to
perform as if you were extending the
hand but you're not extending the hand
you're deeply you're you're deeply
insinuating that the other side is is
not to be yeah and the level or the
level of articulation capacity the Boris
Johnson and speak and what's his name
extremely posh in his presentation and
Wow Jacob Riis MOG and his capacity to
deliver to
liver communication in such a in such a
flowing way he he evokes the sense of
the gentleman in just an incredible
incredible degree and it has me buying
into it when he speaks an awful lot and
then there's part of me that it's like
if that if that is really functioning by
way of if it's if you you know it has
just you know through the little sly
lines of the communists on the other
side or just the a certain kind of
division to to the the energy like it's
it's not it's not extending the hand to
what is what what is virtuous like what
where where the virtue is coming from it
you know sometimes when we are outraged
it may be the case that much of what
we're saying turns to noise quite
quickly but the very motivation to be
presenting something we care about in
that performative way we are being
vulnerable with that that has to be
spoken to and heard right has to be
heard and appreciate it and there's a
sense in which just how good at just how
good at acting as though we are building
bridges but fundamentally not building
bridges is is it is a core dangerous the
performance of authenticity in that in
that deep sense rather than rather than
a true offering in terms yes yes yes the
praetor's yeah I've tried to I've tried
to think about that very deeply in a way
that would call me to my own personal
response what are the markers that I'm
actually entering into dialogue as
opposed to earth science or protects
I've tried to look for the degree to
which I'm open to an insight from the
other I'm open to acknowledging a good
criticism by the other I'm open to
dialogue in with people
and I do do this who have ontological
religious commitments other than mine
and trying to it's let me give you a
clear example jonathan pazzo who I
deeply respect um you know if they're
much credit a committed Christian
Eastern Orthodoxy he made a criticism
you know John's talking but you know the
the all disease ecology to practice but
what he tell him to talk about is very
individualistic and he's leaving he's
leaving out you know but what was in the
ecclesia the gathering together the
collective and I thought that's that's
that's right I took that criticism and
let's remember what this used to mean I
took that criticism to heart that's one
of the things that motivated me to take
a look at circling to get involved in
these collective psycho technologies
precisely because uh you know I took
Jonathan's criticism seriously it was
like that no that's a very very good
point
I take Paul's criticism about when I'm
talking about the religion that's not a
religion about the issues of scalability
and you know what do you do that's gonna
do you know what how is it going to
match up to something like what
tradition gave us I take I so there you
know we have to remember and this goes
along with serious play it between
accepting and rejecting there is the
important liminal transformative place
of taking seriously taking seriously it
doesn't mean oh I agree you're right or
no you're wrong let's fight about it
it's like I'm gonna take it seriously
and I'm gonna try and see what insight
is in there you know open myself up try
as much as I can to self correction
doesn't mean that I'm gonna sort of just
give ground because then that's also not
of service to the person that I've been
dialog with right but the this idea and
this is why I doing all this work with
Neil Ferraro on plausibility as opposed
to certainty because certainty is about
right about coming to conclusions which
are very rare to actually forget to
whereas plausibility which is so
important to the practice of
Sciences you know having a sense of we
should take this serious we should take
this seriously which that doesn't mean
the scientist says that that's the truth
I've concluded but the scientists is no
no we should take this seriously a deep
part of serious play is what things do
you do what habits like to use aerosol
what virtues do you cultivate so that
you regularly and reliably show up and
take seriously what the other person is
saying right and so that you and and
then you can also you know encourage
them and then care them to take you
seriously as well well John you you
embody this and show up with that you
know with that disposition in such a
beautiful way and I'm deeply
appreciative of of it both personally
and also as someone who cares about how
we are making the world together all of
us and the moment at that the moment you
know I appreciate I really appreciate
how you're showing up and look I feel I
feel as though bringing this dialogue to
a closure now is his right propria
and so you know thank you so much I I
look forward to I look forward to
further further dialogues in the future
well you could tell how how excited I
was when I saw you showing up okay that
that I'm happy to see you and I'm happy
to interact with you I think you too I
think you bring I think you'd bring a
tremendous depth and flexibility and
finesse to how you show up and how you
engage and how you participate in these
dialogues and and you also are so
articulate I I would really love to see
you talk with Christopher Mercer Pietro
my dear friend because his innate
capacity or that's both innate and I
think Hardy train his innate capacity
for
mmm lyrical expression and insightful
articulation I think the two of you
would just vibrate off against each
other and just a powerful and profound
way so I encourage you to speak with him
but I I think what you bring to this
makes it deeply enjoyable in that not so
much pleasure but I experience deep joy
in in this time we've shared together so
thank you very very much for it I really
appreciate