[Music]
she seems to have a very big you know
tantric he certainly be a lovin of
todrick people and he's definitely seems
to be a habit on Trek spirit and yet he
kind of went mad in the end because he
didn't have a Tantra community perhaps
would you agree with that no I would say
that Nietzsche is still living in a
Protestant Christian shadow what the
problem is you don't have a concept of
the borrowed absolute this is why return
to the borrowed absolute constantly
because if you're Eastern your
Zoroastrian Buddhist or Taoist it's
obvious to this Tantra and their Sutra
and the division between Santa suit is
essentially that if you want to take
knowledge all the way in the sense that
you educate a people for example that's
what Sutra does but if you're really
curious about the world and you're ready
to go out there in the wild and you know
pursue you know some kind of deeper
truth beyond what's actually required
for you to be a responsible citizen to
begin what like so you want to be more
shamanic and that's definitely what
Tantra is and to me since I'm working
with at the moment we need to
reintroduce this idea of the bar at
absolute in western thinking it would
solve a lot of problems for many Western
thinkers even Heidegger I give you an
example of Heidegger struggling between
the two logos there's a Greek logos for
Heidegger and there's another Jewish
logo for Heidegger that he finds in
Christianity and especially in the
Gospel of John and he puts the Gospel of
John against the logos of religious
obviously he doesn't think much of Plato
need to do odd but the logos of
Heraclitus and and the logos of the
Gospel of John are to me much it's much
easier to understand why we see this
attitude even logos historically if you
introduce the bard absolute as well so
let's slow down a bit here so the logos
of Saint John is in the beginning there
was the word something like that yeah so
logos essentially is an idea of language
being able to capture reality
we know now for example that mathematics
is the way we do that a lot easier so we
have a loud language to be more poetic
and more a place of art that's why
allylic philosophy ultimately fails
because he turns in a language is some
kind of logically coherent way the young
Wittgenstein these guys try that they
failed why because mathematics does that
you're perfectly already we don't need
language do that language can then be
mythos so language can then be more
poetic and theatrical and I would say
the way it works is that I know you
Thomas and I'd like you to see to have
your input here but we talked a lot
about the different brain house and when
I look at logos pathos and missiles I
think the best way to describe is that
nature's giving us one brain half which
is Lobos another brain half which is
pathos with us that's why that's why
storytelling and narrative starts with
mythos is always mythical because the
storytelling itself is really the story
how wine brain have called logos another
brain have called pathos try to unify
the worldview and that's what mythos
originally does to ourselves oh that's
great so the mythos unifies the two
hemispheres that that's kind of yeah you
know Gilchrist working on the two
hemispheres everybody and to me when I
look at narrative you know I'm sitting
here working every day on narrative
narrative what is it well there's so
much we can actually tell by just
separating having three narratives to
start with a great we're looking at it's
not a narratives not a struggle to logos
and whistles especially since
mathematics takes care and logos
wonderfully no mythos is rather the
story about mankind but what is then
besides logos what mythos is just the
narrative fundamentally about logos and
pathos then we have a logical narrative
that science as mathematics and we also
have a path achill narrative that's you
know pornography and violence and sex
and art when art is truly transformative
when we lose when we lose we lose sort
of we lose control of the narrative when
the narrative becomes sacred as Sharad
would say rather than controlled in an
adult manner when it becomes trantric
that's when I vector back to stage is
exactly done is back to the Sutra Tantra
so so
I guess I guess Sutra creates a bar so
that which blocks the pathos from from
entering whereas when you enter Tantra
you work with pathos as well you work
with them perhaps all three or oh you
you are actually even beyond the bard
episode when you are in Tantra that's
why Thomas is stressed before that you
must understand it's dangerous you need
Tantra you go well you need an early
dangerous you need Sutra Tantra is I
would say is what you're probably move
into if you have any of these sort of
shamanic cast characteristics about
yourself then then Tantra could be
available to you but it's it's not a
journey for everybody and it's a very
challenging journey definitely you're
walking into like we talked about the
donation the donation is also split
something Nietzsche misses out again
because it doesn't think the bard
absolute if you do introduce the bard
absolutely needed donation you discover
that the lower part of the bard absolute
is the raw soy and lynch mob right
that's what Christianity tries to say
what making Christ's ultimate scapegoat
at least thinks it's very reassuring
right but the other half of the
dimension that meat you can't separate
come upon us were coming if is the crazy
wisdom part of it mmm-hmm and that's
when you introduce a tantric approach
towards the donation Thomas can you keep
commenting on it on some of the stuff
just to get you in this point there's so
much but I think that the I really love
to to find tantric ideas and some
transfer I'd love to find these ideas
reflected in investment thinkers and
philosophers and I think that that you
know you can of course read all of these
Tibetan texts and Buddhist texts and
stuff like that but if you want to get
an idea of what tantric attitude is
about you can find that in nature and so
one of the core ideas of niches is amor
fati
that's the love what is and accept what
is and and rather than trying to run
away from it you you you basically use
it in an effective manner and that's
that's essentially the core of Tantra so
you you know reject anything
it's extremely inclusive and the citric
attitude which which you should also
adopt that is that is a if that always
includes renunciation so you're going to
to reject some some attitudes or some
some some ways of being that are
inherently dangerous
like for example anger is a classic
example right I mean you really need to
put limits to that but you cannot
completely give it up at some point you
have to come to terms with the fact that
anger will be a part of your life and
you better learn how to deal with it in
an in an effective way and turn it into
art or turn it into a sacred ornament
that would be a typical way of there's
there's anger types and there's also
like in the in the Buddhist iconography
there's anger types and then there's
type passionate types and then there's
like people who are a bit more space
either like or or and then there's you
know you know their different types of
personalities and we're all kind of
stuck in these types right in these
archetypes so you can't you can't you
can't destroy them you can't get rid of
them you can't you know erase them
through through doing a lot of
meditation particularly and then touch
where you kind of embrace them on some
level so how can I ask you guys then how
does this relate to what religion
essentially is according to Renee
Sherrod res strongly agree with him
religion fundamentally consists of
prohibition which is domestication and
controlled and civilizing ourselves and
the other one is ritual and richer than
often is the opposite ritual is where
you let it all out so you do you you
don't you don't you ride the nature
inside of you you don't try to contain
it and control it to eliminate it
because that's actually when it goes
terribly wrong right mm-hmm
so how does this relate to the tantra
versus sutra divide when it comes to
prohibition and ritual i think that so i
think your art is very suit rick because
he never really talks about about a
constructive way of using the of using
the dionyza it's just like no this is
very dangerous this is basically it's
it's the victim edge mechanism right
that the mob goes crazy
picks a scapegoat and kills it which is
obviously something that you don't want
but the possibility of actually using
that energy and
more constructive way Jared doesn't
really talk about that a lot and that's
where Nietzsche comes in so I think you
should really reach it right with
Nietzsche right so Jerrod gives a very
very good account of us of Sutra and
white Sutra is necessary and then each
it kind of points out well that's all
true but still you can bring in this die
and ice and energy in a certain way if
you are careful well Nietzsche wasn't
too careful about that actually but if
you if you read the two next to each
other I think you can make a very good
integration yeah and also there's anger
for act like bar Badger pride for
example having a lot of pride or
something like this is something that's
very you know religion tries to temper
that when you get into Tantra you kind
of wear your pride you kind of embrace
your pride you don't try to destroy your
ego you kind of it becomes transparent
but you use it as a power in some kind
of way so it's not and it also it
becomes humorous exactly exactly you
know I think I think you really haven't
you develop a sense of humor humor when
you when you get to Tantra Bharat troupe
was very much emphasizing this you know
it's about developing a sense of humor a
basic sense of humor he called it and
humor certainly belongs to pathos so
this would we would probably and again
with the brain halves the hemispheres we
describe that as again Dionysian
Apollonian that would be more like a
Dionysian within pathos or Pathak
narrative that Bologna would be logos
logic narrative and then mythos
fundamental ease the truck they tend to
bridge these two so that makes us and
this again you could work with the
powered absolute so you would have
prohibition you would have ritual and
say you would have that within the
community that would be the everyday
practice of religion so you would for
example have certain dates of the
calendar where you have rituals like
carnivals and things would you let
certain energies out that would make
sense to the vast majority people that
in between that they're gonna go through
long long periods of probation and
domestication I'll give you an example
you know Trump up when he was being
trained he was being trained in a
monastery with very very strict rules
like ridiculously uptight strict rules
like you can't even imagine
and then he was being the time came for
him to get the tantric practice and then
his teacher came out with some naked
women and some alcohol and you know he
almost had a heart attack because
because there was such a strong kaboo
against those things in his monastic
community you know that's the kind of
thing that that the the Tantra does it's
you you have extreme risk restrictions
and extreme renunciation each sometimes
it goes to extremes I think and then you
know and then and then suddenly you're
you're you're launched into something
that's much more you know energetically
challenging and you know this is going
to be very very important as we go
forward say the next 20 to 30 years
because I realize this enormous interest
in a statuses from now I'm on young guys
that I like to do martial arts to do
meditation they discover they get a kick
out of the fact they can control
themselves and control their mind
certainly can control your own body and
they get high on it and we end up with
this terrible world of boy Pharaohs and
pillars Saints as I call them you're not
very skeptical about Plato and I hate
the Gnostics and and let the there's a
core Zoroastrianism to me he's like this
or Athens warned us like a thousand
years before the Gnostics came along
Julie isolates they weren't as I said
anybody who leaves the community goes
outside of the community and sits on a
pillar in the forest and thinks he's
superior to everybody else he's terribly
dangerous and that's where you end up
when you go and stay in nothing but
prohibition all the time
that's exactly my crazy wisdom teacher
were you ready for the walk straight
into the room with the drinks and the
drugs and the whores and whatever just
to shock you out of your tracks and that
will save you from becoming a Plato or
agnostic mm-hmm because he did what he
does he kills this this sort of super
suit trick ego you go to the fact that
you could contain and control yourself
they dislike his urge of prohibition has
gone so a mark in you that you become
higher your own ego on this sort of ego
that can control and contain itself to
this level that you just need to bring
this shock in the system
it's a bit like this way always return
to the idea the religion fundamentally
it's a force of nature that breaks
through her fantasy and breaks up the
fantasy reminds us that we're not in
control of things
lakhan's the real as opposed to the
symbolic and imaginary and this is where
a crazy wisdom teacher is wonderful than
white Tantra you're gonna be any sort of
leader or teacher or spiritual teacher
or whatever you have to go into the
target because that's where the crazy
wisdom teacher walks into the room and
destroys this fantasy that you being
high on your own capacity to to regulate
yourself it's just being torn apart and
that it's only then that you can become
a proper spiritual teacher you're
dangerous before that mm-hmm you can be
very useful to society as a whole a
puritanical ism is is very very
dangerous and it else often has this
sort of you know facade of purity of
love and light of you know yeah this
could explain why separation of church
and state happens both in China and in
the West because I'm looking for that at
the moment why did Confucianism go its
way and then Taoism Buddhism became
religions and the same way we separated
church and state in the West wasn't that
because when you're gonna run a state
bureaucracy the best way to do it just
to have people that are incredibly
contained you know the the go through
prohibition all the time they're high on
it and they become the state bureaucrats
I mean at the end of the day plague the
dreamed about his Republic that'd be
like the perfect state and perfect state
bureaucrats
he created the same fantasy at the same
time as Confucius did the same thing in
China I don't think that it's a
coincidence that these sort of pillar
cents that came out of the axial age
dreamed about creating these perfect
institutions of perfect collaborators
who did all the right things at all
times almost like machines but of course
if you do only Sutra that's what you get
in that you could build whole
civilizations on these bureaucracies
but you had to de match the
bureaucracies with a world of art and
religion and that's where you allowed
art religion to have different labels
you're separated from the state
machinery you moved it out of there and
you credit these separate monasteries
where either monks would sit and go
completely inwards or artists would just
express themselves to go shy manic but
the separation of donation ARPA loaning
this aggressive sense like it's two
different spheres of a society
eventually collapses and it leads to
conflict it has to it is it is a plate
on this dream of the perfect world and
and the only way we can deal with that
eventually like Nietzsche says is to
throw the Dionysian into this ultra
Apollonian world that a Confucian state
bureaucracy is it would make sense
because China obviously today suffers
from the same problem the West does and
it's the mythology of the separation of
church and state when reality touch the
state of different roms within a
religion would you go back to the unity
of church and state yeah but no I think
I do so rest in at least to me and I
think Buddhist would agree to that's the
only honest thing but you would say you
can have several DISA there is no
separation between you know church and
state there's only one world okay we
cannot have a dualist worldview so
there's only one world in that sense
there's only one society there's only
one humanity but so to start with
acknowledge that and that's why I do
this elastance you need two different
religions you need one religion that
unifies society but then within that
religion you can have three at least you
can I want for the priest you can or
another religion for the military you
can have a third religion for regular
folks which we call polytheism where I
call it I chronology and actually the
fact that you have different religions
you have a tolerance between leads
actually because that just reflects
society
just like contra and Sutra fundamentally
are two different levels within the same
religion no tantric teacher would say
the Tantra is separate from Sutra as a
separate religion but if you use
religions in plural is here it would be
like there's an overall religion within
which they both belong that's what
that's human relationships to reality
the wife yes I guess this is a so you're
using the world religion in in a way
that most people wouldn't recognize I I
would I would say no but if you ask
people what does religion mean it's just
like to ask them what does God mean they
have no idea they just think somebody
else that they mimic he knows what that
is
I say religion is the the process
through which we try to contain
ourselves so we know golf and kill
strangers in an instant so it's all
about fostering I think it's like you're
obviously fast your kids to one day
become adults and then it's the job of
the priesthood to foster the dolts to
become civilized and what the priest
then tried to do is that if you can
stretch your imagination beyond the
loyalty of the hundred and fifty seven
of the dumbo number that you're born
with maybe you can set you to at least
1,500 people you could have some kind of
loyalty with if you can then take it
beyond that then we have ideas called
nations and empires and the larger unit
you can express some kind of solidarity
with the better of y'all are mmm-hmm
okay this is why I sort of think it's an
illusion that people can I sort of think
it's an illusion that people can live
without religion
you know even when they don't have
religion they create all these pseudo
religions just to oh yes yes the kind of
replace the void they feel because they
don't have real communitas they don't
have a real you know culture I don't
think I don't think even if it wasn't
Nazi and I don't care but we can't get a
round called Schmidt's political
theology because you can't you can't
even start a political science these
days without having to go to college MIT
first regardless of whether you want to
go to the left of the right even the
smart left reads column it and it's
political theology just says it all
everything is theology theologies deeper
than philosophy everything is religion
so the question is is liberalism a
religion certainly conservatives and
religion certainly socialism religion
absolutely these are different ideas of
the relation between human beings
organized through the state well that's
a religious institution that's religion
at least as much as the church ever was
I would say that Tantra is actually it's
actually a metal religion it's basically
something that looks at the prohibitions
of religion and and does something
creative
so it's kind of like that because if you
if you have a system where the
prohibitions are completely absolute so
then you have something that is
suffocating something that as you
pointed out so you get something
something like like a suffocating
bureaucracy so you need some kind of you
need some kind of space where kind of
like you know as you call them you know
that the shamanic types have their do
their experiments on you want that space
to be structured you want that sound
that you don't want you want complete
hedonism or or just chaos you actually
want want something want a lot of
structure in there and I think that's
that's what Tantra tries to accomplish
right or Sutra brings in prohibitions
like the big classic aim of religion we
bring in prohibition so that we that if
we have violence that it's an organized
ones that we don't have total war war of
all against all which humans are very
fond of and they always go there and
unless unless religion stops them and
and I think that's kind of the that's
kind of the checks and balances right
yes your posting here in Sutra
prohibition dominates and the occasional
ritual breaks up the probation otherwise
people explode well when you go over to
Tantra the ritual dominates and
prohibition is hardly there at least you
should have been so tricked to begin
with so you have your prohibitions
already so you basically get out of
those so the shift is towards ritual
dominates and prohibition becomes minor
when you're going to the tundra
would that make sense yeah I mean it's
it's it's Roger can be actually it can
be very baroque in its and it's like
behaviors and rules and and you know all
the things you would do but I wouldn't
say I wouldn't say they're in service of
some kind of moralism I would say that I
would say that it's kind of the commute
the whole community becomes an art form
of some kind yeah but there's a lot of
rules yeah it's not like breaking all
the rules and you know in some kind of
Excel it's yeah so it's still in tension
ceremony integration they're always
shamanic practices intention ceremony
integration where you learn gradually
you're attracted to the ceremony before
you get in there and eventually
discovered the sermon is only there to
break up
between the intention and integration
because event that transforms you during
the ritual is that the intention was who
you were to yourself before you went
into the ritual the integration is the
new person you become afterwards mm-hmm
so ceremony is only that state where
that happens that's exactly what's
during the ceremony that the crazy
wisdom teacher throws in the horse and
the booze and the drugs and everything
if that's what you need because you were
becoming this totally self-obsessed
narcissistic Platonist and he just
wanted to break you out of that spell
right so so yeah well you have to be
broken out of your your mechanical you
know your your your stupid you know
mechanical way of thinking so so that
could be through drugs or it could be
through sobriety and it's yeah you know
it could be through it a lot of sex or
it could be through and not having sex
you know it could be it could be
anything in fact there's no there's no
sort of there's no sort of limit to the
skillful means of Tantra because it's
always a very individual relationship
type of thing yeah oh yeah you know you
got a crazy wisdom teacher we get God a
guy who's an absolute freak he's a
terrible role model you can see straight
through you like a really scare away
this guy's found out stuff about you you
never see I never thought anybody would
see so the one thing the crazy wisdom
teacher has it says sir it's a very
strong phallic gaze and only the sense
that okay this guy really looks at
reality then he looks at you and he just
he knows he might be wrong on a few
guesses about you but you know this guy
is probably 99% right about you and
you're never gonna need to know the
person in your life that'll see us
brutally through yes this guy does
that's what crazy wisdom is to me mmm
yeah and it's it's very it's it's it's
very loving but it's also very there's
it's it's almost brutally honest and
direct because yeah if you get to that
point you're you're you're you're not
holding on to you you put yourself next
to the you know to the to the fire or to
the danger you know you're not you have
to you
to basically keep unraveling parts of
yourself over you know continually oh it
certainly as Frick sampling comes to
psychedelics this is when you realize
you're gonna learn a lot more from a bad
trip than you'll ever learn from a nice
and happy trip yeah okay because you
tried to get to nice and happy trips
before that you were too interested in
the drugs you were certainly in the
Sutra cram you weren't ready for Tantra
yet why should the Tantra Graham you
realize no no no it's perfectly okay
from the bad trip and now I can handle
it I'm ready for a crazy wisdom teacher
knows that I'm ready for this and
finally it's not that you come around
and ask for the battery it's rather that
you realize that that's where you learn
the most
yeah that's they call that a you stay in
that ambivalence no they call that
wrathful compassion you know and you can
see it in the itraq iconography you have
these fierce you know you know you know
beings that are destroying your you know
it's destroying your ego but you also
have these very sublime beautiful
sensual you know you have both what
those worlds you know you have you have
both those those models you have the
this sort of crazy kind of love and also
this crazy kind of you know destroy
destroy
cutting through your your illusions and
your your facade and your you know and
also also I would say the real lesson is
that you learned that barred absolutes
aren't that bad yeah right you might
love a brother or you love a woman of
your life or whatever uh Nate's arrows
and it's philia and strongest forum and
you you you you you just shocked that
the fact that you can feel these things
for somebody else I realize I don't want
to know if this has some kind of dirty
motor beneath it but I don't want to
know that and I and you turn it off and
you realize well that's part of Tantra
do it's just but I don't have to know
everything but I know that he could have
a really nasty origin of some kind but
because it has you know beneficial
qualities to it and and and and I'm now
wise enough to actually understand that
the motives behind anything I ever do
could be you know come from out of the
absolutely worst places and that's okay
and that that is that is why I'm talking
about a split to the dye nation that
Nietzsche doesn't get but he probably
could have gotten if he'd learned about
Tantra and so trip beforehand but he
wasn't well-versed in it I mean he was
not to me I'm not sure I get that split
in the Dionysian idea because the split
in the donation that's lacking in each
in each said that also Camille toggle
has been looking for a lot in survey is
the split donation is precisely the
donation because there's a bard
absolutely the donation and there's a
prior to the burn absolute the prior to
the burn I was absolutely said the lynch
mob run down the street obviously that's
the case but yeah the lynch mob running
down the street is it could also be the
Christ some crazy wisdom teacher in the
wrong place for example okay it could be
crazy crazy wisdom if you're a crazy
wisdom into a fucking daycare center
full of five-year-olds you you've made a
horrible mistake
right so knowing its place is central to
wisdom where does this belong and that's
both geographical place and place along
the time axis when is this person ready
for this kind of information absolutely
central the crazy wisdom teachers do it
through amazing talent and that talent I
would call crazy wisdom intuition ya
know that's why you trust them they just
have a feel for it and they nail it
again and again that's something good at
and they've learned to trust it it might
be the only talent they have the rest of
life might be just you know terrible
empty bank accounts and alcoholism or
whatever but they were constantly
returns with the crazy listen to dig got
an eye for what they're good they God is
one spiritual unique talent that they
have and they can really light and they
can die exactly who's prepared and when
it's the right moment to go to that
state mm-hmm yeah and in my experience
you don't really think you're prepared
and they might give you something that
is too hard for you or something and
then and then you fall back and then or
they might get you know they might make
you you know puff you up full of pride
so the do you think you're some kind of
a teacher or something and then
if you think you're prepared you're not
that's the first thing they will teach
you they will teach you that no no I
will definitely shock you when you're
prepared because I'll know it but you
won't yeah that'd be the number one
quality of a taunting session absolutely
so you have any experiences with that to
Thomas like maybe you could talk about
exactly I don't know just like what
we're saying um I'm just trying to get
you to speak a bit because last time you
had a lot of things to say and this time
you're being very quiet so I could give
you a topic where I want to hear you
guys talk and avenges okay can you
please tell me and the listeners of this
conversation we talked about our
Buddhism as origins and matched each
other and you have a Buddhist background
both of you certainly Dongshan Buddhism
but can you explain the different
variations here with a small wheels and
the big wheel and all of that but where
does Buddhism sort of so-to-speak go
tantric and where does it go phallic can
you explain that to me because it's
obviously there in the Buddhist
traditions too well I mean that's a
that's that's an aspect of Tantra right
Tantra enthusiastically engages with the
world so to trick-trick boost Buddhism
has a lot of renunciation so that's you
know that that's become a mantra to
enunciate the world and and but Tantra
is of course about enthusiastic
engagement with the world so that it's
very I guess that falls under phallic
right yeah being more technical there's
the narrow path which is this Hana it's
it's it's about discipline and it's
about just like hardcore discipline and
it's usually a solitary endeavor right
you have the are at who is the solitary
realizer and he's kind of looked down
upon a little bit by Tantra he's he
realizes something very deep but he but
he's solitary realizer and that's the
Hinayana and Mahayana the my Anna you
develop wisdom and compassion you know
you develop a lot of wisdom and you
develop a lot of love and you just
develop this you keep developing it
Minh and then you you then in in the
third
face is vlad rihanna where you enter
this whole other world kind of you you
you kind of enter a different kind of
world where you know all the rules sort
of you know are integrated but at the
same time they dissolve and you play all
around with the senses a lot more you
play around with reality a lot more you
in terms of a phallic i would say that
you know the Vadra is is is is a symbol
of the phallus right it's a it's a
weapon and you hold it in your right
hand and you pierce through things with
it and whereas on the left hand you're
holding this bowl of nectar it's like
it's like a bowl of nectar of the bowl
of loving-kindness and you just so you
have this nectar in one hand and you
have this fierce Vadra and the other so
i think it's very much a balance between
the the masculine in the feminine but
but the but the women can be you know
there's a fierce aspect of femininity as
well it's not a soft sort of you know
mother mary kind of there's a lot of
there's much more room for the different
kinds of female archetypes I think in
Tantra which is one of the reasons I
love it and the male archetypes you know
which can be very you know you know
wrathful and fierce or you know you know
or or or else just aesthetic and and you
know why isn't deep you know there's all
kinds of so I think it it it brings in
personality or all the personalities all
the different that's it there's a Maha
yoga part right so that that deals a lot
with you know the data yoga which is
essentially working with identities and
emerging in a certain way in the world
yeah yeah well the my yoga is yeah the
deity yoga so you yeah you you you
develop you do these elaborate
visualizations where you become the
deity or something and then and then and
then later on these the salt dissolves
right so it's where I kind of sometimes
it is uh so there's this there's people
are arguing actually genuine Buddhist um
tries and isn't really given to the
Westerners anymore right not after the
mister choking the greatness I mean in
many ways the the mister chögyam trungpa
made so and so
so you you have to make the transition
from sitting on a pillow and then you
know doing these visualizations and you
know I'm an angry deity and I have 20
arms or whatever and then actually
acting in the world right and that is
that is kind of where it very very Tori
can go wrong right that you cannot see
these practices as goals in themselves
rather than as as ways to point to ways
of being in the world yeah well there's
a lot of the strong warnings at the
beginning you know that it can go very
wrong and that it's very dangerous and
you're dealing with energy right so
you're you know there's a yoga out the
bottles yeah yeah yes I mean it's like
it so the higher the higher Tantra is it
like you have Maha yoga which is about
essentially about identities it's like
like playing around with it like it's
like relaxing your fixed sense of self
and there you have actually already have
a process idea right so do you start
seeing yourself as kind of a fluid range
of identities and then you do this Maha
yoga and then then you have the UH new
yoga with deals with all these subtle
body practices right and that's kind of
the - the - big - big branches of
tantric practices as far as I as I know
yeah well you move into subtler several
kind of kind of practices but but also
you know the the basic practices can be
very you know raw or physical or so so I
know yoga can you tell me more about
that
um I'm not I'm not good at this the
whole theory oh maybe I think Thomas is
better at that than me so you have Maha
yoga which is which is I mean this is
kind of like very simplified right I'm
sure that this would totally disagree
with me but so this is one way of
looking at it so a lot of practices deal
with identity so you visualize yourself
for example as a deity of the opposite
sex
so this is a very interesting experience
right especially of you if you have a
deep meditation practice these are this
can be very transformative practices
that so that's one aspect so you deal
with identity so you start kind of
letting go of this fixed identity that
you have
as a man as a woman as a father as a
disorder and I think that many people
would benefit from a practice yes
absolutely yeah so that's the Maha yoga
aspect and then you have the all new
Yoga aspect that's a bit more difficult
to explain and it often sounds a bit
like new agey but but it's it's a very
important practice and that's these are
all these subtle energy practices where
you basically you know wim HOF is a is a
is basically an all new yoga practice
it's inner fire meditation that has been
adapted to Western a Salo practices
which are you know niggas and breath
work and yeah that's work and it's like
it's like things that you that many
people only experience through the
taking drugs like you know psychedelics
or but you can you can actually have
many of these of these extraordinary
experiences so what happens when Shogun
Trump I mean he wasn't he the ultimate
christ wisdom teacher yeah it was very
good
that's why the toy oh my god I got kind
of a bit like you know they actually
thought like these Westerners are way
too stupid for Tantra let's not give it
to them so when you do when you sign up
for it for Buddhist Tantra so typically
get this like Sutra with some singing
and dance well I agree I mean we argued
in digital libido that the West or
whatever the West has become after 1945
is this increasingly infantilized world
and you know these days were all slaves
are the political correctness and all
these stupid things and and even this
distinction between a role model teacher
and a crazy wisdom teacher is almost
impossible for Americans and Europeans
to understand today mm-hmm and they're
at an enormous loss because of I said
they're at enormous loss because of it
well people couldn't understand how
somebody was who was supposed to be a
sort of you know
Tibetan a spiritual Tibetan man you know
could be doing all these wild and
outrageous things and and not be a
complete lunatic and he but he wasn't a
complete lunatic you know so so so
come rushing in and and and shut
everything down and so these kind of
teachers the ones that I know right now
wouldn't go near the public sphere
you know because because it's too much
of a so two things they're right there
so the idea that your teacher must be
somebody you can mimic literally in
every detail the idea that this is
somebody is your teacher and he's a role
model and if he's not the role model you
have every right in the world to
moralize against your teacher that in
itself is just the most absurd grotesque
form of the child of God myth it's just
like I am still the child I'm I will
never grow up and take responsibility
for myself because this shift if if
child and adult is one relationship
where children are perfectly fine you
should mimic in everything they do and
then develop their own personalities in
the process when you're moving to the
world of adulthood that is not an adult
world
if adult people are not prepared at
least occasionally to leave the role
modeling behind and stop the damn
imaging and try instead to follow the
crazy wisdom teacher because this
obviously the shift into the
transcendental meaning that a crazy
wisdom teacher is somebody you're not
supposed to mimic so that you can maybe
just for once in your life do a novel
act because if you mimic such a person
you start to get into cultic behaviors
right you become a child you cannot be
an adult think of chaotic you cannot be
an adult in that sense if you stay
mimicking and only mimicking and refuse
to do anything Republican and don't
understand the price is something you
pay the problem here is not an immoral
teacher the problem is that you demand
morality out of your teacher means that
you are only sitting there so you can
mimic why else would you why else would
you expect your teacher be role model if
you see the bigger picture you would
expect the teachers to come in and
behave like an asshole because then
obviously it's only the wisdom you want
to access to not the person mm-hm and if
you only want to get of access to the
Westham itself that's the that's the
time when you're really ready to be a
proper adult and if you're gonna be an
adult person who's more than just a
in the formal sense but actually become
an elder or a leader of a community or
say spiritual teacher anything like that
you must get out of the whole role
modeling thing the problem his net is
not jeong sugyeong trump on his behavior
absolutely not that that's perfectly
crazy Western behavior that just proves
it is a crazy wisdom change doesn't
really work you cannot say like oh you
know that behavior was acceptable
because it was crazy wisdom that that
actually which is my other point comes
you can never use it as a Thomas that's
my other point I said I had to point the
other point is that this must then be
moved beyond the barred absolute hmm
okay get it out of the public and I'm
all for that
especially after 30 years of kids
diseases on the internet and everybody
exposing absolutely everything I am so
sick of this these people constantly you
know showing off their private lives and
every amenity to anybody who dares or
bothers to watch these days because
we're all sick of it right we've seen
every pore of every human body by now
until we are absolutely fed up with it
so we're sick of the role modeling one
one part and we're sick of the total but
you know flagrant exhibitionist was
actually nice word I don't worry use the
word exhibitionism because I don't want
exhibitionism at all I think it's
fantastic
porno flick or no play well there's a
great hyper narcissism dangerous on
porno flashin for inflation is the word
yes
so danger people put you know acting out
crazy wisdom pseudo crazy wisdom like
behaviors you know which make them sort
of sexy or something and then they they
start up a cult and people do anything
and next thing you know they're drinking
kool-aid right so so there's also that
danger right is it it's it's hard to
know what you know what what is what
well it isn't it's hard to know what the
real thing is and not everybody knows
what the real thing isn't not everybody
can perceive that well I would I would
say the poor inflation and role modeling
obsession here are two different trends
macro trends of the times
that point towards the same thing in
general in general sense it would be a
return to privacy the call to privacy it
will be the cult of voyeurism rather
than exhibitionism in the sense that the
voyage retreats retraction is the right
word ease it's a beautiful word from
silent Creek so and it basically told
the political left off he's an old
anarchistic told them often this is
actually not at all the time for
revolutions
that's what revolutions failed they
become a three-day event sweet t-shirts
and in commercial merchandise and then
they're dead because into American these
days so retraction is the only mode
acceptable retraction is then are a
retreat retreat literally retreat from
society isolate myself with some few
friends who actually get a bigger
picture and that's exactly why the
tantric practices these days has to be
have to be done in isolation in smaller
groups sub culturally away for the
social arena and that's where I think we
can allow ourselves to have our first
sort of tribal retraction in the sense
that there are people who find each
other and say that oh okay we're getting
out of the limelight now we're getting
out of the public we don't want to be
there anymore
we start with closed groups and an
absolute oath so confidentiality between
each other and only then can the bard
absolutely practiced and this is
actually historically correct this is
always one of what has happened when you
know people have been too flamboyant
with everything and gone to public with
everything they like the osho cult for
example like what happened to all those
guys and when they tried to take over a
United States or something you know they
try again that was the perfect example
of the naivety involved in throwing
crazy wisdom into a bunch of people who
who are just a bunch of Californian
hippies and and and exactly that's what
happened they mixed up the craziest
thing with a role modeling mimicking and
again you will mimic unless somebody
addresses it and tells you that that's
not okay any longer you mimic tall your
life you have the capacity for at least
one of left to do something out of
novelty and the only way to do something
or novelty is only when you're denied
the possibility to mimic
hmmm that you have to do something novel
fundamental to problem-solving is
fundamental to creativity it's
fundamental to innovation it's
fundamentally any of the things that we
will value the most as we go forward
over the next 30 to 50 years we that's
what we call synthesis we've already
created a society we value the
creativity of mankind the most in the
collaboration between intelligent
machines and the most creative human
beings is going to be the highest value
now that's impossible if you just sit in
mimic because if you sit a mimic you
become a Chinese Communist Party
bureaucrat or a Chinese Communist Party
manufacturing person who sits in a
factory somewhere and just does what
somebody else does and you become
nothing but a human revolt in that case
in China as it is today will not be able
to go into the mode of dreaming about of
massive amounts of creativity and
innovation unless they break with that
what are you gonna say Thomas if
something like crazy wisdom as as the
sabotaging of the of the of the mimetic
process the process of going berserk
right he was too much copying yeah and
that's what's lacking in here art
although your art is so damned pearling
to so many ways but if you look if we're
the sons of Girard you know God we're
gonna piss off down a little bit but
finally some little blind spots and is
the reasoning then I would say what's
lacking there is the crazy wisdom and
maybe that's why for me as a soar aster
she's an older religion Judaism he
called that the holy spirit by the way
I'm sorry to interrupt but at the crazy
wisdom is the Holy Spirit he said I you
know I've talked about the father the
son but I haven't talked about the Holy
Spirit so he actually admitted that he
hadn't gone to the net that next step
and that the next step was in the
futures somewhere
okay you could call that crazy wisdom
the Holy Spirit oh no no no really I
would I wouldn't I want to go that far
the Holy Spirit is essentially the name
of the congregation so the father son
and congregation interesting enough is
then in popular mythology replaced with
the Virgin Mary why because the math
shark is the symbol of the congregation
so if you say you have this sort of the
triad of the two the split fellas on the
matriarchy which is repeated constantly
this is like Moses errant Miriam this is
like precedent Congress Supreme Court
constantly we find this this disparate
right that works over time where the
matriarchy
the metric is a symbol of the
congregation itself the delivery station
to which you deliver the community of
the mothers and the women and the
children to which you deliver and where
your sons and your daughters are born
the only thing that will survive you
that's that's the congregation so the
Eden Christian theology beautifully the
Holy Spirit is the name of the
congregation self that's why Christ as
opposed to said in the Gospels that
whenever you guys are together I'm there
with you meaning I'm not there but you
will be me when you are together not
alone when you are together the
congregation is therefore made sacred in
in Christianity that's why the Christian
congregation that's just a high status
in Christianity and of course the you
know the the Last Supper everything all
of these things are about the
unification of the son of the father and
this and the spirit where the
congregation is the spirit but that's
why it's all so easy I guess I'm
thinking in a more literal sense like
what is the most Holy Spirit is the
spirit of like Christ going and smashing
the temple right no you're trying to
bring great stuff out of Buddhism and so
asterism into crystals if you could find
it there I think that's why she rod
didn't go that way I think that's why
higher the givers frustrated I think you
don't find that in Christianity
Christianity is ultimately I would agree
a plate honest Gnostic religion it
doesn't have Tantra that Y would meet
you otherwise have such big problems
Protestant Christianity he would have
become a product than Christian minister
in no time at all
if the dilation had been included in
Christian this is something that I
discovered so I'm talking to I do read a
lot of theology and I talk to
theologians I find incredibly
interesting and so
this idea that Christ died for our sins
right this is fairly recent
this is Tove Jansson st. Anselm so this
is ridiculous in my a bit of a
ridiculous story you know people
misbehave so God sent his son to the
earth so that he could be killed to pay
for the sins of the people
that's the sacrificial version of
Christianity and and this is this is a
this went wrong in the twelfth century
and that's basically that might be
coincidence was right before the first
Crusades right so that was st. Anselm so
and then there was another
interpretation that a reaction is
slightly better one and I was a there
was a date anyway don't remember his
name but another if not a very famous
theologian he came up with and another
interpretation there was no that that's
wrong right didn't that first thing he's
a moral example right now so and these
are two of the interpretations that we
know very well that space or ability so
these are the two interpretation that we
know well right
eh Christ died for our sins or Christ is
immoral example this was not the
interpretation of the first thousand
years no I agree of Christ revealed
something it revealed the devil it and
what it did it reveal a very very simple
thing that is that humans form mops and
mops they kill innocent people
and that's something that we should
avoid that was the interpretation the
first thousand years of Christianity and
that's the interpretation of Gerard I
find a very appealing yes yeah I get
that but it again if the congregation is
the Holy Spirit and Virgin Mary are
clothes you can turn one into the Falk
religion and the other one is the sort
of mystical correct no but these are
Thomas my point here is that they're
close that's why it works because you
can actually transfer it because you
just said that by turning ski it Christ
into the scapegoat finally we can
stopped in the lynch mob in here and the
lynch mob is the sin so the point is
that sins can be over so the the period
of sin can have an event a certain date
when the sin the sin can be over and the
to limit scapegoating forever that
that's your odds point right so by
turning Christ into the ultimate
scapegoat which is an event it's an
event ology Christianity likes or
asterism in Judaism and Islam is an
event illogical religion it's a religion
based on that certain things happen at
certain times to change history forever
okay so the cross is the ultimate
religious event and Christianity is
based on it and you have different
interpretations of what happens and
that's what I'm saying is that you you
would expect certain stories that are
popular with people to be certain
variations be you know six expect
certain versions of this to be discussed
among theologians that will be the
ultimate truth to Christianity you would
expect your minister who preaches to you
on a Sunday to be on the truthful side
whereas you as a listener could probably
interpret it quite widely because the
end of the day it is your behavior and
it's your relationship to the
congregation that determines whether
you're a good Christian or not the
question to be solved the Christianity
how do we limit the scapegoating since
the scapegoating has cursed humanity and
how do we get out of paganism something
that I mean if we kind of put it like
that very concretely then a lot of
things make sense and if you if you get
other stories you know Christ died for
our sins and then it doesn't work then
you can if you believe that and you're
basically doing some never if you have
that gonna help you okay know if you
have a brain don't ever believe Falke
religion that's the point
the default credit is the worship of
Elvis Presley still being alive on Mars
the folk religion is to believe that
Donald Trump is a proper president the
United States or the Joseph Biden even
its notoriety for curly that has all
kinds of beliefs and we all know that
these are not true okay so you what you
need to do either become some kind of
religious fundamentalist idiot who kills
people constantly blow them up because
they don't have the correct truth or you
just accept the fact that people will
make all kinds of wild interpretations
as a priest you're responsible to
community with the vast majority of
people are idiots would say mentality
Minds you still love them and that's
very Christian because you just say okay
whatever they believe as long as the
community is a peaceful community and
little golf and kill people on a regular
basis but actually then
here and they try to be more peaceful
we've gained another week of peace right
you gained another week of peace that's
what a good minister is supposed to do
their religious then approach that in
different ways now what I'm interested
in trying to explore with the other soul
wrasses like Pablo Vasquez and others or
ask two scholars out there they're
converted like me is they're all sort of
interested in the Sharad addresses the
question Christianity is so so solved it
it didn't solve it you ask the Jews they
had programs but we undoubtedly had
longer periods for peace we undoubtedly
had less scapegoating we undoubtedly
became more civilized because of
Christianity it did we did benefit from
it in that sense even his song could
probably claim that compared to some of
the more pagan religions it sort of
eradicated but I wouldn't count on Islam
having such a great tracker but don't
worry too much about because to me the
proper lens will we need to get rid of
so you're saying that Christianity sort
of brought us out of the Dark Ages and
so no no no even try no wait a second
yeah yeah okay I agree compared to a
certain pagan alternative to certainly
much more bloody okay you get rid of the
Vikings running amok all over Europe to
begin with when you Christianize them it
worked okay so but the surest your
religion
apparently starting 3,700 weighted
scapegoating better and it didn't do so
by creating a scapegoat like Judaism and
Christianity later did
Zoroaster died in the battlefield I've
never heard a sore Astron turning him
into Saint because if he died in a
battlefield and the rest isn't because
it doesn't build pyramids it interesting
enough just throws your way in your
corpse and says you're a corpse because
you're nothing but a corpse and sore ass
this and teaches that you should be
obsessed with living a full and whole
life you possibly can it's called Horta
if you accomplish that you can hope that
certain things you achieve in your life
other people can build from so knowledge
that you have achieved your life can be
taught to others before you die and
that's what's eternal about you that's
called our merit ah that's what
transcends your life okay so you're
going to harvest a marathon and between
those two you have ideals that actually
work but you actually get the
scapegoating out of the system by just
removing all
the arguments that were there for
paganism in the first place I give you
perfect contemporary example that that's
interesting
say you happen to meet the Chinese guy
who had a crappy lunch in October 2019
somewhere in Wuhan where happen to eat a
bat okay okay
pagon would find this guy would go after
him dragging through the state probably
slowly execute him in two hundred
different ways imaginable in public
associated execution ever and then some
guy out there probably still resurrect
him turning to some kind of say for a
perverse cult today after okay that's
what you do with scapegoats okay what
would it so a stern do sir Aston was it
oh you're the guy who ate the bat how
would you think about not having bats
for lunch since it was probably a crappy
lunch anyway so the rest of humanity
gets some time to maybe learn from this
pandemic and avoid the next one that's
called OSHA and by practicing this sort
of radical reconnect it's called Dow in
Taoism it's exactly the same idea
inherit about from the Persians to the
Chinese so it means that you connect
with a reality out there that's beyond
you you cannot cross but it's there it's
it's called Austra how things work
that's what the term marshal literally
means the way so the way how things work
the same thing right so also vehicie is
then your ethical attempt I think Asha
speak Asha and act Asha meaning that's
where that's the birth of science right
there it's the birth of a logo Stockley
those logos is the birth of logos is
something opposed to the pathos so the
pathless can be contained and from that
point on Zoroastrianism practices Lee
leads all the way into her a Clayton
process for loss of the Greeks it's
total is arrested and this this this
idea is that by writing the process of
life through retraction and an
impression and eventual ritual I could
contain it
now suroeste ISM I would say today would
even more benefit it had
tantric elements into it so it what is
lacking the Taoism and Buddhism have is
that it's lacking meditation practices
contemplation practices and certainly a
resurrection of the old person martial
arts all of those things are things are
working on right now so you could have a
third Eastern religion that we could
induce the West properly those things
are still lacking
that's what Buddhism and ours are we're
well but these are these are fascinating
times um so it's a good example right I
mean dungeon comes from the east and it
came from the West
I mean it's blending with New Age with
philosophy with with peers and with all
kinds of stuff right and then it kind of
reflects back to the East right so we
have this this enormous creative energy
going on and many people are coming you
know that's not real Tantra and that's
New Age and this is that but I think
it's great I mean this is a very very
creative cauldron and it seems also that
a lot of the religions they have it seem
that religions have different different
emphases right so and John Cobb has
written about that process theologian
and so so what can I say if you have
religions that are focused on process
you know process religions who kind of
like try to to emphasize the the process
nature of the world right most
definitely Buddhism and Hinduism to some
extent I probably saw Austrian ISM as
well yeah and then you have you have
religions who are who are who are more
concerned with potential so there is a
every of choices how do I make the right
choice in Christianity the Abrahamic
religions are very much are very much
about about a Bastas potential and then
you finally have ever religions in like
that are with pattern so that is how
does the world work that's basically
science science is one of these one of
these if you want to call it a religion
let's say generalize tradition where
were very much obsessed with like what's
the pattern of the world that we can use
to make predictions and to to to get
things done so and you need these these
three so I mean you see honestly never
appealed to me at all before I studied
Buddhism it was only through Buddhism
that I could finally understand what
were the the value of Christianity life
and and I think that it's it's and this
is going on
in all no grand-scale in the West right
so people are studying Buddhism they're
studying Hinduism they're going back to
Christianity they're obviously there's a
lot of science going on so people have a
tendency to be very optimistic about the
world and of course there are reasons to
be pessimistic but have there ever been
a rose in the history of mankind where
there was so much exchange of
information