you
you
hello Daniel hello hello I said you're
there I am holding up what about you
also a bit frazzled around the edges I
must say in many ways the the world
localization day initiative couldn't
couldn't be more topical for me because
I sort of realized that I was getting
caught up in this international weaving
and speaking and talking and networking
and advocating and and was increasingly
losing my grounding my actual rooting
into soil soil soil soul and society as
Satish would call it and and
particularly with a little girl coming
late into my life like being a father
now I've realized that basically what I
need to do is to understand that this is
a marathon and not a sprint I can't
serve if I don't have something that
renourish is me and from which I draw
actually the deeper wisdom in the deeper
beingness from which to do my work and
long story short like I I'm radically
real oka lysing and like I'm close to
disappearing for a couple of years to
just focus on building our finger here
and and and planting forests and those
kind of things yeah I hope that you'll
still you know devote some of your time
to get in the word out and what I call
big-picture activism because you know we
all need to live in that way but I'm I
see there's still this huge need for
communication and big picture and
letting more people know how delightful
it is to live a more local life you know
there's all this discussion about people
having this fear about
didn't go of the civilization and what a
tragedy that's breaking down well I mean
you and I know from our myosin from my
work with ecovillages there lot of
people who live in those ecological
communities have a lot better lives than
the people in the big city were running
after the dream of being you know
powerful wealthy important famous yeah
no I mean but but for me it I got to a
point where it is a balance and I was
basically to balanced on the on the
advocacy side and not enough living my
practice also having a little daughter
means I naturally in the next now she's
turning 3 in the next three years I have
to find the community in which I feel
comfortable that she gets that the sort
of it takes a village to raise a child
and and so I mean it's always going to
be a bit of a dance for me and to find
the right balance because of course that
my income comes from more of the global
work rather than the local work but but
being locked and you can't imagine what
it was like here in Spain we were
literally locked into our apartments
with no ability to exercise or even go
for a brisk short walk in order to get
some fresh air
and we were lucky enough to have a roof
terrace 2 on 15 square meters run around
him a little bit but that all these
large families locked into 4050 square
meter apartments with five people and
with with no balcony and I mean I can
only imagine that the scenes and the
horror that that some people lived in
Spain yeah and I think it led to
developing this appetite for nature for
community for connection and in all this
you know appetite to to start doing
things more creatively you know like
baking and sort of buying things
ready-made and so I that happen in Spain
as well didn't it like also I mean
there's some already some wonderful
developments in terms of localization
Jayceon on my okay what happened is that
all the local farmers suddenly get the
attention that deserve and even though
the more conventional local farmers like
not necessarily the organic farming or
regenerative farming community everybody
was suddenly rapidly trying to build up
direct marketing to the customer and
everybody or Mayaka seems to be getting
rich boxes now from from local farmers
it's wonderful so you know for us that's
such an important foundation stone for a
healthier economy so it's a it is a
really really positive effective the
whole family are naked and I can see
some signs like for example just last
week the government the local government
announced that there were investing in
50 new solar parks on dry land and land
that isn't farmed there before they were
very hesitant to give out permits to
build up this solar energy of renewable
energy capacity of the island and now it
seems something has startled them into
understanding that we we really need to
provide the basics for the regional
population as much regionally as
possible and that includes energy and
food and and water sovereignty I must
say I'm a bit worried about you thing
you know putting the panels on the land
rather than on rooftops so you know
because I would love to see that land
you know again in terms of climate
everything you know restoring carbon
means you know either diversified
healthy food production including
animals which can actually help you know
to be a carbon sink or forestry but to
have the land fertile and to just put is
that what they're doing there right no I
completely agree with you it's just that
I my experience of working with
political processes it's already a move
forward for them to say we're going to
give permission to 50 new solar funds
then you can have the conversation about
what the appropriate place would be in
and you'll definitely get a lot of that
issue of
we should really be planting forests
here not putting solar panels up here
but yeah I think it's it's always for me
one of the things where we where we fall
short sometimes is that we very quickly
jump at pointing out the the shortfall
of something rather than say yes great
and we need to really have a
conversation on where's the best place
to put the solar panels yeah I think
that can happen but I also see a lot of
people who simply don't think about the
holistic picture and therefore will
think you know solar anywhere everywhere
you know you need and you know and and
you know the whole discussion about
fueling the global economy with
renewable blasting the Sahara with
panels and exporting it to Europe all of
that but why don't you talk a bit about
how you see you know now the pandemic
and the fork in the road what do you see
as their options as we come out of that
well I find all the work did I mean you
spent another 25 years longer than me
and I've already spent 20 years on this
path of of reminding people that as
we're becoming a global species moving
into the planetary era and there has
been this globalization of awareness in
terms of we are one species living on
this planet we need to rebalance all of
that by by paying much more attention to
what we haven't paid attention to in the
last 250 years which is the local and
the regional and the pandemic has shown
and will I think continue to show in the
next years to come how fragile global
supply lines are how destructive they
really are and M also having had that
really close to home personal experience
almost everybody on the planet now with
this sudden change being possible and
the whole conversation around
transformative change has a whole
different basis now because previously
people like uni and vision
is saying we can redesign the system in
a much healthier way that we actually
reintegrate into the community of life
and become a nurturing keystone species
in the local ecosystems we inhabit and
make the places more abundant and more
vibrant and more resilient all of that
sounded like our that's very nice but
it's in impractical and we can we can
fundamentally change things quickly no
you can always say to people well did
you see how fundamentally quickly we
changed things in response to this this
viral pandemic and so I think that a lot
of people have been touched in one way
or another by something that previously
seemed to obstruct ins to theoretical
for them and and so building on that
experience it makes sense even to local
government officials that a post covert
19 recovery plan has to build community
resilience has to build ecosystems
health and I'm delighted to see how much
the conversation has moved on to let's
move on to a new normal rather than the
old normal because the old normal was
murderous and killed more people than
the virus has killed so far and and also
the the way that people are
understanding that to reinvest in
technologies that were actually driving
us full speed over the climate cliff and
that the suffering that that would would
cause a will cause is it's just
exorbitant larger than the the endemic
suffering although never compared
suffering I mean that's something that
in German you I'm always very sensitive
to not comparing that many people to
that many people suffering because
suffering is is is something to avoid
for all of humanity but yeah I know it's
kind of still I honestly couldn't sorry
but could you push the screen down a bit
more so your head is I saw earlier even
that in and slightly more cuz when you
sit back it's proven extremely difficult
to do this in most speakers
I don't know you know I know but that's
very good that's much better you're much
more central but are you gonna stay like
that or you're gonna lean back more I
can stay like that yeah okay yeah one
thing that I realized increasingly is
that if we want to one thing that I say
a lot redesign the human impact on the
planet from being degenerative to being
regenerative and if we want to do that
in accordance with the patterns of life
and I had this wonderful conversation
with Fritjof Capra where we basically
pretty of distilled his lifetime's
experience of studying the system's view
of life down to saying life is a
regenerative community and that life
creates conditions conducive to life by
creating communities and if we want to
redesign the human impact on the planet
we need the political ideal of
subsidiarity to become the new real
because you cannot get citizen
participation you cannot empower re
regionalization and local resilience
building and climate response and more
collaboration and cooperation at the
local level if people are disempowered
by political systems where where
decisions are made by centralized
governments and like even the co-ed
response here in Spain you could see
that some of the decisions were made by
panicked politicians in Madrid very much
with the situation of Madrid in front of
them but more understanding that for
many many people around the country the
situation of living in a small village
in maybe two kilometers from the centre
of the village having your little wept
or your little farm and your little
garden which supplied these families for
vital food the the restrictions were
such that people weren't allowed to go
to those Gardens and that at the point
where food sovereignty and local food
was the most important food was rotting
in the fields because of these
regulations and that kind of thing would
never happen in a subsidiarity based
governance system and so so the the
whole enabling step to really
power real localization means that we
have to become much more political in
asking for subsidiarity to not just be
written into the european constitution
but actually be the fundamental of how
we rearrange things now and and i I see
a lot of positive change like I've got
contacted by people who work with
Doncaster City Council and they want to
look at there's this whole notion of
regenerative cultures and
regionalization and and using that the
frameworks that we've developed in an h3
uni to take their their team through a
process of of really looking at what can
we do to revitalize the regional economy
to build food water energy sovereignty
and to basically make ourselves less
dependent on large supply lines that can
be disrupted so easily by so many
different scenarios that that we can
imagine for the 21st century I mean I
think it's really important that we
really understand that decentralizing
political power is simply not possible
unless we also decentralized economic
activity so you had you know certain you
know throwing off to the local
government oh yeah you can do this you
can do that but no funding to do it and
it's ended up being you can look after
the elderly even look after the sick you
can do a bit of environmental protection
but all the funding has been going
towards supporting subsidizing rolling
out the red carpet for global
infrastructure and global players and
that you know especially in terms of the
creation of money you know it's led to
this casino superstructure that is not
only preventing local economies from
being empowered to do what they need to
do but it's been disempowering
governments now suddenly we see that in
Colvin there was money available from
the giant banks that are actually
private but suddenly there was all this
money available so don't you think
another really important part of it
rushon is this economic reality of who
has the right to create the money who
controls that can we hope for you know
democratic process to start scrutinizing
that side of things but absolutely like
I mean the fundamental driver of
degenerative behavior on this planet is
a economic and monetary system set up to
favor those who exploit people in Planet
and-and-and as long as we have that
zero-sum game type system set up we
we're not going to be able to be
regenerative I mean I find like even in
the in the corporate world even with
larger international companies that are
trying to be regenerative these days M
the most intelligent leaders in those
companies understand that there is a too
large not to fail too large not to be
degenerative and and the guy I often
remind people of like last year Yvonne
who not from Patagonia wrote this piece
where he was basically saying they
brought me the news that our company is
a billion-dollar turn-over company I
dread at that moment and there's I I
cannot see how I could lead a company
that has a meaningful impact in the
world at that scale yeah I I know Yvonne
quite well and I think you know we need
to point out that this is a privately
owned company and that's the great
paradox that the publicly traded
corporation is a much more dangerous
animal because it becomes this blind
machine with this expectations of profit
again that are blind and systemic and so
paradoxically you know Chris generally
speaking you know we're assuming that
trial it is worse than publicly owned or
publicly traded but this is a really
important distinction to and
understanding why things have gone so
wrong and there are some leading lights
you know in
private like working with Russia a
little bit in in the last few years
mainly on their giving site and their
kind of animating new regenerative
production in local areas to basically
build a responsible supply chain they're
doing they're doing really wonderful
work but they can again also only really
do it because they're largely
family-owned and now also partially
employee or owned and because they've
done a transfer to their employees and
those are the really leading companies
tend to be in that structure and not to
be too beholden to shareholders that
that are just then ultimately taking
over do you also see how even when you
have this enlightened companies and even
when you have attempts by citizens to
come together to to create more
localized economic structures they were
all up against this craziness where
human labor and human intelligence human
care is too expensive because endemic to
the economy has been subsidizing
regulating and supporting every
individual institution even government
institution across the board we are
being pushed to always choose technology
over employing people what would you say
about that Daniel yet for me that is
increasingly and I'm sort of noticing
how I've personally never been that
comfortable with just jumping on new
technologies just because they're there
and I've actively even in my life so for
example I don't use Watsa because I just
don't want to have that technology in my
life and how it then shapes my life I
keep thinking of buckminster fuller's
statement that if you want to change the
way people think give them a tool the
use of which will change how they think
rather than telling them what to think
and to some extent I'm realizing how
much our our minds have been
I learned this you would recently ban
Australian Aborigine elder and our minds
have been Columbus they've been
colonized by the technologies we use and
even the benefits like we're talking on
Zoom now but and increasingly there's
this that so many well-meaning people
out there trying to use technology
blockchain holo chain you name it to
take more money out of the degenerative
economy and fun let's towards
regenerative practices but in the
process we are also setting up
mechanisms that would ultimately only
the local farmers who are willing to use
a smartphone and senses and all that
kind of stuff will be able to access it
and for me that that is a real warning
light because if we really want to
celebrate diversity I think we need to
explore how we can create enabling
conditions for people who like the
wonderful indigenous people that mutton
from Hildebrandt works with in Colombia
and the Amazonian rainforest rather than
they then having to use all this
technology they should be allowed to do
regenerative forest management like they
have done over millennia em using their
tribal worldview and their storylines
that they transmit through ritual and
storytelling and so on that's that's
valuable human diversity that that if we
if we only allow people to be part of
the human community if they had used
technology then then we're actually
colonial izing through technology and
and that I'm increasingly concerned
about it's very interesting that you
even mention the farm is owned by Orca
because this is our experience that even
in the modern world the imposition of
these technologies systematically
destroy the small we're talking about
very expensive tools we're talking about
the barcode and now we're talking about
possibly only being able to use digital
money it all supports the Giants to the
detriment of the smaller players so if
we look at the vital importance of
smaller scale diversified farming to
feed the world which i think is a very
very important understanding that
smaller diversified farms can be far
more productive than any monoculture
ever can and that we need MBR I think
you should say well ok good say that you
go ahead and say that because I'm happy
to do it you say that but yeah well I
mean if you really look at the figures
and there's still more food being
produced by peasant farmers who are
predominantly women all over the world
rather than by large green agribusiness
or long green agribusiness this whole
lyre of the Green Revolution has fed
millions of people and it transferred
fossil fuel into food that killed people
rather than then fed them in the long
term and changed dietary habits and
rolled it biodiversity so and ok very
importantly we need to say it also
killed the soil and even in the early
stages it was never producing more per
acre of land or unit of water what the
great efficiency was was that it could
produce more food and fewer people so at
the same time that it killed the health
of the soil and affected our health
negatively and destroyed productivity it
destroyed jobs and now you know
communities and oak yeah and you know
also you know ice you've seen too as you
destroy those jobs and you try to move
try to arguing the dominant sort of
narrative that this is a tragedy then
the argument is also people don't want
the farm but you're as familiar as I am
with this micro-trend of young people
who do want to farm
in permaculture and I'm sure you've seen
it in Germany as much as in seen it on
my okay I mean I think we are still for
the movement of people wanting to find
more balance in their life and more
meaning and more connection and more
community and but also having grown used
to these communications technology and
having developed other skills and so on
that that they would also like to play
they like the creating new models by
which people can spend some of that time
funding and some of that time working in
other creative industries and in
enabling this balance I think we're
still on the journey of that like he's I
personally this has been my my in terms
of lifestyle design for myself I've
always said like I remember when we
moved to the Abu Huraira in southern
Spain in 1999 Alice and I trying to set
up an eco village and environmental
education center I said I dream of the
time where I can spend five six hours on
the fields and working with people on
the land and then come home have a meal
and then spend four or five hours doing
my writing and reading and and and my
thought work so to speak and finding
that regular balance in everyday life
but I even in in Finland living like I
thought that moving to Finland I could
somehow design my my life in that
balance but what I noticed is that even
if you know what what happened
unfortunately is that then you get the
people who work in Cologne gardens or in
the farm and then you get the people who
work in the offices and and and we we
seem to separate yet again into either
you do that or that rather than really
enable structures that that allow both
and you know this is exactly there's
been the dream of all of us in local
futures and we we ever since living in
Ladakh this was exactly a dream it was
as you said precisely about half the day
on the land in community and using our
bodies and moving and not you know
sitting in a chair and we have ended up
spending far too much more time in front
of a computer and for me
when I when I look at it I basically see
that it takes an entire village not just
to raise a child but to raise a crop to
raise a barn and I see it as a function
are not enough vision not enough big
picture vision to realize that we need
to build up the numbers because once we
have a bigger and I'm talking about what
what the minimum would be I'm not sure
but in order to build up the momentum so
there between us we could actually have
a new economy that would really so value
this lifestyle and the ability to do the
words with our hands to use our bodies
and their word so value the ability to
be productive engaged with the
uniqueness of specific programs specific
types of wood the specifics on soil is
specifics of a climate in order to build
up that potential for a group of people
to demonstrate that we would need to
work far less than we believed we would
need to United Synod in indigenous
culture but I have yet to see it
properly in the new experimentation and
for me then in the new experiments like
eco villages and other communities there
hasn't been I think enough attention to
numbers that we actually need more
people not all in in one institution by
any means but with enough of a support
network and trade and connection to be
able to step out of what has been fossil
fuel-based for hundreds of years and
from you know from the very beginning
slavery and so on was a process of
extracting wealth for the few you know
and destroying the ability for people to
live off natural resources and provide
for themselves and to do it in a humane
deeply ecological way so to risk to
regenerate that to restore that I think
again why I saw emphasize big-picture
activism is to build up the numbers and
to try to encourage also that there are
certain what we call localization hubs
which are already emerging all around
the world and in fact I've said
thousands and you know one of the most
exciting is some Nissan in South Korea
in Seoul where there are 20,000 people
that have been collaborating to build up
an alternative and we including an
alternative school and now some of them
are moving out and they have you know
farm school they also have many small
businesses in this part of Seoul so I
think that's a key it's not thinking we
can go out you know a handful of us on
the land and suddenly create this
different lifestyle which is also white
very exciting when things start
happening at the level of a region or a
town where we see now in the
localization movement we see awareness
trickling upwards as you were saying my
orc supporting solar energy and in many
areas the support for local food
economies so once we can start working
also with local government but it's got
to be everything I'm saying if there's
got to be through civic society pressure
to change government government and as
you said with that principle of
subsidiarity because even local
government can just strangle you with
heavy top-down regulations that are
stupid and counterproductive fine and
sometimes it's the again because
regulations are made in silos everything
is in silos and so you get somebody with
the best of intentions saying well the
Ramadan Imams are the UNESCO work worth
Heritage Reserve and you can't do
anything here and but that then also
means that any attempt to ecologically
develop like to basically build new
systems is also impossible there and so
so some sometimes we we we block out
because we don't think holistic
I actually think that increasingly and
particularly now in this post Kovac
response there is a huge opportunity
where some of the old lobbies and some
of the old powers of industry and so on
of the destructive economic powers and
not in a weak spot like I see this in
Germany the kindest rate for example and
so there is it there's a unique
opportunity there to actually say okay
if we support you in transforming then
you need to not go back to what you were
doing before but do something else and
you need to work with local communities
and you need to enable this this sort of
decentralization in regionalization in
re localization and in order to create a
more resilient systems in nature things
don't happen always at larger and larger
systems and erode redundancies
redundancies are really important and
they need to happen through people
producing things at local and regional
scales and but but I I think that the
opportunity we now have is tricky to
break down more at the local scale the
three sector are thinking are saying
okay that's the role of government
that's the role of civil society and
that's the role of business and
understand that in the businesses and in
the government's are people more and
more people that are part of the
community they are they are civil
society as well and so how do we how do
we begin to really enroll like that's
why I've spent some effort here Majorca
with with friends launching this fourth
sector network because in many ways they
this idea of the fourth sector is
another way of saying let's say wrote
the boundaries between those three
sectors and create that fertile sector
where people are kind of working with
local government to address the local
government issues using some of the
skills they've learned in the business
world but using the ethics of the of the
civil society movement and create this
fertile new new system and I think it's
violet it needs subsidiarity from from
the
Rico perspective it also needs new forms
of business like I had a really nice
conversation Donnie McClurkin from from
the post growth Institute and his whole
vision of changing the all companies to
be not for profit companies and and and
localizing in that way that that
companies are basically there to serve
the local benefit and there is a there's
a sort of ceiling which people can't
earn any more financial gain for
themselves as owners of the company but
actually just they've got their salary
and then the company is assessed by how
much they it produces benefit in the
local community although you know I
would say that I've seen both in more
traditional settings and now in the sort
of new local that when you when you
actually have the awareness and
precisely as you say in a way from the
fourth sector it's a combination from
activists you know environmentalists
social activists local business owners
and sometimes also local government
individuals that together start creating
the new initiatives so for instance when
all the farmers markets we've helped to
start around the world it's been that
kind of mix of people that have come
together and you know all of the both
the producers and the consumers so once
you start getting the awareness of the
need to build something that is more
decentralized or localized and it's on
that scale and you're actually creating
structures where the human
interdependence is visible and clear you
suddenly start finding that even you
know private business for-profit
business operating with an invisible and
accountable structure inevitably has the
both this social pressure the community
pressure and the ecological realities
that again are visible both to the
business and to the consumers so you
start getting
a structural move in the direction of
which is both socially and ecologically
accountable and healthy so I don't I
think sometimes by talking about turning
business away from profit and just
towards a non profit I think I would I
worry that we're trying to invent things
that would be more difficult to achieve
and I'm just so thrilled and amazed that
particularly in the local food woman how
much has been achieved using the
conventional currency and working within
you know a profit motive but because of
the scale and they entered the clear
interdependence you're creating
completely different structures you know
the local market actually is pressure
towards diversification once you're
being pressured to diversify that there
need to use toxic chemicals and the fear
that comes from you know in some
monoculture
everything can be destroyed by one
hailstorm or by drought or flood when
you have that diversity already have a
protection so there are certain very
structural very real reasons why smaller
scale and absolutely yeah as I see it
here on my yogurt that ya don't know the
exact number of the top of my head but
is there's close to a hundred different
species of almonds they're all the 240
species of of fig trees on the island
there's somebody who's collected all the
victories of the world and planted and
one thinker examples of all of them and
just on the land that that my mother
Stewart's here on the island and there's
some fruit trees and there's a different
types of apricot trees and this year the
big tree that used to give this glut of
apricots
has hardly any in the other tree that
last few years and always came in a bit
too late and ended up getting the bugs
and and we're we hardly harvested
anything is the one that were harvesting
from and it's because they're two
different types of apricots and then
they just flower in a
different time of spring and that means
the second one didn't get the last frost
and is the productive one in the first
one and basically this year what wasn't
wasn't the right one in there by by
having that diversity you actually risk
manage for environmental fluctuations
and all cultures knew this but we've
kind of applied the rules of engineers
and physicists that work on production
facilities and and and
mechanisms to streamlining biological
processes and and that was a major
mistake well life or death really and we
could wake up now to why we're
extinguishing species and maybe
extinguishing myself and that's
absolutely fundamental that mechanistic
view so you know having been so outside
of the Western system I'm not seeing it
so much as we doing it I am seeing
people that were pushed off the land
because I'm seeing it right now in China
and India and of course in Ladakh and
Bhutan and when I say pushed I mean
through psychological warfare that makes
you feel like a primitive nobody if
you're on the land and then rolling out
the red carpet that makes it seem that
through media advertising schooling
everything telling you if you want to be
someone you've got to be an urban
consumer and conform to this
monocultural image so with all of that
going on I would much rather that Robin
saying we are not trying to send some
old-fashioned marxist sense but we need
to look at the economic system that led
to this extractive mechanistic view and
this extractive system enabled it to
control so many people and to put so
many people off the land and to
disempower so many people and get them
so insecure I mean that's what I see in
the West you know that were often we've
been made to feel so insecure and
anonymous that we then become you know
totally obsessed with the idea being
someone and that means again into that
urban environment being important lots
of money the right look lots of power
and of course we know now from those
super famous super wealthy people
Russell Brand being whether the people
are right some had read all the time
because they're so I would love to ask
you one question in you from your
perspective then you know this this
framing that I used with the three
horizons or increasingly I've actually
seen the three horizons also am very
much matching drama Macy's Hospice in a
dying system and midwifing a new system
and that there's some sort of bridge in
between that that are kind of not maybe
the final patterns but the patterns that
allow us to make make the journey and in
the second horizon they what I find
useful of this this little map is that
the old system doesn't completely die
away that the red line still goes on
into the future but in a much smaller
way and it speaks of what is the baby in
the bathwater of the global industrial
system that that may be in a very
transformed way but that we actually
want to keep certain things like for
example and how in this hyper localized
world like I know that the experiments
with with open source ecology and and
and local maker labs and so how will we
create maybe not for everybody but
publicly accessible this kind of
technology so sometime in the future I
can still sit in front of a computer and
have a conversation with you and say hey
Helen have we made it it's twenty years
on and and and things have changed
beautifully and how do you see that that
balance of still maintaining some things
like
some positive parts of emergency
medicine and technology for
communication and although well I see
first of all that we urgently need to
understand again the economic system who
has been in control in terms of first of
all creating the technology of money
controlling it and how our governments
have become subservient to this global
system and it goes beyond the sort of
previous critique of capitalism because
we once we understand the ecological
realities once we understand the
absolute necessity for maintaining
diversity and that is you know
biological as well as human for human
beings to survive and thrive they need
to have the right to be recognized as
unique individuals you know a genuine
individualism and that also means
understanding the link between cultural
diversity and biological diversity so
once we see that we need to move in that
direction to move away from this
mechanistic energy intensive highly
wasteful system the first thing we need
to do is to look at which technologies
could actually genuinely serve us and we
need to take back the power we need
democratic processes whereby we
determine so we want to use aspects of
the internet we want to use them for
communication we recognize that now for
a long time in the future we're going to
need certain tools possibly the drones
and the satellite to monitor climate to
be able to deal with the catastrophic
effects of this energy intensive system
but if we don't look at that carefully
and really start doing the numbers and
see how much of those technologies how
much of that energy is going into
creating useless products built in
obsolescence pushing every child on the
planet
till the absolute need to have both a
new set of shoes and fashion and
clothing but above all electronic
objects that have to be replaced every
year to be upgraded we've got to step
back and look at what are the tools that
really do service and we have to look
honestly at the whole ecological
footprint and that means the minerals
the mining what is doing on the other
side of the world I think once we do
that and once we start taking them
Crotty control I think we could envision
a world where we do choose to use for
instance for society these tools for
communication and as I say for emergency
rescue but what I think we'll find is
that most people would prefer where
possible to do their work within a more
decentralized system where they don't
need to spend so much time on the screen
I think we're finally now even in
medical terms with finding a different
experience from the face to face
situation so I know people who've been
you know suffering from adrenal stress
and so on who find that the zoom cause
and even sometimes telephone calls can
be quite exhausting whereas face-to-face
communication between people can be
truly and nourishing and we're realizing
that there are all kinds of things going
on there is an achievement there is an
energy flow there's the the eyes there
is even the smells that were you know
not conscious of so I think we'll find
that for everyday working life we will
want to move in a direction where we
support more decentralized economies and
that would mean that you know not only
the basic needs of food clothing and
shelter but even a lot of like for
instance here in Bahram we have a local
newspaper we know the editor we know
that the ten people are in that office
that we can go and visit and are very
well informed about what happens here
that type of decentralization I think we
will see that for multiple reasons there
actually prefer that there were happier
healthier and we have more accountable
and genuinely democratic structures when
it comes to using them the internet for
communication I think we will also want
to rely more and more on having have
some kind of personal chain of
connection in terms of validating and
and and having better knowledge in order
not to be so vulnerable in this post
truth world because one thing that I'm
personally wrestling with at the moment
is yes more participatory direct
subsidiarity based action on the ground
by communities working together but you
and I know from experience of that even
within the experiments that are the
equivalent it's not like that days down
disagreements on on how to do things in
in a community and and in in those
experiments there is actually why
there's enormous diversity there is some
sort of alignment also around everybody
came together in an intentional
community to want to build an
alternative model lives live healthier
and differently and when I'm sometimes
wondering in this process of redesigning
towards enabling much more citizens
participation on the ground is where's
the role of Education and the lag effect
of having spent 40 years of brain were
longer to hundreds of years brainwashing
people into a certain way of thinking
that then it actually takes a sort of
democratic maturity and also a level of
education for people to then make the
right choices when they make the right
choices to together like if you just
tomorrow here on my akka said okay now
we all have to agree with all citizens
of Pama of how to spend the budget of
Parma I don't think they would
necessarily be spent on the most
sensible things to
because people haven't been trained to
think holistically about all the things
that they need to put in place to create
a healthy City and and what they believe
they really need is what has been
planted in their heads by by
advertisement and 20 years old longer of
living in this consumptive culture and
so how do we how do you see the the
enabling of wise local participation
through education well I would say that
what I'm seeing is that there's a
certain leadership in terms of creating
these more localized communities and
economies very interestingly a lot of
the leadership from that comes from
people who've seen a lot of the world
and I've lived in different cultures and
I'm I'm sort of my conclusion is that by
living in different cultures people are
started becoming more aware of a
dominant system and a dominant narrative
towards the consumer culture empty life
and then also those generally the
leaders have also had a bit of a taste
of something a bit more earth-based a
bit more community-based a bit slower a
bit also more rich in terms of
intergenerational community they come to
understand that the monoculture you know
in terms of age groups and the
alienation the speed of the typical
urban modern sort of peak experience
that we're supposed to value is dead and
empty so it comes out of this
consciousness which by the way I think
this huge curve back where we bring
something with us into the future
a lot of that is the experience of both
sides of this equation which makes
people much more committed to doing
things differently to want actively to
get closer to the earth to develop an
appetite for being closer to animals for
understanding the plants and the
richness of that it's a
only spiritual and psychological wealth
that we recover when we move in that
direction but so what I'm seeing is
around the world that there are certain
groups that are taking leadership and
there are certain hubs in the world are
beginning through a lot of pain and
discussion you know whether it be in eco
villages or in what's sometimes called
transition towns and and many similar
what I would call localization hubs you
see that people are managing despite
enormous pressures in the opposite
direction to start to come together
because of that deep commitment I
believe that what's needed there still
is a deeper and broader knowledge to
have greater clarity about what to say
no to and what we want to affirm and I
think after coalbed I really feel that
fork in the road is do we unconsciously
want to support and link into the arms
of robots and a rat race to take us to
Mars to look for more minerals because
we just trashed this earth and this
hyper-masculine I mean I call it a
teenage boy culture is blind and
immature
on the other side led by women is this
broad movement that I would call the
worldwide localization movement and it
really is in every culture that I know
led by women much larger number of women
are actually feeling you know again
physically I think that deeper
connection to nature and they have a
deeper spiritual awareness of what is
our home what is our true home what can
nurture my children and me to feel more
at peace to feel more joyful to be
healthier and that's an awareness not
only oh the communion of life in terms
of non-human life but in terms of
community in terms of being more
sophisticated in terms of social
relationship so
I see it happening and I just think with
more clarity so that we put more
essentially money and support behind
that path back home back home to
community and the earth I think then
we'll find that actually so many of the
problems that you've seen that I've seen
in eco villages so much of it will fall
away because we're not aware how much of
that of that dispute and those you know
controversies and arguments actually
emanate from trying to swim in the
system when literally every law and
regulation every subsidy every dollar
that comes into the area is born of and
from that teenaged boy system that
mechanistic system - all the time
fighting against the tide and you're you
know the speed of it all and you know
this is another thing that was so
fascinating to me living in an ancient
culture like like that I realized oh
they are so lucky because every decision
they take is not some great discussion
about are we going to be this way or
that way or that they were so lucky they
inherited a way that worked for nature
that worked for people and the
modifications they made over their
journey happened over a longer period
you know the experimentation and they're
you know so they were under so much less
pressure than we are now as we move
forward I just I want us to be kinder
and gentler with ourselves you know be
more aware that we are swimming in this
incredibly difficult system it's not
because we're so bloody selfish or
egotistical by nature we've sort of
imprisoned and I think yeah again this I
live that in my own life like sometimes
in order to pay the bills for my family
unnecessarily the
the decisions that if I if I had a
universal basic income and could could
fully follow my bliss and my passion and
my desire to be of service
I'd put their emphasis a little bit
somewhere else like I some some some
jobs I mean I'm lucky enough that I've
been always working in the economy of
meaning more than the economy of money
enough rather choose not to earn so much
and have less but do something that
fulfills me but sometimes when I'm in
this situation when I have to use well
this is quite fulfilling and it pays and
this is really fulfilling but it doesn't
pay and right now I need a little bit of
income so I'm going to choose this one
by the way that I so agree you know
earlier you said about not being purist
and I think this is a perfect example
where I would just love people I think
with that deeper broader awareness as I
said they could be a bit kinder to
themselves and they could more willingly
accept that they have to make a
compromise and so I'm you know I'm
saying to so many people who might still
be working in a corporate job as long as
they're not involved in selling weapons
or you know truly toxic chemicals
perhaps it's fine to stay there and earn
a bit of money to save maybe go
part-time but don't think that we can as
individuals be the change we want to see
in the world
I love Gandhi but I think that slogan
does not help us to change the eye to a
we so the way that we create is
something that's going to take
collaboration it's going to take time
and we cannot do it as individuals
anyways that's the answer to my question
it's it's the journey that we go on
together that will actually educate us
to do things differently and I'm
noticing more more in there sort of this
is awareness it's a transformational
journey that probably already started
decades ago and is only building speed
and and potential for real
transformation to occur now and and
we're probably going to be in it phone
a few decades if we make it and and then
the process will do a lot of learning I
would love to I know that we're kind of
using a dual function for this call yes
yes localization day and is it it's a
local futures project and how does it
has it come together yeah well basically
you know local futures for 40 years
really has been about raising awareness
about the destructive nature of the
globalizing path of the economy and
promoting we've been promoting
decentralization and localization for
that time and it came out of experiences
with indigenous culture and a conviction
that we need to reconnect deeply to life
and that meant we could choose a part
that meant both human and ecological
healing simultaneously in the last Oh
what is it now ten years or so we've
been organizing international
conferences around the world and you
know this was sometimes particularly in
recent years people were questioning
whether it's meaningful to be traveling
but we as I said early we really believe
in the need for deeper communication
deeper exchange particularly between the
so called third world and the first
world less industrial as more industrial
urgently needed because there's so much
misinformation both ways so these
conferences were very meaningful for
many people and we brought in some of
our network of speakers who were very
clear about how the global trade
treaties were destroying democracy
driving uh permissions etc and had
experience of localization Michael
Shuman for instance he's one of the
world experts on locally financed for
local business and building local
economies to us
Eisenstein who philosophically and in a
holistic way embraces all this so we've
been doing this
to national conferences and this year we
were planning to do more including
working with the new government in
Mexico we were very excited about and
then go bid hit and so oh it's very
recently but a little over a month ago
we decided in local futures were a small
international group to try to put these
conferences on the web instead and we
could see that really you know this
pandemic had open eyes in a way that we
felt the time was right to try to claim
this as were localization day we so want
to show that these millions of people
around the world both in more
traditional and in the new local are
demonstrating a way forward and that way
forward doesn't mean that the endpoint
is everything is produced locally what
does local mean it's a relative term but
it's a process of shortening distances
it's fundamentally about diversifying I
mean anything about slowing down because
to love to care to nurture takes time
and that we need to nurture life back to
life whether it's the plants or our own
children or own Souls
you know we desperately need that
possibility to scale down and slow down
so that's what localization is about
it's happening and there are so many
beautiful examples of how it can work
and we're trying to gather as much of
that as we can on this one day we will
have an online program and we've been so
thrilled to have the support of Noam
Chomsky and just recently this wonderful
letter from the Dalai Lama who now talks
about how when he was a young boy in
Tibet they didn't have most of what they
needed from their region and local
economy so we have a very interesting
blend of people from left to right and
we're particularly keen to reach the
angular world which has been
often vulnerable to the propaganda of
the corporate global Isis believing that
this global economic interdependence was
actually creating a village was actually
creating genuine collaboration and so we
want to reach them with the diversity of
voices and to try as much as possible in
about a four hour program to to show
that there is a very very important fork
in the road and it is about this
fundamental things are we moving towards
the earth and towards reconstituting
community and with that reconstituting
what it means to be human or are we
actually buying into the propaganda for
robots and believing that they can be
more kind and wise than humans and going
down in line that this mean resource
intensive energy intensive and means
that we will be running after technology
and becoming more and more dehumanized
with so on people to think about how it
feels when they pick up the phone they
want to talk to a human being on the
other side and they get a robot or they
get maybe someone on the other side of
the world who knows nothing about their
context so I'm so glad that you could
join it Daniel and will it be here so
it's its life broadcast for four hours
but then all the things are recorded and
streamable afterwards so people like it
so it becomes a resource for people in
not just on that day absolutely it will
be a resource for people it will be a
sort of repository everything local and
and of course we have a lot on our
website local futures anyway
I'm amazed myself when I try to look for
things and there's so much there in
terms of books and films and past talks
and but I think also what we're going to
be doing is we'll be screening at 6
o'clock
New York Times six o'clock London time
six o'clock Sydney time
on the 21st and that means that people
can chew in tune in at that time and if
they want in some parts of the world if
they want to watch more than once they
could do so and we'd have questions
answered we'll have teams of people on
each continent so they can send in
questions you know in the chat box so
that's how we're planning to run it but
the rest of it will be pre-recorded if
you send me the recording of this like I
can use this to promote the day yeah
that would be fabulous and it doesn't
matter if it overlaps if you promote it
with what we have
so that would be fabulous contests
I'll have toys yeah but there's also a
contest to feel like so it was me yeah
by the even it mayor Falcon so you know
something like I send you my best wishes
for were localization day and I'm so
glad glad that I can be with you
consider soft oh it's on and that made
me feel like I'm I'm Corvo slice of one
fishy achievement in fishing nets
provinces understand yes even the kippah
guys that and this is a world
localization they made a local easy
unstuck caption that Baba spring try one
more time then if in Vegas that does his
English I'm very local is amongst are
kept and missing Vida sulukim tones and
amendments who then Borden their owns
nyet so they may be Orakei on the owns
the sleeve
Chinamen on you can innovate differ from
Sonia schaffen in via loci Suzanne
Abidin only belt on the ecosystem at so
high-end and abednego Manhattan Suzanne
to a local easy on can be a lot of the
better at Mohammed can be or TV
threatened was a missed also to come
threaten as you feel fear and dunked as
here and I but I liked and then they
look lazy among stock could you could
you also perhaps do you do how much are
you working with Jen now I'm wondering
with it I guess kosher quit yeah I'm
talking to caution I think next week
yeah but she's quit and now who's taking
over from her it's all in flux as far as
I understand really had communications
with her but but I think it's the team I
mean Jen was always quite decentralized
so there will be people stepping in
they're not part of their no not really
and they should be they should be I
could that who should I talk to if we
speak to someone from Jen and we'd like
to have them as partners yeah I mean I
can I can write to her and double check
could do could you send her the link to
our website had you seen her website and
yeah the link to the website meant
probably if she were able to just send
in a message from Jen and then we could
also have Jen as a partner and then
hopefully they help to promote it as
well which networks can you promote it
promoted in well I mean basically
through my work yeah reach 500,000
people social media that should get
picked up by like for example part of
this movement from you years the
ecosystems restoration comes the
a generation movement common land that
lots of different movements that are
already going in that direction all the
movements that are working on
bioregional changes so yeah
regenerative communities Network common
earth initiatives through the
Commonwealth so yeah I trust it will
travel once we put it well I hope it
does we're really counting on it
can I also so I'll send you also we have
some materials for social media and
stuff so I'll send you that but wait a
minute there's just one other thing I
wanted to ask you so you you're okay to
write to crochet so little time yeah you
know cuz it's June 21st right so we have
and the deadline for getting material in
to be aired as part of this yesterday
email right now saying oh I know what I
wanted to ask you I saw that you were
part of this thing called one earth live
how did that function was that all
pre-recorded did you see it I was going
to look and then I didn't have time
because it was over the weekend and and
I was very committed to finding time of
like Union but it was basically seven
parallel life stages and all the
missions offering wonderful musicians
from from all over the world yeah bring
their gifts and and then there was also
a speaker stage and John Liu and me and
lots of other people like really nice
group of people who were invited and
that was as far as I know all
pre-recorded short interviews and
insulations also you think the talks
were pre-recorded but the music was live
yeah so who contacted you to do it we
were trying to figure out who actually
did um
like Heaney was the woman who lives in
the Bay Area area and you know I think I
do I mean it since she connected to
uplift do you know about Oakland I think
she is I think she is yeah and then
producer she was the one who pulled
together the speaker stage number in a
conversation with the guy who runs the
platform playing for change which is a
really beautiful musical music industry
based who also basically create another
online event around financing
regenerative projects around the world
oh okay do this mention us won't you
yeah I mean I strongly believe that that
is the next step like we need to somehow
get the cultural creatives in terms of
arts dance music poetry play into
celebrating the wealth of meaning that
comes back when you Yury inhabit the
earth again and don't forget about
community because this is where our work
has been a bit different I spoke to
Joanna the other day she's a dear dear
friend but within the West somehow well
I think I know how but you know the
vital importance of intergenerational
community which humans as a way of
allowing children to develop a healthier
sense of self not such a frightened
little being that then is so hungry and
becomes so vulnerable and yeah oh yeah
ancestry is a consensus process but
would often happen you know with with
this whole view of people holding the
earth in their hands and very much a
type of managed environmentalism we lost
sight of that the fact that is the earth
that holds us in her hands and that that
place
based existence is necessary and by
skipping out the need for actual
face-to-face real ongoing community it
becomes easier to become part of this
yes is global one earth we all you know
we all love each other we all love the
trees and I increasingly believe that
the one fundamental change where we sort
of veered off the road is because we
didn't have the cultural traditions
intact that reminded us that we belong
to the earth and I expressions of the
earth rather than the us belonging to us
and that's that's where all went wrong
like if we if we can re-create cultural
narratives that remind us that the only
enlightened way to work for your
self-interest in terms of the ego is to
actually work in service to our life and
that's that's and that's why I sometimes
also get a little bit annoyed with this
framing that we're moving from ego to
eco like I think the the synthesis will
be an expressing self ego in as a
relational being to community and
community there's the human community
all the way through our ancestry and
into the future and it is also the wider
community of life the two are
inseparable and and if we in habitation
Arion digitalization is a Shinri
localization a part of regeneration it's
it's all about this process of of seeing
ourselves as expressions of life again
and life does one thing really well
creating conditions conducive to life
and and it happens always at the local
scale and always now live in the future
yeah beautiful thank you so much Daniel
thank you always things will change in a
way that will actually get yeah yes
lovely to see you in Madrid
yes thank you he's much better right now
it is fabulous
lots of love Daniel yeah let's skip
collaborating yeah and you'll send me
okay