so I think for us it's the exact was go
to bed it's deeply couple to its
environment inaccurate the sensorimotor
blue carpet actually exists and shows I
think over is a really interesting test
case for applying for the division
especially vision indication of EMI
our process with that talked about the
two senses the presence of the
transformation for verisimilitude
pendants to the stomach
working partners to identification on
this case Dennis shadow is called
propositional theoretical knowing of
Mars and our procedural field what
skills and others are categories to
restructure sandwich - sighs no my
father uses this is the part that crying
so provocatively intriguing is respect I
wonder what it's like to be and work on
Mars depends on participatory knowing
the rover okay NASA scientists robotic
Rovers on Mars in order to be most
scientific investigation of Mars course
to be stopped there is some supplement
importable satellites most of it is
field workers are not
[Music]
[Music]
so so although there is no joystick
control the scientists are still doing
science through the rover's
[Music]
there's another there is no for all of
this polymerization the scientists
regularly divide the report two
important phenomenological features they
reported a sense of being on Mars they
reported a sense of presence we've found
our seniors
so this ability to be on Mars and see a
rover is actually highly prized by the
scientific community because they
specifically select for individuals and
they just sort of a sort of tutor
apprentice people and some people get
[Music]
now the combination of explanation an
explanation the scientists consider
analogous to human are listed over on
earth
so here's Bob even have disrupted
standard where the features are how is
it that the scientist nevertheless
[Music]
there's a lot of features
[Music]
his talk so the sense of presence is a
sense of being it's an it's an active
indexical sense of here now must be some
environment I'm here down in this way
and this is what I'm talking expressive
being in eating this room right here
right now or be on Mars now my important
consequence of a sensor presence is an
attendant sense of realness
so the VR research and people get a
sense of presence they will often say it
felt so real
so presence makes the experience
lido where I'm using this term to report
a sense rather than making ontological
reference to the other one whose
realness at word to talk to her first
was phenomenological feature the
contrast to reality for a logical plan
thank you
this sense of realness is normative for
us in the sense that we see it as good
experience as good we intuitively
understand
[Music]
it seems that do things are important
trying to get work so just actually
media rods what is it about and you can
see that we should have a lot of people
who have is that the sense of detachment
is generated by verisimilitude at the
more being looks like the real world the
more of a sense of presence yeah and I
mean this is a possible intuition
because that you know personality would
help explain both presents a sense of
presence
[Music]
so although it seems also finally to get
the sense of presence proceed in
causation precedes the sense or three
owners so the role of exit points to the
role of intense involved in generating a
sense the present so when you look at
that case where people say well although
there is the first militant this
tremendous sense of involvement and
somehow so performers didn't divine
Nigeria
last year drew LaVon was like and then
the flow state is what's generating the
sense of presence not a lot of the data
very well because we know that one of
the things that the new use the lion
need to do is induce the flow State
that's again very possible and some
features of the flow State explain this
that's realism so these are the features
metrics my talks about you have an event
and focus concentration on the present
moment to enhance a sense of presence
expense emerging and actionable and
sense that one
[Music]
[Music]
the demands of the situation are just
met by your skills and so all of this
misses their possible but this I said
there's some challenges about this so
first of all this is a prototypical
thing from dinner at Utah State is Rocco
generated because lead is the only
explanation I can come
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
your your actions and how the moments
was fun
[Music]
that's within the
the network and what party needs by that
is right in this community or recently
development right it's the pillar of
philosophy like $30 in psychology and
pieces of related development ideas
respect them so what's the basic idea so
what what party arguing these are the
people developed is the idea vision with
the object in the situation so what is
the greenish Dalton features okay so I
try to get to a place where I can get
the best relation from the oak right
between the overall Gestalt and the
individual details good right too far
back so it's also going to try to look
at somebody and kind of zoom to the
place ready uttermost so this is good
[Music]
[Music]
moving around right to try the best
trade-off between what's familiar
let's talk to you too much you might
miss opportunities what's needed in the
situation that's not
[Music]
[Music]
place where we can see is what is
possible while being as hidden as
possible and those are in the trade-off
relationship it's if you get to include
your vision and you open up too much to
see to out then you're easily visible
it's so responsibly trying to get the
trade off so we're doing all of this so
let's try to get probably we'll try to
get good you you stop featural or run
background for the novelty welcome
humane prospect refuge and also we're
trying to like whether to explain her
situation in exploring other situations
and both of these die now
all the time I would also argue the
community is contributing vocals
residuary or passive awareness is the
optimum grip one has a hopefully good
view sort of tyrol well why hasn't
accident rebus off and through the good
viewing which is more our concern
so it has to be aware that I'm doing
prosthetics or exploit and then I'm
fully aware that I'm getting a balance
between two stall to feature elixir so
but it's different from just being an
indistinct blog about I see as something
with which I can effectively interact I
call that an aspect reality I do seen
aspects
in a way which is really centered upon
us as actors so there's an aspect so al
you do it all that stuff to talk about
with optimal gripping that's unfolding
to time and it's centered on us as
actors because it's ultimately grounded
in affording our interaction by the way
[Music]
what we get out of this
multi-dimensional complex all optimal
Rick sizing up route I'm Center on us is
a constantly shifting experience
landscape I think they're standing out
to us so if your foreground background
right and when I get that sort of
welcome you think they start to pop up
to be inserted so I give this
dynamically shifted Samians landscape
that has a spectrometer morality and
centrality
I call that stimulus landscape I want to
call this optimal grip sizing up
seamless landscaping respectable this is
what it's like to be here now right
through motions of the word it's really
by means of
[Music]
[Music]
okay so talks about the complex poster
she calls dry ass cheeks blimps real
institute it's not emotional seeing as
the ideas there are scientists are
altering the image in the neck that's
one sensor probe they're doing stuff to
it and it'll immediately draw a lot but
she wants to play on that word also
brought about what needs to be seen so
drawing has been drawing a drawn out
that needs to be seen as a way of
warning seeing acts so they're
specifically doing almost manipulation
so you can see this blonde the photo as
a deposit of silver so as I said they
need lots of things they're holes in the
process
or were to be able to generate seeing as
virtuality
they need continuously create shared
narrative of the movement of narrative
constantly running and they market on
the quotes this is where they were this
is how many time and they're always
keeping in mind and talking about the
mechanical limits of the world
everything is centered on the limit of
the road everything that has ultimate
authority over all the students that are
doing scientific exploration exploration
is you have to use the resources with
the rover can get it to a place where
they can sleep and get enough sunlight
and they talked about it so they could
be able to use the rover the next day so
there's two kinds of processes that are
designed to the first alters the photos
all of those are always be modeled it
alternate did this first way of his
color lying stability background
features point to the picture and each
with several pictures together to make
something that is seen as verisimilitude
presence what Mars would look like to me
you've had one Mars here as I can see
all you need for themselves motivational
but also specially for the public will
support confronted they explicitly look
for back distance that never lasted a a
sense of journey and a tranquility or
surrender so they're doing prospect
lifting all the counters defining where
did we places for people they use this
terms of a frontier be explored and
explain this is nothing trying to get
familiarity novel that explored
exploited balance nicely the key sort of
cultural life bonds of the frontier for
Americans they do this delivery so this
is an example I wanna show you to stage
a vacation and all the process of its
developing done is a knitted a bunch of
things together and then they've done
all of this stuff and then they've done
an algorithm that we situate the point
of view from the lower
they balance the background of the sky
which is particular to retirement
o'clock the style changes tremendous
sense of presence that's actually
meeting sense of presence in another
world because the scientists don't
really value those pictures because they
don't know that there's another to
censor presence like in the video games
doesn't improve working on Mars because
those pictures what would be like to be
a human but it is what it would be like
to be king over others you have to use
the rover the needed seeing is not seen
as a human but seeing on scene and not
only seeing something as something
senior as being you are too kind of
agent it's not just the senior but also
the scene of viewing the viewer that's
why that's the title of what seemed like
the world seemed like overseeing hassle
over the second center presence of the
most highly sought after and as as the
federal indicates he was really
interested
[Music]
so here's a drawing of whether this
language doing this right she hears my
connection here's a rocking chair I need
to do this she said something like the
robot so there's this loop the human
beings are analyzing the rover but
they're also captain
so they have more power over but the
tech no more fights themself
[Music]
so there's an inaccurate integration of
knowing themself to move through the
rubber there's a utility that is
analogous to how organisms and
environments don't usually stay to each
other in each construction our cultural
four mutually shapes people in
environment
Miche construction makes us or
biologically to come to define the
culture layers on symbolic play so we're
in the park and that's contributing
significantly to your social projects
I'd like to name this positive visual
and active participatory no
participatory no I - I believe this
participatory doing those with a series
of folks from the most intensity doesn't
[Music]
you see that she think those want to say
my my weight is always the rope so right
here is the one over my magnets are
right here touches the base of the metal
shoulders by the solar panels right
so I all find the things that tennis
picking up over here laughs or when I'm
taking a picture of something in the
atmosphere that it helps me to kind of
look up being the rover and this is the
front of another researcher talks about
the shape of the two dimensional three
dimensional picture
it changes salience offers a seamless
landscape in a way that triggers a penis
that accepts in the scientist which then
is fed back into the picture there's
something to be said for engaging your
own kinesthetic sense if you take a look
at this 3e you can see how this is
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
working
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
so it's important to note that this
processing pictures
all manipulations of the picture colors
on the draw because they're trying to
trigger massive military presence
they're trying to trigger this epistemic
working presence sensor presence and
proposing to you an order of the panics
the proposition of the electrical
knowledge 15 to vision is dependent on
procedural knowing how to use the rover
which is dependent on this second sense
the epistemic working sense of presence
and that is dependent on a participatory
Miller's being on Mars
the steering against the theory depends
on skills which depend on sea bass which
depends on seeing as the road
this is almost implicitly audacity so we
don't remember we talked about that for
our talks about that in flow what you
need to do is implicitly set up all the
conditions that would distinguish
causation correlation that flexible
value it's very similar to the
scientific experiment you do clear
information is becoming you need a tech
company to pendency between x and y and
falsification matters so he says the
waiting improve implicit learning
believed improve your intuitions of all
this is intuitive the scientist right is
that you said in the flow state
this structure is very similar to
assignment in experimentation and a cute
accent gives the sense of realism flow
you're doing a kind of implicit
experimentation that helps you
distinguish the causal products with the
relation well the science they do a
twisting science they're explicitly
working with the rover to distinguish
college from the college to the optimal
rippin flow they're doing the flow is
advantageous for you all that happy we
understood the proposition into the
procedure into the perspective of the
participatory and then they're doing
science the distribution that causal
patterns from the correlational that's
why the sensors
see ya depends on seeing as over to
respect our just for going to generates
and
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
he does protect them deafness people
don't initially find it to have any
surveillance purposes it doesn't look
like maybe realistic but mostly they get
a sensible present and then they stay
there
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
and they don't get dirty so I think
imagination
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
interesting is what's interesting the
challenge
[Music]
[Music]
potential trying to get the flow is the
scope of things about which we didn't do
that kind of distinctive distinction
between all eligible powers is greatly
expanded by explicit science in a way
that it's not it's much more localized
in flow precisely there's a compelling
boundaries to universe or the mediums
building fire
[Music]
well I think by army there was but I
don't I think it's pretty clear that the
enemies would be honored if this - I'm
not getting into the post so there's a
lot of but they are because other sense
of realness and this other presence and
that's why did the participants were
known as California it's doing a
question
[Music]
[Applause]