hello and welcome to the first
possibility during the pandemic where I
am going live every night at 6:00 until
6:40 at the accounting member if that's
earliest or latest six to 6:40 you might
go later we might go that's that's the
idea oh you know what happened
I had this open and another in another
tab so we're at stellar from day one for
Easter which is the whole point so going
live figuring out how to gather with
audience participation if possible how
we create a better world together how we
actually create the infrastructure the
system that we need your cute couple oh
he's my little brother
so also right because that's from
periscopes people don't know that that
makes sense
um my name is Jubilee I have a youtube
channel called Jubilee saves the world
by meandering through life this is my
brother Adriel together we are part of
together tech a technology cooperative
that is figuring how do I create the
technology together and work together to
create projects that have meaning is
that about anything you want to add to
that I can't think of like a slightly
longer version it's either that or
talking for five minutes oh no it's fine
okay cool so during the pandemic there's
tons of people who are doing art and
singing and playing and dancing and I
love it and that's not what I'm getting
into the world I'm participating in that
because it fuels my soul but what I feel
I can give the world is a conversation
and a ideas that actually generate
change that bring us together and create
solutions that matter and so that is
what I have been involved in that's what
together tech is involved in and in my
vision
I want everyone to be able to
participate and everyone meaning the
audience to be able to be part of what
does that look like for you because we
can't yet with the current technology
work with dozens or hundreds of people
to create it but we can all have
feedback on what that actually looks
like how do we create on the fly the
thing that we work that we can work
through as a group however big that
group is while we're the group we are so
always looking to to bring in more
people and so where do we go from there
we have that is the slightly bigger
picture I will tell you what I am up to
its solution raising what we've been up
to a solution raising and then we'll see
we'll see what happens after that unless
a drill you have something else you
would like to I don't have different
co-hosts different people joining me
because this is a lot for anyone to do
every night so having the same person
joined every night but anyone is welcome
to be a co-host as long as here you know
we're working through the world should
not necessarily individual but I
don't know we're gonna see we're gonna
let it unfold well we figure out how to
great possibility and pandemic fix the
world Friday's all the hype um you're
gonna need to keep me on track dater all
I'm also not smoking pot during the day
and my brother is agreed to join me and
I bumped pot right before we came on
because it generates ideas and it's a
reward for a day Hyundai always a day
solution raising is I'm so glad I took
notes because then I just keep doing
brought back without actually get you to
the point so hard to know why this
hasn't been successful yet but it's also
 awesome so let's get started
okay so I don't need to give a history
right we're solution raising came from
that's probably not the most important
thing so crazy is
we get together for an hour and within
an hour we come up with a potential
feasible feasible solution to a sector
to a topic to a I don't know a thing
that we want to talk about I think
sector kind of work so that's it gives
me sort of that high-level yeah so when
we might get more into the focus but the
point is to have a more broad topic so
we've talked about education food
infectious disease community
transportation and labor and during that
hour we spend about 15 minutes talking
about what the world looks like now what
is working and mainly what's not working
we don't focus on that area because
that's what all we talk about is what's
wrong maybe have a little more of that
on this current brand-new catastrophe
but right now we're talking about
education we know what the problem is
then we spend 15 minutes talking about
what our ideal future would look like
individually in our perfect future for
that topic and then we spend 30 minutes
coming up with together something we
actually could do right now if we had
10,000 people and $100,000 and are
creating a solution that is enticing
that isn't pushing one agenda on
everyone it's like creating a solution
for ourselves and inviting the world and
sometimes I mention that's people we
call it with that sometimes I mention it
we don't go up with it you know and I'm
saying forget to mention it so it's
mainly just than 10,000 people $100,000
so we've conducted six of them and
they've been amazing different I mean
all the ladies participate in every
single one of them Adriel you've
participated in two or three two and
then I think we attempted a third but
there was no one at it so - okay
and so I say on and so a lot just uh
coming um I'm gonna talk about what a
brief solution we came up with in each
of them and then you know maybe we can
move in the world together where they
we're done all of that right and if you
want to jump in well I mean well I'm
telling about these different things and
mention something then go for it so for
education after our hour we talked about
organizing existing videos online and
existing his content online to be able
to learn something or gain different
skill levels and our main focus was
gonna be on catering that to learning
styles as it was the most powerful thing
we could do so basically just creating
catalogs for various learning styles
online is something we could do with ten
thousand people a hundred thousand
dollars then during the food one we
talked about an app that would help you
grow food feed that information back
into the system using a lot of existing
tech like Google Maps and sunrise sunset
geography I mean I don't I don't know
what's possible but creating a gardening
purchasing coordinating with your
neighbors and especially recipe sure
with a grocery list a shopping list for
infectious disease we talked about
having a way to safely share your data
so that we we could work together to do
things like map the spread and warn
people and work through you know
operating okay helping people with the
quarantine as well as the importance of
having trustworthy information during a
period like that so having something
that is somewhere you can have a go-to
for trust for the information for
community we talked about we ended up
talking about the physical communities
that people want to be part of that they
live and eaten
maybe work with but more just live
together both say that and we went
through various solutions but we ended
up talking about this really cool idea
of having a platform that facilitated
you to have a group of 100 having a
hundred groups of a hundred each
different group working on a bigger meta
problem for communities in general like
food sovereignty or having visitors
child care during the day right like any
kind of problem that you're gonna want
to solve together as a community is it's
more effective having you get to choose
which group you're in you have a hundred
teams of 100 and then at the end let's
say there's a hundred doctors who are
part of it and there are in one team to
figure out the medical system of their
own communities and how to do that but
then they're also connected to 99 other
doctors and creating a platform in a way
like I just really liked that idea and
find your people space work that part of
that is finding the groups that work
well together finding in either a set of
skill sets that come together or in this
case a common purpose that they come
under that they're all trying to solve
plumbing and community furniture people
space oh and to be so and also as a
community to be able to work through
what actually takes to start a community
so all those the problems but also like
getting through your cities or areas
regulations I'm like can you buy land
can you build on it is it to code is it
to figuring out that process and be able
to share that with each other as a group
I know thank Hoover going through the
one to build the I'm part of definitely
has a lot to share on what it is to go
through the Vancouver process and if you
don't have that yet then you have access
to other people who are also
brainstorming for that same place so
that's what we came up for community for
transportation we talked about a lot of
different things but but a lot of it
wasn't necessarily filled it's feasible
with we have kind of thousand dollars
and 10,000 people two of the things that
stood out to me for the hub which was a
an idea where you create stuff in
various locations whether that's your
home your office your studio and it gets
shipped to every week and shipped to a
hub and then it's like kind of like a
heartbeat stuff comes in and stuff goes
out to everyone and it can happen daily
it can happen so it's it's about just
redistribute it within that region so
being able to make soup in your in your
you know in your house and you not want
to know that people like a marketplace
slash hub and creating the delivery
system and stuff and that we something
be really cool during this pandemic and
it's also just shipping things to people
but also figuring out is it safe can we
how do we track it whatever not quite so
that's the transportation then for labor
we talked about with this solution of a
platform that helps you coordinate
volunteers that people want to be do we
want to be helping and so to be able to
facilitate that process from
organizations and from startups is
powerful especially since we've talked
about together tech having it be a
central um I lost my champ out there
something somebody talked about together
tech labor so he oh and as well as one
of the other options for labor was a was
a I don't have it down here
winner is like TaskRabbit and stuff
called the I want to say piecemeal
economy but I can't remember with that
work sharing no okay gig economy yes the
gig economy having a labor platform
right where you're able to see the
transparency of what that is how much
the person is getting paid how do we
make sure the workers are getting the
best well people are getting the best
deal how do you actually facilitate that
process and by coordinating on a
platform does most of the work for them
so most of the labor can be directly
paid and not you know you spend 10 hours
to find 10 hours of cleaning it actually
just they you know facilitating to help
you find it and so those were the
six topics that we covered and created
different solutions and all of those
solutions are things that at least in a
minimized version is something you
create with 10,000 people and $100,000
and it's about figuring out that process
of how do you find 10,000 people who
then give $10 per 100 thousand dollars
or we crowdfund together and find a
different way to make money but you also
need a threshold of people all of these
things also don't work if only 12 people
are using them
most of these they have to be something
that many people want to use and
coordinate together so that's what we're
not gonna say focusing on this so I'm
gonna now hold the solution raising on
solution raising itself and talk about
that how do we find how do we find
10,000 people how do we get $200,000 but
if we can finding out a way for this
space to be part of that where people
are able to contribute I don't know I
don't even know what that looks like
maybe someone else has that to
contribute what does it look like to
contribute onion and I realize my alarms
been choking because I set off then no
our fire alarm that's the Miles's we
need to see back into the system
we're Donna like why do you create a
fire alarm the troops at you after it's
gone off it's a warning to say like I
now have to stand on a chair and reset
it for five seconds hold it and have
this horrific sound coming out so it
resets it and it's super sensitive so it
goes up every time you cook those to
feel like I get it should be super
sensitive that's a higher safety level
at the same time I don't need to know
that it went off I was here I'd the
place either burnt down and there was
you know or it didn't like you don't
know I having an alarm later like if I'd
been at work and then came back do I
need to know that the alarm went off
because the place is either burnt down
or the problems been solved I just have
this mental image of like this pile of
ashes with a working smoke etc in the
middle going to be by the way there was
a fire beep
whoa-oh
someone said they oh I thought they were
saved they had the coronavirus I was
like what I said like well how do we
help the audience participate ignore the
audience that's ugly audience miss me
it's bad although it's low-key good for
the environment yeah it is people the
economy is bad for the environment but
and it's bad for people like the the how
its currently working for them there is
a benefit to staying at home for
Humanity in a very real way but there's
also a cost to it
he caused in stock chirping it could be
a buzz no I can't unhear it every 30
seconds it is good for the environment
and it's good for a lot of things but it
also isn't people don't know how to
solve this people don't know how to make
a new economy that doesn't run like this
we have to figure that out we have to
figure out how do we actually come
together and create things and
understand things in a way that we can
trust and we can work together and do it
without leaving it up to people who
clearly are not in a position or
designed to they can't help they can't
do what needs to get done because they
don't have the will of the people right
like you're gonna piss off everyone so
you're in a position where you have to
make decisions for other people instead
of us making them together us trying
them together in a way that we want to
be part of as much as we can because now
it's also a little bit dire like we need
to figure out how we run a world without
the current economy because the current
economy might not come back and we can
create something so much better in its
place if we're willing to work together
and figure out what that looks like and
how we move towards it and I got my own
idea it's role in this Lucia Brizzi but
the more that this time period can be
I don't know what that looks like
a dream take away what does that look
like what we're talking about how to
capitalize on the current moment for the
purpose of moving these kind of projects
forward that's it how do we make
billions of dollars off the backs of
other people I know I'm fine
just how do we Union case it's to
advance something that you know will
hopefully help make this sort of issue
not as much of an issue in the future to
actually help us be able to prepare for
things instead of just you know shave
off every little cent that we can off of
ace a supply line to maximize profits
while making it fragile as hell yeah so
I don't know if I'm able to explain this
profit versus purpose in our current
economy we've maximized profit but with
competition so there's a lot of
different actors competing within the
same market and because of marketing
costs because just an off well the cost
that comes into competition right that I
did we all need to run our own place we
all need to do our own secret R&D and
try to compete each other there is a
they get as close to like the edge as
possible for not being profitable
they're taking them up like the highest
risk in order to be able to compete with
other people who are doing the same
and so we've maximized for profit but
within a competitive marketplace where
that competition has a benefits but it
also comes at a cost
the other option there's many options
but is to create for maximum purpose
which I believe we can almost always do
together better because you don't need
the competition to come up with the best
thing if you have a different system
they can come up with with a best thing
better than the current one that's
maximising for profit
because you don't have to be the best
you have to be the most profitable which
is not the same creating a system where
you are the best because you're looking
at including everyone in creating a
better one you're looking at including
everyone in sharing in the cost in the
risk and figuring out how to like you
don't really have competition right
because you're not trying to market
you're just like how do we solve this
for you
you don't need to market that you just
have to like start with people and they
will go out and spread the word because
it solves it for them and yeah under my
point that once but profit versus
purpose that that is how we create
solutions is by focusing on the purpose
together instead of the profit which
currently is what the system is based on
and it gives us what we currently have
which is this level of innovation that
comes at a high environmental and social
cost and this level of all of the ripple
effects of that of which our economy
needed to stand still free because we're
biological beans who have to at least
pretend we care about each other
I don't know what would have happened if
our politicians had actually not done
this right if they had said no we're not
shutting down the economy it's not hot
like people can't stay home that doesn't
work and just kept going because it
comes at a great human cost including
our emotions it's like ease and stuff
but they didn't and now we're dealing
with this which is a very what's the
word like the feedback is very rapid we
do they when you do something wrong you
can see what happens by looking at at
Italy and it didn't go wrong for very
long they did you know he didn't wait
that long to lock things down they made
the decision then the world the rest of
the world had to as well like oh this is
what is going toughen what needs to
happen
they're busy dealing with that when
have no capacity to do to deal with that
they don't know what to do they don't
even understand the economy as it was
running really
so understanding something that is very
complex and basically runs itself for
profit and only for profit so when you
take profit out it doesn't run itself
but we can see this new thing I think
emerging of people taking ownership
using the tools they have using Facebook
starting groups of how do we support
each other how do we get our neighbors
food how do we do but these things
because they didn't have the capacity to
do it took days two weeks to create
right like you keep knowing three months
ago it was like okay this pandemic is
gonna hit we're gonna have this happen
and so we need to have these things in
place it's happening on the fly and the
more we can create a system to deal with
these kind of things on the fly so we
can work together the better off the
better off we are so what does that look
like how do we create that how do we
fund it together how do we work through
that process in a way that we're gonna
trust the outcome we're gonna trust the
product that comes out of that right how
open is that process does this look like
us creating that where they grew a
smaller group of people with people
commenting and spitballing ideas and you
know working together does it like
create a democratic system we can create
literally anything because roots doesn't
mean it's gonna be the thing that stays
it's just playing with it in our hands
and then eventually trying something
when it's less risky which literally
anything's less risky no as long as
we're staying inside solving problems
everything's less risky now and
everything that we have to figure out we
self it figure it anyway we have to
figure out how people's rent gets paid
while there can't work it's a large
fraction of the populations like that
how do you get your medicine how do you
get your food how do you stay home how
do you deal with your family I live day
in and day out basis how do you you know
deal with any of that and we can be
dealing with that stuff what could that
look like and we could be dealing with
the bigger future we
wanna create together herbicide it's
just gonna be me talking to myself it's
still easier having a second person
because I have sound wardens somebody
sort of looking for co-hosts for for all
of these oh the time periods great well
you know I'd love although that's that's
less for you guys and totally for me is
I really love exploited the technology
cooperative idea to people and having
them pick holes part like who haven't
heard about it before right right they
kind of ask the same questions
it helps that was actually I was gonna
do up like that's not a real idea for a
blog partner what's Rogan yeah so having
a podcast but every episode is somebody
interview like that's maybe not the most
interesting but I like two weeks ago I
had Edward on the one of these things
for wiki election and that was like the
best one I've done by far oh cool yeah
no it's so much easier having another
person and being real and be like ask
questions as I'm going you know and
explaining things and so we're possibly
somebody in the audience has questions
you can get an actual question in we've
sort of ended up going through
everything and it was a long one but it
was good like it was yeah it was very
happy I did afterwards and now I'm like
I kind of want more people to
participate and sort of doing the same
thing where it's like here's that the
topic is the project and the goal is
just to get a bunch of feedback did you
explain it you know the different
aspects of it and then to get feedback
and sort of a constant iteration of
improving your ability to explain it
yeah absolutely except that I don't like
I can't consciously learn it it has to
be like muscle memory we people to do an
esky the same path to got it again
alright
I've just been building a Google slides
document like in each session I just
kind of go through it you know the same
three sections four sections so I think
between topics rooks okay feel like I
can't do that for like the bigger tech
cooperative but I think I can do that
for every individual project my brother
my braid sparks be like hey like
solution raising right I can do that for
a solution because the big tech project
is what we're creating together from the
baby from the seed so I have my idea
what it looks like but doesn't look like
that right it looks like what's the next
thing we can do what's the next thing
like this can be so much fun to create
together but people have to get through
the slightly shitty or part of this
current crisis first yeah but that I
actually know people need like they're
gonna need to takes a few days to a week
to two weeks to like sit in it and be
with it but if we can meet people where
they are and have people actually part
of the project in their current
emotional state like that's part of why
I'm doing this from 6 to 640 every night
is there's gonna be days where it's a
comment I'm better or worse oh people
people I'm gonna put it up this is read
these ideas or exchange existing company
ideas or both what it would take a lot
well we're there's so many things
happening so how do you things happening
we're creating the tech Walker team
together and trying to find out other
projects to bring on board to say how
did how do we how are we how do we
create something together that actually
facilitates us as individuals and us as
people or part of projects and my
project is solution raising which is
what I went through for the first 10 15
minutes of what solution raising is and
what we came up with together
over the course of I guess six hours
because there are six different
conversations and so I'm here that's
what I'm doing in the world outside of
being here from 6 to 640 hey Charles
creating a collection and I don't did I
answer the question it's the others then
I don't I mean the vibe I get from the
question is sort of what's the best way
to do it and I think it's just everyone
does what they think the best thing will
be so we're doing a co-op other people
will try to change the existing
infrastructure and prove how companies
operate you know and possibly make them
a bit more resilient to these kind of
issues and then we see what shakes OH
like our world's not going back to the
way cows back to the way it was I don't
think maybe a little more for dooming
boomer like I think things are a little
worse than they are in some ways and a
little better than they are in other
ways but a lot of the jobs aren't gonna
be there when we go back so we still
have to figure out how to run an economy
when we have a huge workforce not
working and that also there's a lot of
jobs we actually don't need in our
economy they're not the essential ones
they aren't the things that kept it
going and that's what we're also like
our governments are kind of figuring
that out they're figuring out what is
the essential part what is here
well we deal with something that is huge
and yet not the worst this could be so
much worse than it is
and it could not be happening but then
we wouldn't have our mini apocalypse to
learn from ah yeah I know on periscope
it's it's like that we're on um both
periscope and YouTube I'm doing this
every night the idea is hopefully people
will be joining and participating and
getting more of an idea I'm like I don't
know if anyone participating occupy the
Occupy movement but they have like two
meetings a day where nothing really got
done because everyone had to speak and
everything had to get voted on and you
weren't out the last ones who didn't
know what was going on but couldn't
figure out we're gonna figure out how to
do something together here or have a
conversation as generative or talk about
big lofty ideas that we never quite get
to but then you know figure out just
like the next little piece but I would
love to have a platform that we were
able to co-create together with 10,000
people and had those people giving $10 a
month so that they were part of like
what would that look like for you what
would that one of the questions in
you make a group this week that I asked
was if what is coming is coming our
we're staying inside for how we're meant
we need to stay inside for and the
impact that has on the economy is the
impact that has on the economy the
number of people who died or the number
of people who died and we have to mourn
them and and and figure out where we go
from there what world would make that
worth it what world would make what's
coming and what we're currently going
through enough of a beautiful future
that you would actually sign up for this
you would actually sign up to spend this
time at home and to sacrifice the number
of humans that are gonna be sacrificed
and recreate something that works for
everyone
what does that look like to you like
what does that you know entail Thanks
you're ten I don't come on very often
just Paris goes where I started though
it's where I started to feel someone
okay being on camera by myself you know
there's literally basically never anyone
there but every so often so by yourself
with you know I don't know but I'll buy
myself online there'd be like one or two
people which is like the worst first go
because be like the only one there it's
like the spotlights on you as well right
some people don't hang out but then once
you start getting them higher numbers
and more people are watching we have see
forty minutes go super fast almost eight
minutes figuring out let's say have
written here but no it's Thea that we're
building this on the fly as we go
figuring out what it looks like to be
part of these and so I will be on here
talking to myself who needs me from six
to six forty because that's part of this
is figuring that piece out I will
hopefully because anyone can call in and
be on video so it could be people
popping or they know like on periscope
but on video so you could actually also
but it on Mountain voice like just not
have the camera and have voice I won't
understand as well but if people want to
join like that and be part of asking
questions and comments because this is
what I won't do and if there aren't
participants we can we can participate
in well that'd be kind of cool it's a
better need to be an hour but doing a
solution raise doing the solution
raising on solution raising here but
then that's already gonna be a high
level of people wanting to participate
in like it has to be from the pool of
people very participated I think I think
you should have participated in one or
watched a few of them in order to party
probably yeah you know you're not
necessarily gonna know what is a
solution raising like I very much like I
want everyone to be able to create one
like you want to create actual potential
solutions within an hour and then yes
they're not real in the world but all of
those things I went through at the
beginning are amazing and
they're possible like they're our world
gets better with every single one of
them like who wouldn't sign up for an
education system where you get to learn
in your learning style and it helps you
find what is gonna make sense to your
brain and you get to follow the path
that you want to to learn a new skill or
to be able to coordinate with your
neighbors and grow food and eat cheaper
better food no thank you
feel like you're part of it you get to
co-create with or you just get to pay
for it but like the people who are
co-creating it that's what they want to
be doing it's like yes please
I want to make help make a food app I
want to have those conversations
having want to say the infectious
disease one even though it's also
awesome like it's all we're dealing with
but having a way to share and data to
make this safer to make it so doctors
can coordinate with one another and we
can see where the infection is and where
it's going to have that extrapolates and
what the different cities and countries
are doing and what effect that's having
may be catchy that without a thousand
dollars that wasn't baby a little over
the top but like it's who says it starts
with a hundred thousand if you do a
crowdfunding campaign you get a million
you get 10 million like those things are
possible when people have trust in a
system when they have trust in just
voting for something different just like
dear God sort of knowing that like the
operating principle but behind it isn't
something that'll end up being bad like
you know pure profit they don't really
care about anything else like actually
providing a decent service I feel like
the community sorry I was not listening
it's library 30 I did a lot but the
hundred one hundred times one hundred
problem solving with the community
solution we came up with the first one
we came up with that I I wasn't a big
fan of of like having 50 people do it
and having the other
9950 people watching and contributing in
some way that doesn't work for that that
does work for this having 50 of us or 10
of us or however many like working
together to solve one of these right
what is the task how do we break it down
how do we do this how do we work
together in a team of 10 but having a
larger audience supporting it and
participating in it when when possible
right to say what they want together to
have things like zoom meetings on the
weekends that are like on the weekends
but having a zoom meetings on where
people don't have to participate live
online but this becomes effectively like
our up the SS it's out of the 6 o'clock
slot but just that it becomes like a
board meeting right we aren't like so
boring not working so worried but having
it be like yes we're working through
actually creating the right doing
the project craziness doing solution
raisins doing the task division and this
thing needs to get done like right now
what needs to get done for this hour is
if we do figure out a process or we're
like this is last yesterday on right
where you can know and be able to catch
up to what has happened it's important
that's what I need someone else to do
because I'm not doing that like I can
tree watch them and do a what is it
called shortened for
of inwards now summary doing a summary
of each different segment which is also
part of keeping them somewhat shorter
and not staying on hours as he sometimes
still on periscope but this could be a
what occupy wasn't like actually coming
together once a day and creating
something by the end of this that we
want to be part of it just depends on
who comes on when who wants to be a part
of that and who can we create it in a
way that people want to watch it and
participate in it or not and then we
figure out how we and you know it's
watching the five people creating
something but the five people are still
creating something and still creating am
well its crowd funding campaign like
creating a crowdfunding campaign during
this forty minutes every night over the
course of six to eight weeks would be
huge we'd have you know especially if we
also had 10,000 people or a thousand or
I mean any number of people want it
depending on how how highly they were
participating the usual we have people
with time on their hands without money
because the people who are working for
home don't really have more time on
their hands I guess they'll have more
flexibility they could duck out for 40
minutes
do those daily on their lunch hour
training where their time zone is yeah
we can do something big together or not
and I'll just be me showing up I'm
talking but I think doing it every night
it's funny I've had this a similar idea
but it's like never been worth it or
it's not the kind of X here it's like no
bean well other people are singing and
doing other things that entertain us and
make it this this a lighter time doing
stuff that makes people feel useful and
let's actually get their ideas out into
the world and how do we actually create
something there's a ton of stuff happy
to deal with the actual pandemic but not
the stuff that's coming down the
pipeline not had me feel what the next
thing how do we create the system if we
had known this was coming in a year's
time what would we have wanted to have
in place beyond of course having
respirator is having a bit later you
know was this but you knew it was
something there was a big catastrophe
that was gonna happen that the world was
gonna have to band together for what
would you have wanted to be in place so
that we could make decisions together so
that we could empower each other to stay
inside when we wanted to and work
through why you don't want to and how
can we like we can work through things
more easily together that our government
ever can because they don't have the
will of the people we have the will of
the people if we're willing to work with
it right if we if ten thousand people
come together and create a solution
those ten thousands people will is will
is embedded in them like it's they're
gonna want to do what they came up with
even if it's against when they
themselves had wanted more easily than
it coming from a top-down structure
right like where you're like yeah I
don't want to stay inside but yeah
you're right we have to stay inside and
your people outside of the ten thousand
are likely to do believe it and listen
because they can see the pros us and see
wow that was decided and I don't why
that would have to be ten thousand but
like the prettiest he created in a way
that it's it's trustworthy processes
trustworthy and what would we wanted to
have in place for this and how would
what kind of resilient world wouldn't
have had this collapse and how do we
help but not collapse because it doesn't
need to it's only an economy it's not
our food it's not our actual like he we
can create something so much better from
what was always kind of a hamster wheel
just going going going going we don't
have time to even think about what's
going on just keep we're all kind of
having to take a pause and realizing
we're all on hamster wheels like there's
a tiny portion of our economy that
actually is needed is truly needed to
keep people alive to keep the rest of it
some of it is is cool and the end
like how what is needed what is actually
good for us and the planet and how do we
create more of that so that we can use
it and then yeah also where the
weaknesses that we're getting hit from
and like how do we make sure that at
least those particular you know gaps are
plugged even had your the the current
model but also just to build a list of
okay anything that we do in the future
has to keep this in mind because you
know it may not have been obvious to
stockpile masks or to do something for
certain groups or like okay so we got
hurt from that that wasn't a good thing
let's learn from that and yeah had
anything like it it's not wasn't
necessarily gonna be a respiratory drug
like what our knowing that you won't
have a perfect solution
what sort of is the ideal level of
preparation for costs really like okay
so we need masks maybe not
the perfect number for right now but
like enough that if it's something in
this area we have it covered and as a
big enough scale that like okay and
we're talking about hospitals all over
the world so but people yes yes it is
and then everyone's trying to it's
competition it's like my people are more
important instead of like no how do we
actually get enough yeah how do we
actually create enough masks that we can
you know what I mean send them to the
hardest-hit right now so we know there's
more coming down the pipeline and the
truth is we don't the truth is is right
now we have no idea how to do that we
can commandeer factories we can make
them produce and because people who want
to produce but like even access to that
level of that you can do that and that's
possible is scary
that's going to piss a lot of people off
and that's yeah you're right but if we
were like hey we need masks who do we
call a dear yes call the factory owners
right can you make this no okay to go to
the next factory there's gonna be a
factory who will make it and especially
at a time like this and then how do you
make all the factories doing that how do
you have enough that when people are
potentially sick and can't go to work
and we're trying to self isolate and how
do you how do you do any of this and
this is a very weird event like it's
weird we don't know how to deal with
this we don't know how to deal with in
this level and so what could have been
in place to deal with that right to
understand the science to understand the
history or like you don't even know
what's gonna be helpful so to have one
place that is like here's the DNA
sequence here's how it folds up here's
how it in filtration cell here's how
here's how other things infiltrating the
cell we don't actually know how that you
know here's all the different way things
we know here's how the measles doesn't
here's oh tuberculosis or whatever it
happens to be right that we can have
systems in place that help us with this
one and then the next one we're like hey
we've totally planned for a pandemic now
do the best we can then the next thing
hence we plan for that thing but it's
like every time we deal with something
we get better and better at it when it's
not done for this like soul-crushing
competition of like Canada's gonna be
the first one to come up with a vaccine
I don't care can you just pop the one
faster like cult-like or can we just
figure out how to get the ventilators we
have to work for two three eight people
right like how what is the limit how can
we make them work that way because
people already working on that but it's
like ska to go through the FDA no it
doesn't it suck air doesn't get the air
I don't know intervention laters do but
like come on does it work right because
if it's it's this thing snow works and
it's just the intern air in the air
going in a know it's like well one in a
million one in a thousand breaks down
okay but those people would die anyway
so we would instead of having a 50,000
people die we have 5,000 people die
right we're gonna have to take chances
during this that's if they follow
bureaucracy it's gonna cost lives
because they can't think outside the box
they can't innovate and I think there's
a way that we can help them with that
way we can help them with that to be
like like the they did they was a part
to a respirator that wears out or you
have to use for each person as there
were three deep wrenching them and the
person I remember what it was but they
were like we're gonna sue that's a good
luck with that
you're really gonna sue because we saved
lives could you have produced I'm in the
time period could be put in an order
like what no no thank you
take that BS back to that back okay so
Slater then we will normally go so let's
wrap it up so I'm going to be coming
live every every day from 6:00 to 6:00
47 Standard Time whatever this time is
for you it's about ten minutes after
that so about 15 minutes ago it's gonna
go like why does that matter this one
per se let's move on pre watching this
free watching and that's not gonna make
any sense who cares
okay restart let's do a retake let's
just start all again oh I'm gonna be
doing this every night they'll be
hopefully other people and you know
co-hosting all the words so wrong
co-creating co-facilitating be than the
other box the other yeah the other thing
and everyone is invited to come in come
into space and we are going to create
actual solutions that make this world
function technology solutions
cooperative solutions just things we can
trust things that makes sense because
that's how my brain wants things to work
and now the world's not working so if
they don't know how to fix it I think we
can figure out a way together so thank
you and well I'll see you tonight okay