the intellectual dark web was first
named by the mathematician and physicist
Eric Weinstein on Sam Harris's waking up
podcast in January 2018 it attempted to
join together an unlikely group of
intellectuals and alternative media
personalities all the way from
psychologist jordan peterson to
podcaster and martial arts commentator
Joe Rogan figures from across the
political spectrum but all supposedly
united by their willingness to have open
and difficult conversations the name
stuck interest in the phenomenon quickly
spread far and wide
with many thousands joining the
conversation online welcomed by some
ridiculed by others and even questioned
by some in the group it's like a herd of
cats right because so I thought about
well what what what unites us to the
degree that there's an us because that's
not so self-evident there's enough of an
us so that the name emerged and it's
stuck so so there's something in common
because otherwise the name wouldn't have
stuck right you can't name nothing it
doesn't work so what is the intellectual
dark web people in the group tend to
reject orthodoxy tend to reject ideology
tend to be interested in first
principles thinking meaning that if you
you don't take something on faith it's a
very smart concept to try to corral a
very difficult group of very disparate
people into one orbit I think everybody
who's being described as a member that I
the IDW probably has among other things
one thing in common which is they all
are used to being held at for saying
things that are self-evident how old
that in public only to then discover
that the public come up to them in
private and say thank you so much for
saying what we
I would say it is actually the
manifestation of the process of thinking
that's more important than the
conclusions that are generated you need
a group of people who are willing to say
hey you know you made a better point I
changed my mind and I've learned
something that I didn't think about and
that kind of integrity in a conversation
is what characterizes a lot of the
internal IDW discussion to me it's that
people agree not on their positions they
may not even agree as to what the facts
are but they usually agree as to what
constitutes conversation the
intellectual darkweb seemed like
something Eric Weinstein came up with on
the spur of the moment but it wasn't it
had been years in the making part of me
wants to work quietly and part of me
realizes that we have to work in some
public facing capacity and I personally
have found it much more comfortable to
have a private life to not have
everything that I'm thinking broadcast
to a large audience but I think we've
run out of time and so I think some of
us are somewhat reluctantly choosing to
make a different call now I think that
with the current administration and the
White House you're seeing a real
discontinuity with the past and it
wasn't the discontinuity that I was
hoping for we had to break with the past
and I think that the way in which we are
now breaking with the past is so
destructive nobody knows what to believe
nobody quite knows what's true nobody
knows where to turn this is not a
tenable situation and so either we're
going to descend into some kind of
permanent chaos or there is going to be
have to be something that we reboot from
and that thing cannot be simply left or
simply right and that's one of the
reasons the IDW is hopeful to me this is
the origin story of the IDW
[Music]
what started off this path that I find
myself on is that I was curious about
certain things curious about the world
and I wanted to ask a bunch of questions
about well really pretty much everything
and I find that if you keep asking why
questions you eventually either a get
tired or B become a theoretical
physicist or mathematician and so many
of the deepest questions led to a kind
of disciplined way of thinking about the
world where we see all of the complexity
in the world around us as being built up
from very simple and beautiful patterns
and I think was my desire to contribute
to that story in particular with
theoretical physics that began my path
but at the time that I really emerged as
an adult theoretical physics was in a
great deal of difficulty in trouble and
I think as I came to understand that
there was a big story that was going to
affect everything that I cared about it
was gonna affect the markets it was
gonna affect our families our sense of
ourselves our security and that story is
the story of what happens when humans
get addicted to high levels of broadly
distributed stable technology let growth
and then are denied the ability to
continue on that path that means that
you're set up potentially for war for
civil unrest for communism if people try
to grab what their neighbor has or
fascism if people try to maintain order
at all costs I define this thing called
an ego or an increment embedded growth
obligation and an embedded growth
obligation is how fast the structure has
to grow in order to maintain its honest
positions so if you have a situation in
which you have trial lawyers and they're
supported by various associates and the
associates all want to become partners
and trial lawyers themselves
what you have is you have a situation
where the law firm has to grow at a very
fast clip if all those people are going
to be satisfied with their job decisions
well very quickly that ability to grow
runs out and then people want to know
why am i stuck in a position going
nowhere
well the same thing was happening in
theoretical physics examining in
mathematics it was happening in the
pension funds it was happening
absolutely everywhere except for a small
number of places like startups and hedge
funds which were a period of time were
able to buck that trend and as I came to
understand that we were in some sort of
society-wide Ponzi scheme since the late
60s early 70s and that there was no way
to continue to grow our way out using
the previous tools I started to
understand that society was going to be
lying about almost everything at almost
all times and that's a very terrifying
thought to have we have effectively
entered a period in which we cannot
trust our experts and I think that what
began as a desire to contribute and to
do real work ended with an understanding
that we've got two generations of
institutional experts that are corrupted
and that we cannot wake up from this
crazy fever dream that we're all in
because we can't figure out who we can
still trust the doctors are compromised
the professors are compromised the
journalists are compromised the
politicians are compromised about the
only thing that isn't badly compromised
are people with an independent source of
sustenance individuals and very small
groups are about the only thing that is
free of this disease of the embedded
growth obligation and so the paradox is
is that the individuals have to save the
institutions that are trying to
extinguish them because the
institution's don't want to hear this
message but in fact if they don't make
use of the tiny number of people
functioning as individuals or in small
organizations all of this is going to
collapse because it cannot continue
along its current at exponential path
that exponential gave out a long time
ago and it's like wily coyote running
off of the cliff as soon as he realizes
that there's nothing holding him up down
we fall there's two games here there's
trying to get the best deck chairs on
the Titanic and there's trying to rescue
the ship and in general nobody can think
of how to rescue the ship which is a
daunting task so instead what we're
doing is we're fighting for position in
a losing game and it's important that
that stop you've you've talked about
this phrase the war on excellence that
sounds like a very counterintuitive or a
very odd thing to be declaring war on
well yeah so it has to do with
excellence in and of itself isn't the
problem the problem is that we don't
realize that excellence is a modality
that is expensive when we pursue
excellence we usually pursue some
activity that has very low variance an
excellent sprinter is going to be
somebody who's times are usually very
tight around their personal best
well those low variance behaviors are at
the cost of high variance behaviors and
most of what I think actually ends up
moving the dial in human history is high
variance human activity so what is it
that allows somebody who's as unreliable
as Jim Watson of double-helix fame to
repeatedly deliver outstanding
discoveries so you you have a guy who
you can't take to any party and on the
other hand a giant chunk of modern
molecular biology is due to him and
biology so you have very high variance
individuals who are maddening they're
difficult they're unpleasant they're
time-consuming but they're able to play
their far-right tail of the distribution
and bring us unbelievable wonders so a
famous example for me is Bill Shockley
who was a eugenicist kind of a bit of a
nutcase with respect to certain ideas
too many on the other hand you know he
was one of the prime reasons that we got
the semiconductor and built an industry
around it and if you think about all of
the things that are done with
transistors you know a lot of them go
back to Bill Shockley okay well are we
willing to give up our semiconductors in
order to protest Shockley's excesses in
the field of eugenics I in general and
not I'm willing to tolerate a lot of
eccentricity and difficult behavior and
unpleasant people and I think it's
absolutely imperative that we realize
that as a society we are standing on the
shoulders not only of giants but of
jerks of unseemly people very marginal
individuals who have nevertheless
contributed much of the genius that
undergirds our modern productive society
and I think it's absolutely appalling
that we don't even know our own history
to know this uncomfortable relationship
and how important it is to allow in high
variance individuals into a world which
now attempts to shut them out by
claiming that we need excellence at all
costs and highly agreeable people with
very small variants this is a a one-way
ticket to irrelevance see nature
provides a lot of very difficult people
who are very disagreeable with very high
variances particularly the learning
disabled community has very high
variance and I believe that they're not
eliminated eliminated from the gene pool
for a reason I believe that they're
there to be the innovators and so we're
killing our own innovative class with
all of these extra requirements
for collegiality or diversity or some
kind of regularity because often
everybody on the team has one idea and
the idea that you need is that one guy
who won't go along so how do we get
people who are if you know the Asch
conformity experiment ash-
that is that they don't go along with
what everybody's pretending to claim as
their own perspective on each card there
are several lines your task is a very
simple one you're to look at the line on
the left and determine which of the
three lines on the right is equal to it
in length two two two two
the subject denies the evidence of his
own eyes and yields to group influence
we also want people who are Milgram
negative if you know the Milgram
experiment like Stanley Milgram if you
make an error however you'll be punished
with an electric shock so of course it
is to your advantage that you learn all
these word pairs as quickly as possible
completely you want people who when
asked to push the bus buzzer to
administer an electric shock tell the
experimenter to buzz off rather than the
people who go along with it when they're
assured that they will not be held
personally responsible so in part you
have to recognize that heroic behavior
comes from a group of people who in
general are viewed as somewhat unsavory
by the mainstream and that's fine what
makes you so certain that those kind of
individuals are not part of the
establishment at the moment well first
of all even where they are part of the
establishment at the moment they talked
to us in hushed tones like oh you don't
know how bad it's gotten I can't say
that anymore fifteen years ago I could
say that now I could lose my job like
you're actually those people are still
there but they're not free to think and
the penalty for like a single misstep me
even imagine that you have a bad thought
you say a bad thing well is that the end
of your career we're gonna dispose of hi
Bill
people because they may they told an
off-colored joke in the wrong setting
like that's insane
I don't know how to how to say it like
you could have somebody who might be on
the verge of a cure for cancer and if
they told some joke that offended
somebody's gender sensibilities that
person could be out of a job well that's
insane and it's very important to
understand that level of intolerance of
fragility has to be driven out of the
institutions that require these high
agency individuals and is your sense
that that process of excellence keeping
out genius is actually a civilizational
threat or is is partly to do with the
the situation that we find ourselves in
yeah I mean let's just let's just talk
about disagree ability as a trait right
now we have all sorts of things that
need people to say no to them and to
point the way support something else no
we should not be pushing for citizenship
for everyone in the in the country who's
here illegally no we should not be
allowing the claim that Islam is the
religion of peace and therefore the
least close to any kind of violent act
obviously they've got a problem and we
they need our help and we need their
help we need to be talking about these
things obviously trade is extremely
redistributed and to claim that it makes
that it makes a rising tide which raises
all boats is malpractice for an
economist to mouth those words we need
to clean house for people who are lying
obviously lying about very simple things
and the only people who are likely to be
those the people are going to say that
are going to be people with their own
theories they're going to be people who
are highly disagreeable highly creative
and somewhat self-destructive we want
those people rather than the
excellent people and that's our problem
it's a plague and it's not that
excellence is bad it's that we have way
too many excellent people in proportion
to the numbers of geniuses and heroes in
the population
so we'll write was an evolutionary
biologist and a beautiful and analogy of
this called a fitness landscape and his
perspective was when you're doing things
mostly right you can figure out how to
do them a little bit better by figuring
out what gets you a slightly better
outcome with small variations so this
was analogized to climbing a little hill
of fitness but if you imagine that
fundamentally you're pretty close to the
top and the really high fitness peak is
across a valley that you have to go down
to go up what does that feel like in
terms of an innovator how does an
innovator experience well
you might see yourself maxing out your
credit cards you might see your
relationship in tatters you might see
that you've over-promised and
under-delivered and you've got only two
weeks to come up with a solution and
you've got nothing the kinds of people
who are willing to take on those sorts
of assignments are going to be very
frightening to the general population
and great that's wonderful we have to
make sure that those people have a home
in science in startups in journalism and
sense-making and anything innovative so
that fundamentally you don't get these
levels of consensus around total
nonsense that keep cropping up inside of
the institutional framework
I think what they do is they construct
very durable narratives about people who
refuse to go along so in general when I
hear the word consensus my initial hit
on the word consensus is negative why is
that it's because if everybody agrees
that something is true like two plus
three equals five you don't need a
consensus nobody talks about the
arithmetic consensus everybody who
doesn't subscribe to the arithmetic
consensus goes nowhere they can't build
a house they can't you know I handle
money okay
so there is no need to call it the
arithmetic consensus on the other hand
if things are actually open-ended very
rare for people to all bunched together
around one set of tentative ideas so
what you find is that in general you
would expect a cacophony of people each
with their own pet ideas when things are
genuinely uncertain or you would find
everybody falling in line when more or
less it's clear that that the world goes
one particular way so in general I think
what's going on with the consensus is
that a consensus is usually achieved
through some sort of incentivizing
people as the as the mobs the violent
mobs in Mexico say Plateau Oh Plomo do
you want silver or do you want lead so
you're given a certain amount of
encouragement to come to a particular
perspective maybe in terms of grant
money or speaking opportunities and
you're given a disincentive which is
this is what's going to happen to your
career if you don't fall in line and so
using a plateau aplomb Oh model you
suddenly get a lot of people pretending
that they all agree to some kind of
consensus position consensus thinking
almost destroyed the financial system in
2008 Eric had been warning about the
danger of mortgage-backed securities
since 2002 I got very involved in
economics tried to bring some of the
discipline that came from theoretical
physics and differential geometry
into neoclassical economic theory or
some of the first people to become
alarmed about the role of
mortgage-backed securities and their
ability to potentially blow up the world
economic system by 2008 it had become
clear to everyone that we built a
massive society wide fiction which the
mandarins had called the Great
Moderation and this is one of the things
that gives me confidence that when large
numbers of well credentialed and
well-spoken experts sitting in the most
powerful positions in your society all
agree on something you should not be
intimidated or cowed
because what's quite possible is that
groupthink has taken over the entire
system and after 2009 when we held a
conference at the Perimeter Institute
where we tried to bring in people from
outside the financial community to look
at the financial crisis welcome to the
economic Manhattan Project I got a very
good view of why and how the individual
expert communities resist visitors from
other fields because the visitors from
other fields don't have any allegiances
and the people who were in that
particular field have built up two very
defensive positions so I I got a chance
to see well what happens when you bring
mathematicians computer scientists
theoretical physicists corporate
executives to look at the financial
crisis the guys who are actually doing
finance get very freaked out and they
circle the wagons
people sense that there's something
about the incentive structures that
makes the conclusions untrustworthy even
when the conclusions are right and
sometimes the conclusions of the
consensus are right that's not the issue
I think climate is a situation which my
guess is is that the climate consensus
is probably correct in some sense but
many of us are very disturbed by our
ability to see incentives pushing people
to hold certain conclusions so I think I
think that that structure is enforced by
taking anyone who's outside of the
consensus and attaching concepts to
their name so one of the experiments I
tried was controversial professor Paul
Krugman versus controversial professor
or Jordan Peterson Paul Krugman has been
a controversial professor professor for
decades but there wasn't a single hit on
all of Google for the phrase
controversial professor Paul Krugman
because this is one of the tricks inside
of what I called the gut gated
institutional narrative or the Djinn so
in the Djinn the way it works is that
you have these set phrases could be you
know controversial strong man Bashar
al-assad okay well what is that telling
us it's the news media opining that we
should be picking aside and that he
should be on the opposite side so when
you have a situation where the news
media wants to promote somebody like
Paul Krugman they don't call him
controversial professor Paul Krugman
they call him New York Times columnist
or Nobel laureate Paul Krugman but if
it's Jordan Peterson and Jordan hasn't
signed up for some sort of consensus
position he has to be controversial
professor Jordan Peterson now it's true
that he's a controversial professor but
that's actually the gated institutional
narrative special language for telling
the audience who the good guys and the
bad guys are and if you go back to
professional wrestling this would be
called heels and baby faces or faces and
so the idea is that Paul Krugman would
be a face and Jordan Peterson
would be a heel but instead of being
open about the fact that wrestling is a
simulated performance sport in the
journalistic endeavor we pretend the
journalism is actually a search for
truth which I find hysterically
and you've described this as kayfabe in
the past right Lou
can you explain what that is to people
who maybe not heard that sure I think
one of the problems is that we don't
have good language for dealing with
multi-layered deception and the two
places that I thought had pretty good
language where the intelligence
community and professional wrestling so
a professional wrestling was the easier
it's hard to get spooks to give up their
secrets so what I did is I started to
look into professional wrestling and
what our order all of the terms that
they have to maintain to keep track what
the actual storylines are with the
simulated storyline sometimes you have a
simulated storyline that apparently
breaks into actual reality or like
you're breaking the fourth wall but it's
actually a controlled structure where
you're still in a fake story so they
call things that are fake works and they
call things that are real shoots so a a
worked shoot is actually something that
is set inside of a fake storyline is
apparently real and breaks the fourth
wall but is in fact fake so you're
talking about tertiary and eventually
quaternary levels of deception I don't
think the human mind can do much more
than four layers of lie but kayfabe is
the organized structure of lies that
undergirds professional wrestling and is
kept it as a simulated sport for about a
century all sorts of human activity vir
between utter terror and boredom and why
is that well because if something is
actually an unbounded negative potential
experience people are very hesitant to
engage so if two wrestlers
can really do damage to each other
they're gonna circle each other for a
very long time before engaging because
they don't want to risk anything that
they don't have to so you could have
bouts that would go on for four or five
hours and basically nothing happened
well this is true in all sorts of
endeavors people in the know and finance
don't really want to risk their money
so they come up with all sorts of
elaborate ways to make sure that they're
going to be okay no matter what happens
in politics the same is true nobody
wants to simply find that they're out of
a job
because they lost an election so there's
an elaborate revolving door between
politically related occupations like
punditry or lobbying and actually being
a representative so you have all sorts
of fakery that is entitled that is
intended rather to make stable careers
for the participants and to present an
engaging and regular product for those
in the audience and so I believe that in
some sense what you're seeing is what I
call K fabrication where real activities
that are dangerous and or boring tend to
get sanitized by the participants so
that they can present and as if product
to those outside of the structure and
not themselves get hurt and continue to
make money off of it and I think that
that's what happened in professional
wrestling there's a real competition for
airtime for for fame but there's a fake
competition which is a scripted series
of pretend bouts where the decisions are
actually known in advance and that's
very similar to what I see happening in
war and Finance in media and
particularly journalism I think you've
spoken before about the sense that these
systems get weaker and weaker as they
continue why do you think that is which
systems well the political system for
example the it seems that as time has
gone on that the choices that we're
being given in the political system get
weaker and weaker well because you're
driving you're systematically driving
out the people who should be trying to
lead you're making it so unpleasant to
hold real opinions to have real
integrity you're driving the costs of
the specific group of people we need so
that instead the only people who are
going to show up are the people that we
should fear
there's the New York Times article that
came out and kind of named the IDW is
there a kind of paradox in it's no
longer dark what was never dark and that
was a large part of the joke
we have only been dark to one thing and
that thing is the institutional media
and the main platforms be they academic
or governmental so if you will I think
that the mainstream media has pretended
not to notice us as just as they
pretended to find it everything we say
either vapid or or outrageous but I
think that you know what's really going
on is that there's been a monopoly
effectively on narrative held by the
collection of major institutional voices
the true spectrum of thought is far
broader than people have been led to
believe and I think that's where the IDW
comes in that we are it's not that we're
just outside of the Overton Window many
of the points we're making really aren't
found anywhere inside of mainstream
media and established institutions even
though many of these things that we are
talking about are simply commonplace
observations did you have any doubts
about about New York Times article I
mean I had I had an infinite number of
doubts about the New York Times article
part of me wants to work quietly and
part of me realizes that we have to work
in some public facing capacity and I
personally have found it much more
comfortable to have a private life to
not have everything that I'm thinking
broadcast to a large audience but I
think we've run out of time and so I
think some of us are somewhat
reluctantly choosing to make a different
call now so you're talking about a
different way of thinking people who
have a different way of thinking is that
what characterizes the members of the
IDW it's hard to say I mean I would say
that everybody in the IDW is fairly
disagreeable in the
the Big Five personality inventory so
can you hold a position when you're the
only person in a room that believes that
thing like if it's you versus a hundred
people I would say almost everybody in
the core of the IDW is capable of
holding a position where everyone is
against you and I think that that trait
is extremely rare
do you see the IDW is primarily a
political project no I don't I see it
primarily as a precursor to anything
decent it's what has to succeed for us
to have a political conversation I don't
think we're having a political
conversation either internationally or
nationally I think we have people who
are talking about nonsense positions we
just went back to the immigration
position there are only two positions
unconvinced aren't political one is open
borders which is never going to happen
and the other one is closed borders
which is never going to happen and yet
you very often encounter people who are
talking in these terms as if these are
the actual positions so I don't think
that we're having a political
conversation I think that what's been
going on is is that the mainstream media
has been playing keep-away ball right so
this game where you're throwing the ball
over somebody who's trying to catch it
now the public has been trying to get in
on this conversation but what keeps
happening is is that our fake left and
our fake right are engaged in a
completely fake conversation about fake
items including fake news which they
themselves are pushing out and then
claiming to fight fake news so the whole
thing is so saturated in falsehood that
people are waking up to the idea oh I've
forgotten what it sound sounded like for
people to actually have a discussion
about a topic and how much time it takes
you know in general it can't be done
with four or five voices on a panel in
10 minutes with a few commercial
interruptions they're just almost
nothing can be discussed that way and
what's what's worse is that the very
people who would be best able to discuss
it are never going to be invited on to
those programs in a way the people in
the IDW have been selected for like a
lot of them have had quite high-profile
encounters you look at
Sam Harris with Ben Affleck or you look
at Brett Weinstein and there's a sense
that they've in some way had to live out
their ideas there's a sense of bravery
that they've had to stick up for
themselves
Jordan Peterson and C 16 I mean you
could you can list a lot of times where
as you said they had to be that one
person who was thinking of certain thing
no I mean I think I made the point
probably on the Rubin report that what's
going on is that when you ask any large
collection of people to salute a
nonsensical flag and pledge allegiance
to it and more or less everyone makes
the calculation
I guess if this is going to get me
through my day I'll salute any flag and
you've got the one gal or one guy who
doesn't want to well my observation is
that that person is usually sitting on
an entire mountain of interesting
thoughts that they don't have the
freedom to simply make a convenience
readjustment and so from that
perspective yeah in general if you ask a
thousand people to salute a flag that
makes no sense and tell them that
they'll be incentivize you'll get a
thousand-dollar check at the end or you
know you won't lose your job and
somebody stands up and says no way I'm
getting out of here do what you want
that person is usually much more
interesting than just being a contrarian
that person is usually saying no because
they've got an entire worldview that is
built by hand and and bespoke and so
that's why this method of finding people
has been relatively fruitful it's people
who don't back down usually don't back
down for a reason because there's every
reason just to go along it seems that
the the phenomena of the IDW is is part
of this great intellectual awakening I
mean you're seeing people being really
hungry for long-form content on YouTube
3-hour conversations people are are
clearly hungry for a lot more
intellectual stimulation they don't
actually agree with this I mean this is
an idea that I think Jordan has slightly
wrong so for a while I've been making
the point that there was a change
between
writing for television was sort of the
lowest form of of an art and that
writing for movies allowed for real
character development but that the multi
season multi episode shows with very
long storylines actually has the
greatest character development and so
the the greatest writers are now writing
for TV the important thing to understand
is is that it's not just the advent of
long-form podcasting what it is is
having the courage to say something
using that medium you have long-form
podcasts that aren't attracting almost
anybody and the only reason that the IDW
is behaving in a different fashion is
that it's Merritt marrying the content
that brave people are starved for with
the change in technology and so in
general most things don't work in a
three-hour format what works in a
three-hour format is when you're living
through what I'm calling left car theism
where the modern left which is my side
of the aisle has gone so completely
insane that people are starved for
normal conversation as if it was some is
that in the former Soviet Union and so
you have an underground network if you
will that is supplying that need for
reality and the only reason we're
underground is because the mainstream is
pretending for the most part not to
notice that this phenomena is existing
which is fascinating and you've
described this as a civil war within the
left could you can you explain what you
mean by that sure the left that I relate
to is the left that realizes that the
past cannot supply the answers and that
we have to actually progress because we
can't stay here it is not the left that
believes we can wish ourselves into a
beautiful future by pretending that the
read that the world is different
it actually is so I think that the key
thing that it is an agreement between
these two groups is that we have to get
to some sort of better place and that is
that the progressive in progressivism
where we are deeply divided and you know
again these are the divisions that are
is much worse than between left and
right how these absolutely
imbecilic figures believe that you can
just wish yourself into paradise that
you don't have to worry about markets
that you can just say you know three
good things for everybody well it just
doesn't make a whit of sense or you know
you're going to wish human beings to be
both simultaneously non-diverse so that
you can argue that any difference in
pro-rata shares of a group in any
occupation is evidence of oppression and
then you're going to turn around and
argue that people are actually
incredibly different because we're gonna
get a huge benefit from diversity I mean
this is not even self consistent this is
this would be offensive to an
intelligent five-year-old so I don't
really believe that these progressives
as they call themselves and regressives
as some of us call them are even making
serious intellectual points they're sort
of trolling by pretending to believe in
all things that just gum up the works
and so it's very important to me that
not only do we not really spend time
debating people who are not serious in
their intellectualism but that we
realize that it is important to the
diversity of mature and important ideas
that we not spend undue effort engaging
ideas that are functioning very
differently from regular conversation it
is as if somebody asks should we have a
diverse dinner tonight well we could
invite somebody from this position from
that country from this gender and then
should we should we invite a suicide
bomber
well if you're a suicide bomber you're
that bit of diversity is going to take
down the entire conversation
as well as all the people at the table
right well these are like suicide
bombers in terms of their ideas they are
attaching themselves to real
conversations and blowing up the
conversation so that you can't actually
speak and I think what we need is we
need to realize that the diversity of
ideas that have to be explored hinges
are not allowing in bad diversity that
is you don't want a single person at the
table who wants to scuttle the
conversation and that's not something
that we've understood about the modern
left the modern left is very often
focused on scuttling any realistic
conversation so that it can continue to
threaten and terrorize people into
pretending to hold positions that no
sane person could possibly hold why do
you think it's become like this well I
think my wife probably has the best
explanation which is that when you're
actually dependent on labor for your
voter base labor has economic issues so
this is the great search for something
cheaper than labor and identity turns
out to be much cheaper than labor if you
can get somebody to vote for you where
you're gonna take their future their
security and their retirement but you're
going to celebrate the fact you know
that they came from Laos that's a bad
deal nothing against the Laotians but
for God's sake stand up for yourself as
a worker before you you know stand up
for yourself as somebody who needs to
see Southeast Asia celebrated on the
national stage it's not that exciting
demand more from from your
representatives this is the great search
for the cheapest possible constituency
and that's exactly why I think it's
happening I think it's because the
traditional Democratic voter base was
too expensive they wanted real change
they wanted to participate economically
they wanted to participate at the level
of power and the the donor base said is
there isn't there anything cheaper than
Labor
and I think they found something and
where do you hope that this IDW
conversation will go in the future well
I hope it goes to the heart of
everything that is denying our ability
to use our eyes on our ears and our
minds as decent people if you're simply
observing the world as it is and you're
thinking about it with a big open heart
and you're trying to be decent about it
at the same time that you're trying to
provide for your family and concerned
about your country's welfare there's no
reason that you should be huddling in
the cupboard afraid that if anyone hears
that you think that men are different
from women that you're going to be
consigned to the dustbin of history and
fired for it that's absolutely essential
that people stop being terrorized for
holding garden-variety positions
[Music]
you
[Music]