[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time we were
taking in an in-depth look at the work
of Stanovich and rationality because we
are building towards an account of
wisdom because that is deeply
intertwined with the cultivation of
enlightenment and of course with the
cultivation of meaning we noted that
rationality is an existential issue it's
not just a matter of how we're
processing information it's something
that is constitutive of our identity in
important ways and our mode of being in
the world and we'll come back to that
again one of the core things we saw as
we took a look at the rationality debate
in which stand of its work was situated
is that debate showed us a couple of
important things it showed us if I can
put this as a formula that right
rationality does not equal logic
allottee and it does not equal
intelligence that debate also showed us
that we need multiple competencies when
we're talking about rationality we need
an inferential competency but we need an
independent competency of control and
then I propose to you how we could
understand what that competency is and
what the normative theory is acting upon
it namely insight good problem
formulation we then moved into what
standard it saw as the missing piece if
intelligence doesn't give us rationality
what's the missing pieces two missing
pieces they overlap in some important
ways one is the notion he calls it mind
where what I've called psycho technology
and the other is a cognitive style and
the cognitive style that he talked about
was active open mindedness which he gets
from Jonathan Barron and this is the
idea that what you should do
is cultivate a sensitivity and an
ongoing awareness of the presence and
effect of cognitive biases in your
cognitive behavior your cognitive life
and to actively counteract them I
pointed out that unlike Stanovich who
doesn't emphasize this as much Jonathan
Barron who's the originator of this idea
as a constitutive feature of rationality
points out that you can't do that too
much because if you try to override too
many of your cognitive biases you of
course will be also overriding them in
their functioning as heuristics that
help you avoid common and toward
explosions so getting an optimal form of
active open mindedness rather than a
maximal form of it is crucial to
rationality I want to just briefly stop
here and be a little bit more precise
about how I want to use this term I've
been using it throughout and I basically
defined it by example and then it
through exemplification but I want to be
a little bit clearer about it because
it's going to be relevant as we go
forward and talk about wisdom so here's
the definition I want to offer to try
and clarify what I mean and how I'm
using the term psycho technology as I
said I don't claim to be the originator
of this idea but I am claiming that this
is the particular slant I'm taking on
this idea of psycho technology the
psycho technology is a socially
generated and standardized way of
formatting manipulating and enhancing
information processing that's readily
internalized Abell into human cognition
and that can be applied in a
domain-general manner that's crucial it
must extend and empower cognition in
some reliable and extensive manner and
be highly generalizable among people
prototypical instances are literacy
numeracy and graphic
so I want to just make it very clear
it's not just that anything we use
mentally will count as a psycho
technology so the cognitive style of
active open-mindedness will probably
make use of psycho technologies in order
to help track bias but obviously
Stanovich means something much more
comprehensive he means a set of skills
psycho technologies sensibilities and
sensitivities right that will help you
in a domain general manner note and risk
actively respond to the presence of
cognitive bias we can then ask what is
it about people that if intelligence is
insufficient for this what is it about
people that is predictive of them
acquiring this right now this is learn
Abal right
and we talked about the need for
cognition as being an important
predictor so this is the degree to which
you are motivated to go out and look for
problems you're trying to find formulate
and solve problems so in that sense you
are generating your own instances of
learning and problem-solving and it
quite directed and comprehensive manner
I suggested to you that there's two ways
in which we can think about this
curiosity and wisdom I want to stop here
and note something about this need for
cognition that I'm now going to be
making use of in today's lecture which
is the connection between the need for
cognition and what arlynn calls problem
finding
because that's a very central feature I
would think I would say an essential
feature of what it is to have a high
need for cognition Ireland argues that
problem finders are very good at finding
problems as the name indicates there
they are able to realize problems and
connect things together in ways that
people other people have not previously
done some people have argued that this
is central to creativity but important
for our purposes is that our land and I
and this is kind of prescient of this
whole argument she made this argument in
1990 she argues that this is she argues
that this is central to wisdom that one
of the crucial features of being a wise
person is the capacity to find problems
that other people have not yet found I
want to take a moment here and offer a
suggestion of how we can think about
what makes somebody a good problem
finder I want to this is not in Ireland
this is my attempt to extend and develop
arlynn and make it a little bit more
concrete and practicable so I want to I
want to propose to you this idea we
don't find problems typically in a
vacuum we don't do anything in a vacuum
there's always you know already a
background of existing issues we're
dealing with other people are dealing
with in our culture I would suggest you
that a good problem finder can do this
here's some existing problems in the
right space in which human beings are
operating and what a good problem finder
does is I think not just simply add to
that I mean that that would be kind of a
basic skill and problem solving problem
fall problem finding but I think people
that we regard as being exemplary in
this and doing it very well and
therefore demonstrating an aspect of
creativity that helps to explain why
problem finding sort of overlaps between
wisdom and creativity they can do the
following thing they can find a problem
that if solved would make a significant
impact
on these existing problems so what I'm
suggesting to you is that good problem
finding is the ability to generate a
problem Nexus so that if you go in and
say here here are some problems in
various domains and then they are all
centered on this core problem and if we
can address that core problem then we
can go back and make a significant
impact on this I think many of the
people I don't take credit for this I
think the person who should be given
credit for this and I'll talk about that
later today
it's Dreyfus the idea right that many of
the central problems of cognition are
centered on this ability to realize
relevance I think that's very powerful
kind of problem finding it's the
generation of a problem Nexus and I've
tried to show you how it can be very
generative of theoretical and empirical
research so I think that's part of what
it is to be a good problem finder it is
to generate the problem Nexus I also
want to point out something that I'm
going to come back to which is this is
going to overlap with some an important
aspect in some current theories of the
nature of understanding that have to do
with the effectiveness of how we are
relating to knowledge now that sounds
very vague and I will come back to that
more carefully what I need you to
understand right now is that this
problem finding right this the ability
to generate a problem Nexus will also
make a significant impact interact with
some of the best accounts I think that
are emerging about the nature of
understanding and that's going to be
important because we want understanding
to be part of our Theory our account of
wisdom now I want to come back to the
effective side of this so I've suggested
to you that one part of good problem
finding sorry one part of need for
cognition
right there's good problem finding and
then good problem finding is the ability
to generate a problem Nexus right need
for cognition I look at this word here
right also points to obviously an
effective a motivational component and
this takes us into the few things I
talked about before wonder and curiosity
then I propose to you that although
these terms are slippery one way in
which we can pick up a sort of polar
opposites is that curiosity is much more
in the having mode it's much more about
manipulating and controlling things and
wonder is much more than the being mode
it's much more vote on encountering
mystery and calling into question ones
the world view one's identity etc so
that's why wonder can shade into awe or
potentially even into work now I want to
pick up on something here because this
again has some very deep connections to
wisdom so I actually have this on a like
a plaque in my apartment it's a famous
quote from Socrates which is wisdom
begins in wonder wisdom begins in wonder
and like everything about Socrates it is
it is simultaneously provocative and
enigmatic as to what did Socrates
actually mean by that then there's two
different interpretations and you can
see this and the different ways in which
wonder is treated by Plato and of course
by Aristotle
and I can see this in this sort of
distinction to some of the current work
on while on Wonder but for Plato the
point of philosophy is to develop and
extend that sense of wonder so that what
you're actually trying to do for Plato
is you're trying to deepen wonder into
awe because he feels that this aw will
have the greatest capacity for
transforming us for getting us deeply
involved in the an agogic ascent that
makes sense
Horace dawdle also thinks that
philosophy begins in wonder but I think
you could make a good case that many
people have right that Aristotle sees
this more in line with curiosity trying
to figure things out and then what your
ultimate ly doing I would say for
Aristotle is this you're trying to
basically shape wonder into curiosity in
philosophy and then resolve the
curiosity in some answer to some
question so for Plato wonder sets you on
a quest of an agog a but for Aristotle
wonder gets you to formulate questions
that you then answer and that's a
fundamental difference between them and
it's interesting because you see Plato
is here sort of pushing for meta
accommodation as we've seen before when
we talked about this when we talked
about right the numinous and Aristotle
is of course putting for meta
assimilation of course when I answer
questions that may force me to do
conceptual accommodation but overall
this is trying to stabilize right and
assimilate and sort of home things for
you
now the kind of stuff we saw and Garett
so philosophy is working within that
whole structure and why am i pointing
this out because of course again we're
invoking this higher order relevance
realization that's at work within this
need for a cognition within wonder and
curiosity all right so we saw that
Stanovich was able to respond to many of
the defenders of human rationality in
the rationality debate he was able to
respond respond to cohen by crucially
noting that we have to challenge Cohen's
assumptions we do not have a sim as
single competence while I also added in
that we shouldn't think of it as static
or completely individual all right he
was able to respond to charity act by
pointing out that charity act was quite
right about the centrality of dealing
with computational limitations but that
what chair neck is really giving is not
a theory
Christian axe theory is a theory of
relevance realization is not a theory of
rationality but a theory of intelligence
something that standard which also
agrees with and then tests madland he
standard which acknowledges that we need
an independent normativity on control
and we've already seen that we can
answer that well at least i'm proposing
that we can answer that by a different
area in psychology which is the work out
a good problem formulation and insight a
problem formulation that avoids
combinatorial explosion ill-defined
itness and the way in which we can be
misdirected by salience to misjudge what
is relevant I now want to refer I now
want to return to Stanovich this theory
properly what's his positive account of
what rationality is so the waste and
Fitch does this and right and I I don't
want sorry the way he's doing this
overlaps with a lot of other work and
this is a point that he himself make
there's
a lot of convergence in psychology on
the idea of a dual processing theory
that we have multiple competencies now
what does dual processing is is itself
very controversial initially people
talked about two systems and then they
talked about two styles and because of
critiques it was hard to maintain those
terms and I'm not even convinced that
they are just you know that they're
distinct things they might lie on a
continuum but the basic idea so to avoid
all that controversy they're simply
called s1 and s2 right and like I say
I'm not claiming that they're discrete
systems or even discrete styles it's
quite possible that they are polar
positions with on a continuum of
processing I'm going to put all other
side because it's not relevant for what
we're talking about here right so the
main idea here is that these are
different ways in which you process
information and this process works
largely intuitively and it works very
much in a highly associational fashion
it makes use of a lot of implicit
processing and it's very fast right it's
very fast
so this is the kind of processing that
you're using all the time in what we you
know we talked about this one Ravello
Varela talked about your ability to cope
those are your coping right so when I'm
moving around the environment I'm
relying a lot on my intuitive knowledge
my capacity for implicit learning the
way I can quickly associate things
together right and so I would add to
this of course as I argued before that
this is also sort of how we're primarily
caring for things being involved with
them finding them salient etc but
nevertheless this is the this is the
part of your cognition that is operating
a lot of the time in the background in
fact III want to I'm going to step aside
from Stanovich for a moment and and and
propose to you that instead of thinking
of these of discrete systems we can
think of different states where you're
in where one style or other is more
foregrounded and the other is more
backgrounded so I'll come back to that
let's do the what's s2 well s2 operates
more deliberately in both senses of the
word like deliberation where I'm
engaging in reflection and deliberate in
the sense that I am aware of it and
intentionally directed in it so it's
deliberately right so it tends to not
work association ly it tends to work
inferential e argumentatively
right argumentation in the philosophical
sense not in the sense of having an
emotional conflict with somebody the
processing of course all processing has
and this is an important point some
aspects of it that are implicit so this
is more of a contrast of emphasis but
this processing is much more explicit
and it tends to be very slow so Kahneman
has a book out right now thinking fast
and thinking slow that is a very good
sort of discussion of this dual
processing MA dual processing model
because as I said there's a lot of
theoretical argumentation and evidence
that is converging on this so this is a
very highly plausible thing you need you
see it's showing up in many many
different domains within psychology
alright so one way of thinking about
this and this is a way in which standard
vision Evans have tried to get a clearer
more precise way of distinguishing the
two is the degree to which they're
tapping making use of working memory so
the idea is s2
really relies on working memory whereas
s1 relies much less on it and so it's
much more automatic in that sense in its
operation so
let's let's take an example where you
use the two systems right so your
grocery shopping and you come up to the
cashier and they're ringing you in and
you've got a normal sort of basket full
of normal groceries and the cashier says
to you well that'll be $1,000 please and
you know what now where did that what
come from right what did that what come
from well you have associations between
sort of these objects their prices sort
of the amount you get you've got you've
picked up implicit patterns right notice
how intuitively Association aliy
implicitly and quickly you do what
that's wrong it can't be a thousand
dollars that makes no sense
so you call the cashier and the question
by using your s1 processing now what the
cashier has to do right though she can't
just she or he can't just respond this
way to you
the cashier can't go nah it's a thousand
I can sense it
what this they have to do they have to
deliberately no they have to take out
each thing they have to get up the bill
they have deliberately right
notice that the concentrate that the pay
attention step-by-step make the argument
to you explicitly and slowly no no look
look look look at this matches this met
they're using that's to processing now
these of course are in a trade-off
relationship because the problem with
remnants of course is instead of it
acknowledges this but right part of the
problem with this is how much demand it
puts on your working memory how slow it
is so you cannot rely on it yet another
argument why you can't Descartes your
way through your whole of your existence
right you can't rely on it for most of
your behavior because you will just head
into the ocean of combinatorial
explosion you will get so slowed down
and so overwhelmed that
won't be able to live your life you'll
commit cognitive suicide but of course
we have this for a reason we have this
because it is supposed to override to a
degree this so notice that these two
systems are in a basically an opponent
relationship they are both working
towards the same goal of making you
adaptive but they tend to work in
opposite fashions and our stand of it
sees s2 is largely having and there's
deep truth to this having a corrective
function for s1 all right so now I can
first give you his theory of foolishness
which he understands as dis rationale
yeah like dyslexia and then by
implication his theory of rationality
which because it's a comprehensive kind
of rationality it deals with a
comprehensive kind of foolishness it's
now bordering on an account of what
wisdom is so here's the idea what is
active open-mindedness doing well what's
happening is this is the place where you
know all the heuristics and biases are
this is where they are operating and
what happens here is they make you leap
to conclusions remember when I did the
problem with you you know where you've
got the pond and on day one there's so
many lily pads and it doubles every day
and on day 20 it's done on what day was
the pond half covered and you're a swan
shouts at you ten days ten days in
because it's half and half and that's
how it works and that's wrong because on
day 19 half the pond was covered right
and what you have to do is s2 has to
basically override how you're leaping to
conclusions how you leap to the
conclusion that the people at the
airport are in danger because of the
representative heuristic or the
availability heuristic so s1 is
constantly giving but I need this that's
what makes me fat if I'm not leaping
I'm not fast I'm not coping leaping and
coping are deeply interdependent but the
thing is sometimes and again it's
unclear what the degree is that's one of
the ways in which I think Baron is a
little bit more clear than by Stan of
itch but sometimes we need to override
this leaping to conclusion so he sees
that what active open-mindedness is
basically doing is teaching you to
protect this processing from being
overridden by the way s1 makes you leap
to conclusions you are foolish
you have disregard to right to be
properly protected from the interference
from s1 to see what's going on here this
is how he's ultimately responding to
Cohen you had these two competencies you
need both of them
they are constitutive of your cognitive
agency there so they're both
constitutive competences but this one
can interfere with this one and that can
cause you to behave irrationally what
active open-mindedness does is to
protect this kind of kind of processing
from that interference so that's Stan of
itches central model now III think
that's definitely a good account of
active open-mindedness my central
criticism of this is I think it's an
insufficient account of rationality its
insufficient I grant a lot of work has
been done here rationality is not being
equated to intelligence it's not being
equated to logic ality it's centered on
overcoming self-deception there's an
account of self-deception it's so flat
on ok it's so platonic here's the
monster and it's interfering with the
man right so platonic and so we get that
interference effect that's what's
causing us to be foolish that makes us
self-deceptive
if we cultivate active open mindedness
then we can reduce the interference and
that makes
more comprehensively rational I think
that's all well it's all elegance is
beautiful
and the fact that it kids this kind of
work keeps getting replicated and
massively convergent it's so highly
plausible and profound that's all I
think that's all worthy of being noted
however let's look to this because is
sleeping always a bad thing well I
already implied you need to leap to cope
but let's take a look right at the work
of Baker Senate and CC from 1996 okay so
what they investigated a thing they
called inductive leaping I think calling
it inductive leaping is a mistake
because I understand induction as an
inferential procedure and what they're
explicitly doing is not inferential
nature but it is not inferential in
nature so I'm gonna suggest that we
don't use that term and I'm instead
going to use the more neutral term of
cognitive leaping what's cognitive
leaping well cognitive leaping how did
they test it they tested it in the
following way so I give you various
patterns that are unfolding across time
and that write at various times I stop
and I ask you you can tell me what it's
going to be one version of it is there's
like we talked about this before I'm a
bunch of dots and what's it going to be
and more dots get filled and eventually
you are able to leap and say oh it's
going to turn out to be a sofa and
notice how you're doing stuff really
going from features to Gestalt you're
doing that leap and you're going from
looking at the dots to looking through
them you're doing an opacity
transparency shift all that stuff we
talked about right mindfulness is is
involved now why does that matter well
what they found was something very
important this allowed them to
operationalize kind of the in at least
an aspect of the inevitability of
insight as often you don't know what's
going on in an insight there's this leap
and what they say how they
operationalize it was this you're a good
leaper you're a good leaper if you can
use fewer cues
and accurately say what the final
patterns going to be so if you're if
you're if you like if you use fewer cues
and you're making lots of mistakes
you're not very good if you're largely
accurate but you have to get a whole
bunch of cues then you're not a very
good leaper but if you use few cues and
get to the full you stall reliably right
then you're a very good cognitive leaper
okay you're doing this you have this
skill this facility with pattern
detection pattern completion why is that
so important well because that and
that's what the experiment show this is
directly predictive of insight the
better you are at leaping the better you
are at insight so do you see the tension
here if I try to shut off too much
leaping to conclusions
I'm also shutting off the machinery that
makes me more insightful it's right we
have look we have to give up simplistic
notions naive simplistic notions of
rationality
yeah I'm not accusing Stanovich of this
not at all but what I'm saying is we
have to is it being rational is a very
complex process in which there are
trade-off relationships and a very
complicated kind of optimization needs
to be trained so we want active open
mindedness to prett let's let's make
this the error of interference so
sometimes I leap to conclusions and that
causes a lot of mistake in inference the
kind of stuff that Stanovich and what I
need is active open mindedness to
moderate that and ameliorate it in a
significant degree right
I wanted I want to leap to the insight
and I need that for good control and
good control is central to being a
problem solver essential to being
rational so what do I need well it's
interesting because if you turn to a
domain outside of the academic domain
and right we have to because rationality
is existential we have to pay attention
to the context even in which we're
theorizing about rationality right and
if we're in a largely academic context
we're going to think of rationality as
primarily about theorizing and so this
is a great danger to theorizing and so I
would argue if the rationality if the
project you're engaging in rationality
is the project of theorizing and I mean
that broadly in the sense of generating
scientific you know or historical theory
right then active open mindedness is
crucial but there are domains but it
goes the other way
there's domains in which what you do not
what you need right is you need to be
able to come up with a transformative
insight when you need a radical
reconstruct in where's it domain and
where that's crucial well we've talked
about it so this is good for theorizing
the Jacobs in his book and you can see
some related work by Teasdale points out
there's an opposite context there's the
context not of theory but there's the
context of therapy right
I think it's broader than this but I'm
using this because it's a good contrast
and that that right the there's an
illiterate of relation to help for
mnemonic purposes so in therapy very
often what's needed is and we've talked
about this remember your existentially
trapped and you need this fundamental
kind of transformative insight and you
cannot infer your way through it
we've already tackled that argument in
you cannot infer your way through it and
the problem in therapy is people try to
think their way through it
that's Jacob's main point and I say
related a book called the ancestral mind
and there's the same point as being made
and I think by Teasdale when he talks
about metacognitive insight being
central to therapy often what you need
is to try and shut this down try to
trigger this let me think of frightened
free association all right
you have to try and shut this down
prevent it from interfering right bring
this into the foreground keep this in
the background so when we're theorizing
we need this in the foreground and we
need it protected we need it too
seriously background and constrain this
active open mindedness in doing this but
in the therapeutic situation this needs
to be much more foregrounded this needs
to be back rounded and it needs to we it
needs to be constrained so it doesn't
unduly interfere with this now with what
we can ask ourselves is well what's a
cognitive style right that makes this
much more focal tries to constrain this
and really improves insight well we know
what that is
and teasdale in fact argues for it
explicitly and it's what triggers
metacognitive insight that's mindfulness
so you think about how much in a mindful
in a mindfulness practice I've tried to
argue that there we need an ecology of
psycho technologies to cultivate the
cognitive style of mindfulness right
think of one think of meditation think
about how much in meditation you are
trying to write really constrain this
shut this down reduce all that inner
speech all that inferential processing
their deliberate or a direction right
and you're trying to open this up in a
very powerful way
so notice that I now have write a
cognitive style that is in a very
important sense opponent not adversarial
but opponent to active open-mindedness
notice that they are both sharing the
training of attention and what you're
paying attention to and how you're
paying attention so this is great for
planning and this as I said this is
great for coping and especially when the
planning is epistemic when we're trying
to theorize when we're planning for
truth this is very good for coping
especially when we're doing a kind of
coping that's therapeutic in a broad
sense in which we are needing to
transform and undergo important
qualitative development so I think
what's missing from Stanovich is a
broader account of our competences and
how they can be how they are played off
against each other how there's a trade
off relationship with them and part of
what I would argue and I'm going to come
back to this more more directly later
what goes into wisdom is a cultivation
of both active open mindedness for
inference and mindfulness for insight
and then what we're going to need is
well what what coordinates them together
how are they coordinated together how do
i optimize the opponent not adversarial
how do i optimize the opponent
processing between them I want to come
back to that and explore that in detail
with you because I can't push this any
farther because as we as we push this
farther we're getting farther and
farther away from Stanovich who's theory
and moving in towards a theory that I
myself I'm going to propose to you the
work I've done with Lea Ferraro and then
sort of critically reflect on that so I
need you to remember this for when we
come back to more explicitly talk about
a theory of wisdom and to be fair
descent of it she's ultimately no
offering a theory of wisdom and I think
when he talks about rationality he
really means theoretical rationality as
opposed to what we might call practical
or therapeutic rationality ok I want to
stop here though and note it and
continue on with our investigation now
of explicit theories of wisdom but I
want to sort of pull one thing out of
our discussion of substantive itch
before we leave stand of itches good
company and I want to use somebody
else's work to extend that a bit and to
just add more teeth to this claim that
rationality is ultimately an existential
issue a way of understanding what
Stanovich says is the following
right when I use intelligence to learn
the psycho tech and the cognitive stock
I can use intelligence to actually
improve how I'm using my intelligence I
can use my intelligence to improve right
how the competencies are optimizing and
I can therefore overall enhance my
capacity for relevance realization we
can think of that as rationality
but something else is emerging right out
of this which I'm only suggesting now
but we may perhaps be able to use our
rationality to improve our rationality
to make it more optimal overall and I
would suggest to you that's going to be
crucial to wisdom that that's going to
be an essential feature I would I would
argue not everybody agrees with me on
that's I'm trying to be really clear
about this but I would argue that that
is a place in which we can find the
locus for understanding the nature of
wisdom how it relates to rationality and
how it relates to intelligence what the
nature of this is we're gonna have to
come back to one more time please
remember when you see this word that I
am NOT equating it to logic allottee or
intelligence I've given you long
arguments but I've tried to expand this
notion right it's is much more about the
reliable and systematic ability to
overcome self-deception and to afford
the enhancement of development and
meaning in life that's what I mean by it
okay so let's keep this in mind let's
take some time now right to take a look
at some more explicit theories of wisdom
I can't look at them all this is a this
is a growth industry I'm going to a
conference tomorrow with it has a lot of
the people that are working in this and
it's going to be a discussion to try and
see if we can come to some consensus
about this precisely because it is such
an important topic a lot of good work
has been done on it but again because
there is such a multitude of viewpoints
getting a clear consensus on this it's
going to be it's going to be a
theoretical challenge okay
now the I want to as I said do one more
thing before I do that before I move to
the explicit theories and I want to show
you I want to show you a bit about this
and the point about this is to bring out
something that stander which is not
addressing which is the existential
aspect of rationally the degree to which
we identify with our higher cognitive
processes okay so this is the work of
Dweck Carol Dweck and it's work on
mindset she has a book entitled that and
this is course is again an ongoing thing
it's been taking up in a lot of
different research so I want to describe
an experiment to you and and then I want
to sort of challenge a little bit a
potential ambiguity or confusion in in
Dweck that I think we can clarify by
making use of this work from Stanovich
so what did the following thing sheet he
brought she had a whole bunch of
experiments but let's talk about one she
brought in a bunch of school children
and she randomly assigned them to the
three groups Group a group B and Group C
now Dweck talks about two different ways
in which you can set your mind towards
your your traits and the trait that's
really crucial hood and this is relevant
is intelligence so she talks about two
views you can have two ways in which you
can set your mind now it's a mindset
because it's not just a belief it's the
way in which you are identifying with
right it's the way in which you feel you
are embodying the the traits we're
talking about so you can have a fixed
view of your intelligence or a malleable
view okay and so in the fixed view you
think intelligence is like fixed
basically sort of birth or earlier on
and then once it's locked in there's not
much you can do with it so for example
my height is affixed to trait there's
not a lot I can do to modify it it's a
fixed trait okay my weight is a much
more malleable trait I can change it can
it's quite variable it can change quite
a bit so you may think that intelligence
is more like my height you're sort of
born with it you're fixed you got this
number assigned and that's it or
intelligence is malleable it can develop
and change now notice your behavior is
going to be different if you think
intelligence is fixed if you think
intelligence is fixed your attitude
towards error is that error will reveal
that you have a defect in a non
changeable trait it'll reveal it'll
it'll permanently disclose that you are
not smart so fixed intelligence tends to
turn error into permanent revelation
right if I make mistakes that will show
that I have low intelligence and once
once everybody knows that including
myself there's nothing I can do about it
and then I'm
doomed to being a stupid person okay if
you have the malleable view of
intelligence error doesn't right error
doesn't do that for you there doesn't
see error is now oh wait
error points towards the skills I'm
using I need better skills or the effort
I'm putting it I need to put in more
effort because if it's malleable I can
do things to change it so the error says
the errors brace is pointing you need to
make some changes you need to cultivate
more skills you need to call to more
effort now notice something right away
please
notice how the fixed view focuses you on
the product right it focuses you on
right you just get fixated on the error
oh no this focus is you remember the key
of rationality it focuses you on the
process the process okay
so she has a lot of experiments showing
that right to fix you and the malleable
view have a huge impact on your behavior
but interesting thing the way how could
how can you trigger people into this
mode well if you're in sort of an
authority position like like like being
a teacher out of school the one way you
can trigger the mode and this is really
a mode right the mode that people are in
is how you praise them the kind of
feedback you give them if I praise you
using trait language like you're so
smart you're so bright that's going to
tend to trigger this orientation if I
praise you for the process wow you're
really you're using a really good skill
you're putting in a lot of effort for
that that's going to make the process
salient to you the more I make this
salient the more you're going to be in
that mode the more I make this salient
anymore you're going to be in that mode
okay so I can praise the trait
right or I can praise the process think
about how important this is to parenting
or schooling okay so let's go back to
the experiment we have these three
groups the three group it's the control
group they're all given a set of
problems that have been pre-tested for I
think they were great for it they could
all solve these problems they're
challenging but they're all solvable and
they all solve them so all groups solve
them but group a is praised for its
trait Group B is praised for the process
and then Group C is given the neutral
just acknowledgement oh oh the praises
we you succeeded so well in that problem
okay so neutral so the idea is this is
going to trigger right these people into
the fixed view that's going to trigger
people into the value of all view so now
what you do is you give the kids a bunch
of tests you ask which ones want to take
on some more challenging problems notice
what i'm doing here i'm looking for need
for cognition looking for need for
cognition what i find is this group yeah
sorry that was completely wrong descrip
says no i don't want to try harder
problems why because if they try harder
problems there's a very good chance that
they will generate error and then error
will generate right the recognition that
they're less intelligent and then
they're permanently stained with that
permanently marked the process people
say yeah I'd like to try harder problems
they have a need for cognition seems to
be triggered of course neutral right
then you give them some harder problems
and ask do they enjoy them and do do you
not enjoy this yeah I enjoy this neutral
now here's the crucial thing now you
give them a set of problems that were
equal in difficulty to the first set of
problems you get us give them a set of
problems that were equal in difficulty
to the first Center problem this has all
been massively pre-tested so it's safe
right and what you find is this group
does about the same this group does much
worse and this group that's better than
it did
and now I want to I want to extend this
and notice how this is starting to fold
into a kind of self-deception right you
asked these kids to write - I believe
the experiment was done in America you
ask these people to write to a student
in Germany that they'll never they will
never meet by the way and report how
they did on the experiment so these two
groups write largely tell the truth they
just took you know 40 percent of these
people lie about their performance okay
what am I trying to show you I'm trying
to show you the way you frame yourself
the way you identify with your
processing has a huge impact on your
problem-solving ability your proclivity
for self-deception and your need for
cognition rationality is an existential
thing it is not just an informational
processing thing now one thing that
comes out of this is the question yeah
but is intelligence fixed or malleable
and and wek is not quite clear about
that the evidence is pretty clear that
there's a few things you can do to
modify your intelligence there's some
suggestion that long-term mindfulness
practice by enhancing attention and
working memory can improve your your
measures of general intelligence but by
and large intelligence is is fixed it's
not that malleable and then you may say
okay then this whole thing is based on
you know lying to the kids right
basically getting them to relate to
intelligence is something malleable not
really not really at all because what
we're actually talking about here and
that's what I've been continually
alluding to here is that something that
is terrifically there's a way in which
intelligence is terrifically malleable
and this is exactly what mine setting is
the way in which intelligence
recursively relates to itself is a way
in which we can think about it being
rational but that might sorry the way in
which we can think about it being
malleable and you my word slip shows you
what my thinking is a better way of
talking about this is that intelligence
is fixed and this is what what Santa
bitches argues but rationality is highly
malleable and then here's Stanovich
whose main point about this we care too
much for intelligence and not enough for
rationality because yes intelligence is
highly predictive of all these things
and that's why measurements of G are
such powerful predictors but if I wanted
to know something about you now
following state of itches argument I
want to know not how intelligent you are
I want to know how rational you are and
that is highly malleable okay so what
I'm trying to show you is this that
rationality is an existential issue it's
about how you're identifying with your
own cognitive processing and the way in
which that identification process can
impede how you're applying and using an
Intel
or it can enhance it and then there's
the possibility right of cultivating the
right kind of recursion and identity the
right kinds of cognitive styles so
somehow we have to put processes of
identification processes of coordinating
cognitive styles together and we can get
a clear path for becoming much more
rational and as I'm suggesting to you
therefore much more wise because if we
if we use rationality to better learn
how to use rationality and identify with
our rationality then of course I'm
suggesting to you that's wisdom and as I
promised we should now next we should
now turn to some of the explicit
psychological theories of wisdom now I
can't as I've already mentioned I can't
do all of them I'm gonna zero in on four
theories that I think are quite
representative of central ideas in the
psychology of wisdom I and then I will
then propose I'll put my I'll propose my
theory that work I've done with Leo
Ferraro and I'll put that into sort of
dialogue with these existing theories as
well as critiquing the theory that I the
work that I did with Leo and then
ultimately what we want to do is
resituated account of wisdom right into
its connection with the cultivation of
meaning and the pursuit of enlightenment
we will take a look at that next time
thank you very much for your time and
attention
[Music]
you
[Music]
you
[Music]