or QA we have return visit from guy send
stock the creator and founder of
circling and he is so kind to come back
with us thanks guys for being here
betcha so so in the spirit circling just
off screen we get some audio issues so I
I'm feeling frustrated from those audio
issues but but relieved that manuals
didn't filling in to to fix them and
excited to see how this how this goes
mm-hmm thanks for rent is thanks for
running the physics great where do we
have to do physics manually we yeah we
all need to be audio engineers just to
run these things all right every time
like it's so fun it's so easy because
I've only been on this a couple of times
it's so it's interesting seeing some of
your faces because I just get know why
but I love this thing and somehow I just
get this impression of like these kind
of hacker like hacker people is for some
reason just like some underground
did we meet your expectations or I'm not
even sure what a hacker is but uh we'll
see as we go I had a really good time
last sir yeah we all enjoyed it and
everyone's back from where I'm gonna
keep my question short I just wanted to
start off I'm not sure if we talked
about this last time but yeah we talked
a lot about ecology of practices and
keeping a nice balanced ecology of
practices I just wanted to go over what
what what are your ecology of practices
other than circling of course
oh let's see I meditate
I would say between twenty minutes and
three hours a day I've been doing that
or
let's see probably over 20 years now I
think I
read philosophy and for me reading is a
beat for me reading especially reading
really intense like philosophy is a is
such an it's actually it's a practice
that I don't hear actually talked about
as a practice but I think it's actually
been a profound impact on me not not all
reading but like particular kinds of
reading and we I guess we can talk about
that for two let's see
I do some yoga although I hate
yoga but I still do it and let's see
what else do I do
and then I I write poetry which is a
kind of practice I oftentimes go on
walks and
I would say I would say there's lots of
things that I do that seem to evoke what
I would say is like the the the the
non-contingent right where it's like
where it's like I'm doing something
right in such a way that the world
doesn't disclose itself is like an it
means to an end but right like it so
I'll you know if I'm teaching them feel
like like a lot of times when people
teach their teaching in order to get the
get the student to pass or or I'm
dealing with whatever I'm dealing with
in order to get to the next thing it's
like everything is kind of contingent of
everything else but I think that there's
a like another mode which is getting
less and less in the world which is you
know where we where you teach as
teaching okay where it's like you relate
as relating you you know which is
basically about our our experience of
opening directly to our own being right
and bringing it into question so I would
say that like there's lots of practices
that I think are in service of that if
they're not all in service of that but
there are also things that I just find
myself doing that evoke that place for
me so when you see you meditate between
30 minutes and three hours is it just a
factor of time if you have more time in
a day you'll do more or toward you
answer the recommended practice like I
well Twitter it's fun it's funny for me
with meditation right cuz I I'm I'm I
don't know if it's a fair because I
actually like meditation like but
there's something about meditation is up
from the very beginning it's been made
such a big difference in in my immediate
experience and how I see and feel and
sense and how things occur that then I
just like it so I wouldn't say I'm
disciplined I'm it's more like
I'll put off other things I should be
doing so I can meditate it's that kind
of thing you know what if it wasn't like
that for me I don't think I would
meditate honestly um if it was like I
didn't like it and it was good for me or
something like that I'm not very good at
doing things that I that I'm not that
are good for me I know you I think
you've been following John's course is
that right yeah yeah so I as in a long
time experienced meditator has as John's
lessons have they changed things for you
of how you approach meditation
well I would say
I would say well first of all I would
say there's been I think there's
probably been the most I've sat daily
with Jon's meditation succession is
probably like a bottom five or six days
as a few runs there so but the I would
say what I've gotten out of it is
actually kind of perspectives on how
things link together
like for example when when he talked
about the meta right and then the pasta
any-any in he said this thing about
where he's like okay I'm the like on the
in breath do you burp asana right or or
what is the other one he didn't call it
the pasta but it's like it yeah there's
meta on an IG IG noted this when you
were when when you were talking with him
at any any correct issues so there's the
meta in the past of the past now and
that it's together progeny project yes
right the prize not like where where
like you go you do the meta on the
out-breath and then and then the Praja
or the pasta on the in-breath and
whatever that was like the linking it
together like that
in this sense of like where one goes
this this place where one's the
foreground and then the other one's the
background and then on the on the inhale
the background becomes the foreground
that like penetration at some point to
where they both kind of like mutually
disclose themselves is it's been a lot
of those kinds of moments that I've
gotten from from the way that that John
is pull all this together that there's
there's like what what the the technique
is that he's teaching in the in the
particular benefits of that but there's
also this other level what I found with
the wait what he's doing which is
there's a certain kind of knowledge
to get about the interlinking of it like
you know which makes sense because he's
emphasizing in ecology so that
ecological sense is what I've really
gotten I think out of it which I just
think it's so fun it's so fun I used to
call it the zooming in and zooming out
yeah and well you said I think during
that voices with Purbeck you last week
but yeah now seeing that pop up
everywhere so yeah what are some
examples if you kind of know come up
with any up top your head what are some
examples of of where your seat where
you're seeing that just yeah yeah
well it's funny it's like it's it's
actually where I'll be experiencing
something or reading something that I've
read before experienced before and all
of a sudden I'll just go Boop
it'll I'll be like oh this is what this
is talking about right so just just this
sense of well
I think have we talked about this last
time but Chris and I who talk a lot
were in the we're in the middle of
writing of basically we're gonna be
co-authoring an anthology with John and
a bunch of other people about Villalobos
basically and he was part of what he was
writing was was including a transcript
of one of our Thea locals between with
with me Chris John and Jordan and we
both had this experience in reading the
text right where you could really what
stood out when you wrap read it was how
world forming the conversation was and
that in that you really got this sense
in reading it that was different from
the sense from being in it and this is
what's really interesting is that when
you read it but it's so clear that the
world formation right is really
what's foregrounded and the characters
are clearly like it occurs like the
characters or the inner lockers are a
really an expression of of the world
that it forms however from inside of it
right there's this experience of like
where the like the the world inge of the
conversation like in order for it to
work it goes background right so it's
not from inside of it it's it's not you
don't have this kind of explicit sense
that that what I'm saying and and the
way I'm with way we're seeing each other
and how things are evoke tin the
conversation um there's a way where
that's really transparent right but I
think where it bleeds through is
actually I was thinking about Louisville
where does that background figure-ground
relationship bleed through and I think
it happens in the kind of this
electrical almost trance-like
trans rational sense of affinity that
you start to share with the other inner
lockers right this sense of like oh my
god I love the fact that you
exist
alright like that sense of affinity that
comes out I think what I was like you're
talking about it like like you were in a
flow state during that conversation yeah
three of you together yeah yeah and and
from looking at it from the outside you
see you see what you are all converging
on but you didn't it didn't feel that
way yeah well yeah in it totally it's
not it's not even that it didn't feel
that way it's what was figured right the
relationship to that was I think we're
that worldin or the context that was
created called the dialogue right or the
dialo goes right we're bled through in
the foreground was in the experience of
like a trans rational sense of affinity
like between the inner lockers right but
what's fascinating is then when you you
know if a certain sense it's like in
Chris and I disengaged a conversation of
looking at like well maybe the full
breadth of dialogue owes as a practice
really is going into dialogue then look
then reading the transcript right and
that in a certain sense that leg takes
the it brings it back a little bit more
into the propositional right so to go
back a little bit just to recap of of
this sense of there's dialectic right
which is the which is and bringing in
you could say metaphorically the wood
the wood of making a fire right is like
the pieces of wood are like the the
propositions right and then when you
start to go into dialogue right that
that begins the dialectic and at some
point the logos catches the fire catches
you know just going with the metaphor
here the fire catches where all of a
sudden it becomes more than like the DNA
logos of those propositions are released
and then you go start to go into that
you know flow state and you start to
hear and think and understand things
that you couldn't do by yourself right
and then there's that sense of that when
when that's recorded and then you read
it it's like the world becomes the
foreground and you really see how that
dialogue how the context actually wrote
the characters right and then so I was
like well Chris I think maybe what we do
right is that we go back together as we
take this dialogue and let's do one
where we read we go we go through and
and theatrically we reread the dialogue
to each other except for we read from
you know I'll be John and John will be
Chris and right so we can really kind of
highlight that sense of you know this
cut this world this world person
relationship this mystery right
and I was like well maybe we make that
part of the actual full practice of de
Lobos is is that that's what you do is
like you write it down and like you
catch it on fire then you then you
coagulate it back into the propositions
and then you take that up right and you
bring it back up into the fire and you
just keep going like that right I think
there's a there's a way that that's
almost good I would imagine this kind of
a makes practice and symbol of the way
that
form of the way to diet like a dialogic
you know
the logos can be fully practiced and
that in that sense
don't like for example
what does it say would you say that this
so when we do the practice of diello go
see on the exercise you guys have come
up with you you John and and Jordan
Jordan and Christopher huh yeah for the
circling exercises at the beginning help
cultivate that sense of affinity which
helped create than the flow sneaked in
yeah in the actual discussion yeah yep
yeah well what we're good like that like
for example the the thing that you guys
were practicing we had you guys
practiced right with with the
proposition right at the stoah right you
could say is the is that that is the
dialectic right and that's kind of the
way that John and with my input and
Chris's important stuff have kind of
looked at like okay how do we go from
making propositions and their dialectic
right how do we practice like the
machinery of doing that and such and
that it naturally goes up in dialogue
owes and so that's the experiment that
we're having right now with
how hot by the way how was that for you
oh that was great I really enjoyed it
and I kept your protocol and and I
really want to start trying to follow it
here and start running sessions here
right where we tried to do it do it
ourselves and I I thought in yeah we had
a really interesting session I just
found it really interesting the way
there were four of us and we each had a
related but fairly different take on on
on the virtue that that we chose and you
know it's just interest it was was
fascinating to seeing such different
perspectives on the same quote-unquote
thing I know the whole point is it's
each of these virtues are endlessly
discussable but yeah yeah
and a point of bringing in so we got
somewhere we couldn't have got by
ourselves because we don't have the
other person's perspective and we don't
have their take on it and so by burning
it all together make make realization
right and I think the idea I mean the
the intention in the idea behind making
it like a real structured exercise right
is so that you can start to develop
those perspectives and those skills
right such that like that if you really
do them you kind of let go of all of it
right and it just starts to happen on
its own yeah that's the tricky part
about you know in terms of scaling this
and making this accessible how exactly
do we do this you know so this is our
experiment with it
or we're definitely going to yeah
experiment we're doing a lot of
experimenting here on on the forum with
these other things so well you know all
spirit together
are you good how is that how is that
disrupt this real quick just real quick
about what you guys are doing here is
have you guys been practicing any of
those things like like what do you guys
all do together what's your what are you
hackers oh so we are the hackers
community together I'll send you a link
to our calendar later but uh so we have
a whole bunch of activity so for example
every day we meet at 9:34 during John's
meditation session we come a little
early we we do the movement practices
together we set our intentions we then
meditate with Joran then we meet
afterwards and we just discuss or sit
and we talk about you know what is
related to meditation and you know share
tips well we have we have well we have
this the Q&A series which which here
you're a part of we've been doing we
mean we're sort of developing this
protocol for group lectio divina so at
least week we've been meeting and we're
sort of slowly trying it out and we
drafting a protocol and and each time
one of us reads so we take a prose and a
poetry and then the rest talk you know
in reflect back and talk about what it
is to be with the person doing the
reading during the reading this week
we've been doing ecstatic dance parties
where we sort of meditative dancing
we've been experimenting with rituals to
you know to help cultivate the traits
you know the serious play that John
talks about so yeah we've quite a lot
going on here after I could I could give
you a little tour of all the things that
were doing Charlie and when you in it
when you say we write like
and I think I'm just kind of mostly
asking like when you weren't like
actually thinking about what the we is
when you say we when it guard to this
what is what is the we like what is the
relationships that are forming here like
is it is it does it feel like a normal
we like a weed that you have right the
same way that you we I don't know what
your family is it like is it different
is it is it more something or less of
something I think it I think it does for
me at least it is and I hope maybe maybe
we can ask them the people here yeah
there is a lot of we here I mean I think
maybe the fact that that discord allows
for video and audio you know a lot of
this stuff is taking place where we're
watching each other we're seeing each
other so we see the expressions it's not
just like being on Twitter yes both
where where you don't yeah
where it's a little more toxic and and
you know you don't really think of the
other one feels real but we have a real
sense of the realness of everyone here
and you know in a few months but I think
relationships are forming you know we we
have a lot of deep sessions where where
you know there's a lot of authentic
relating circling type you know you we
don't actually mean I'm not involved in
the formal stuff my friends came here
from another group and so now I overhear
what they're doing with this group voice
I'm sort of interested but I'm I'm sort
of just here to observe what my friends
are doing just for an instance of
somebody not regular you guys hear that
yeah this way but I just didn't it's
other peoples happening for you guys
okay cool got you so hi I'm Dana sorry
Brett I didn't mean to buddy that for me
at least this place is like it's like
I've got a room in my house that I
stumbled across that I've never noon
that was there I can just open the door
and go in and sit with a bunch of really
smart and interesting people and have
some deep conversations that's that's
what my place is for me right I've been
using Paul Thunder clay server before
this one yes yeah and they came out of a
real depression and I started
interacting socially again on this court
and I got myself out and I'm with
getting myself I started getting other
people out so I'm trying to present this
positive generative spirit to a lot of
people and also progress myself into the
future so this is would you say is it is
it is being in this and interacting in
this way
have been a part of you kind of coming
out of your depression yeah I get it
like my issue was that I couldn't
articulate a positive worldview and when
I heard a vacant a collation of agape
there was like okay that's that's
something I can get behind and then
basically I just ended up practicing it
as much as I could yeah interesting I'm
kind of I'm just I'm really fascinated
about what this thing is what it does
right like what I'm in the middle of a
night we've started doing even a Friday
night dinner where we all go and go on
the disc or put our cameras on we're
eating dinner but having a meal together
yeah and I would say just because I'm
not interested in the specific subject
I'm interested in who this subject
attracts and I am completely lacking in
my on-the-ground direct relationships
for that level of conversation which is
why it becomes worth it to me to find it
online
right yeah I think I just to sort of
highlight what it is that sort of
emerged from this technology right I
think it's the best way to phrase it is
there's a bunch of mini communities
right so this is more like a fostering
of communitas in any form so we've got
people for example if the text channels
that are going through and talking about
the religion that is another religion
right it got their little plans and
they're off doing their thing and we've
got a bunch of different channels which
focus topics and those people and then
we've got a bunch of stuff in the group
no voice arena where we just have
discussions and sit around we've got a
bunch of different voice channels
sometimes we've had three different
channels going right we're different
groups we're building communities
together and discussing different things
and mostly around John's work hopefully
but sometimes not like sometimes you
just get silly sometimes you do jams
parties right right very there's a lot
of things that the technology enables
and and yeah we're still experimenting
with that to a large degree and also
experiments with John's ecologies our
practices like it's Brett pointed out
we've got group lectio and we're
thinking about other things we're doing
so John doesn't do the meditations on
the weekends but we do right so we're
you know we're we're keeping that going
here a large degree yeah right right
right that's that's sort of the sense
that I get is that we're building the
technology builds the ability to go
ahead and have communitas in groups we
have an interest and still mix yeah
people come in and out of channels and
you know sometimes we have quite a few
people in the channels and you know
usually have a few speakers I'm probably
guilty of speaking the most
unfortunately and then sometimes you
know that it bounces around there's you
know four or five people bouncing off
each other it gets very interesting and
the topics vary quite a bit so that
that's that that's how I see this myself
and that's why I'm here to to engage in
that in fact people and figure out where
they're at that can help them right out
of wherever they're uh something I mean
they're here look for meaning or or in
the meaning crisis two stomachs
right for topic most of them yeah yeah a
course I really got a sense gymnasium
that's what that's what it's not like
for me an intellectual gymnasium
huh it's funny I'm here like I think
when I'm getting from I hear I think in
each one of you you guys are getting
pretty close with each other
like you're actually these are like real
relationships that you're forming and
like you're around with each
other and there's like there's a sense
of we and
it's just yeah it's really interesting
like even said like I don't like the way
you said that like John doesn't do the
thing on on the weekends what we do
right there's this sense of kind of
reforming that's just really interesting
also if I think about it like what
striking me as I'm listening to you too
is just this
you know I think I've just I personally
keep getting one of the things I think
just keeps coming getting this a deeper
and deeper levels of how much or
for human beings it's all about
possibility right like it's like we're
always in response to some possibility
right so like for example I you know I
haven't I haven't
spent any time thinking about how I can
walk through the wall today right but
because it's just it's just not doable
right
however if somehow you can have you can
have a conversation with me and you can
like legitimately have that possibility
open up for me that's all I'll think
about it for like you think about it for
probably a year like how is it
okay so there's this kind of way in
which in this in this very deep way like
if we're we're always responding as
Heidegger would say we're always an
inner response to being in the world
right and and there's some it's always a
possibility that is really even you
could say more primary or more real for
us than the actuality in fact is what
calls the actual to become the actual
for us in relationship to the possible
and so just this kind of sense of where
basically what I'm hearing you guys say
is that there's some possibility that
was evoke when you listen to John or or
the different people however you heard
about this and that like and they all
came together because you are in
response to that possibility and so
what's interesting is that you know this
is a kind of an interesting thing about
technology is it that technology
eliminates friction right like we just
think about all the in order to have
this experience with each other think
about all the that we didn't have
to do in order to have this right this
is it's crazy so like to be able to have
a sense of seeing somebody awakening a
possibility and then you come and then
all of a sudden you develop
relationships in relationship to that
horizon right without and that's more
available that's just
it's really cool
I guess they got wasn't surprised how
things are we didn't quite know how
things would turn out when we started
but it's yeah it's been a nice surprise
right on let me let me get to some
questions though so Jay doesn't have a
mic someone to read it so he says and I
think they said so he says contacts jvv
k which may be jumper Vicki but I'm not
sure became II expressed curiosity about
if how circling could would cope adapt
to a problem being dropped into a circle
was question what are your general
impressions intuitions on this is there
any precedent that approximates this has
any deliberate experiment than ran if so
what are the findings if not what would
you do your design recommendations be
for such an experiment
I just mean they can see an event text
you can see the you can see the custom
of the questions right is that part is
that person here
that person is here but doesn't have a
mic so so they but they can ah okay got
you oh that you
so imagining what you mean is like so is
it is it if we were to drop a problem
encircling meaning somebody has a
problem that they want solved or is it
the problem that's revealed about
circling or I want to just make sure I'm
getting kind of like what the questions
are about
what do you read in that question I feel
like there's an intent or I'd like is
like oh let's have this debate subject
oh yeah yeah totally
you know I it's interesting that
this is why I think dialogue oasiz
actually
there's a way in which there's a linking
that's gonna be happening in at least in
my mind right was circling right because
I think that there's a way that's
what was that Jay did I were you there
enjoying through iPhone so that if
interaction benefits flow I'm here so
yeah okay okay cool okay so how is your
question uh correct hey thank you
Oh totally so is that what you mean just
really quick is that what you mean about
like that like like what can we just
 solve a problem when we circle
I'm not quite sure because I'm riffing
off of genre Vicki himself I heard him
asked that question or contemplate that
possibility I cannot I would love to
give you the exact reference which video
and timestamp but I do not know but I do
yeah referencing that and that really
spray my curiosity as if he was
contemplating how to I don't want to say
push the envelope maybe redesign or
bring elements from circling and from
probably from other tools let's call
them and then see what emerges there so
I guess yeah the spirit of his question
was what would happen just basic
curiosity no childish childish in the
best sense I guess what would happen if
I would take a little bit of this and a
little bit of that in this case just
throw up a question a problem into a
circle and see how the circle itself
responds does that make sense
and yet totally make sense I think it's
like so circling proper per se right
it's like basically so there's an
exploit like in in practicing circling
one of the things that makes it circling
this is what I've been writing about
actually in this in this book and I've
been realizing like this actually
challenges
there's Emma I'm kind of getting why
circling is in psychology and it
actually is like it actually challenges
the notion of sociology at least and how
we understand it but like in one of the
one of the things that make circling
circling is it's precisely that where
it's the practice of being with what is
right so or another way of saying that a
more aspirational way of saying that is
is we're getting together and the reason
why we're getting together what we're
practicing and getting together like the
come from the talos is is how deeply or
profoundly can we be with what is right
and what that does is it is it
automatically brings us right into the
relationship right so
and it also highlights
it also highlights why circling exists
because
so much of relationships and relating
has been has been about solving problems
or fixing or or something like that
right and so circling Perseids is
precisely about like where you can you
can just reveal yourself and what's
going on you can talk about your
problems you can talk about all that
stuff and what we're gonna do is we're
gonna actually just kind of be with the
experience of getting your world and
being ourselves with your world without
intentionally trying to solve the
problem right and that's that's
incredibly difficult to do thus there's
a practice right
so that you practice not doing that and
so so that's kind of like the you could
say you know the the kind of like the
the literal
like at the deepest level like what
circling is about now what's what's
fascinating to me right is the paradoxes
is that when you spend that your time to
talk like not solving the person's
problem but just getting their world you
end up opening up the source of that
problem what's at stake if the problem
why it matters to them and then at some
point in so many ways
there's a there's the problem like not
only get solved but it actually becomes
kind of transcendent
it becomes like you get kind of
transcended in a certain way and and
it's it was those experiences that I was
experiencing in the in the in the
beginning of circling like before it had
a name that I'm like whatever that is
that thing that knows to restrain from
that even though it's difficult to not
just fight down but actually just be
with the phenomena of the being of being
with you right in exploring all the
levels of what has that a problem occur
for you who are you who's the eye that
liked his wedded who is given by that
horizon of that problem right and like
what who who who am i becoming in
relating to you right is that is that
and used to start to open up that world
I kept having these experiences of where
where not only was the problem
like solve per se but it was we started
to access a level deeper than any
solving or the problem could have been
put a fade so that's the
I just wanted to give some context
around that right that's the come from
with certainly a big part of the reason
why that happens is because of the your
frame shifting the problem you're just
approaching the problem from a different
frame and that helps create insight into
problem solving
yeah I think it's more like
it's more like what becomes more
available is the is the ground right
that presupposes the posing of the
question if you say right it's like it's
like more like kind of revealing the
intelligibility that has it show up at
as a problem right that you're
contending with right it starts to get
at those it starts to get at those kind
of deeper horizons and in that sense I
think circling is deeply a practice of
philosophy ah right
Daniel you had a question yeah so the
thing I've been obviously walking
against on this cord is a whole lot of
shadow projection yeah we do you guys
have shadows not from my side as much
like that's that's not my problem that's
someone else's problem when I project
when someone is projecting their shadow
in in a conversation do you have any any
tips how to deal with it or like like
avoidance like should you just run away
from it well it's interesting because
actually bring this up because this is
something I've been been really thinking
about this kind of sense of where this
is where relatedness can become very
like where relationship can become very
can lead to individuation in the UV
incensed right is and it has to do with
it has to do with listening right so one
of the big things about circling is that
we've practices if it's a practice of
ill I get almost like a deep ontological
listening and one of the things that you
noticed about listening that I've
noticed is that it's funny I think how
you learn to listen is that you start to
be is when you start to hear yourself
not listening correct like look at a
teacher once that is like what guy what
do you gotta get right before before
listening it becomes accessible to you
he's like you don't write until you can
hear that you're not listening like
listening is completely sealed from you
and I think that's oftentimes what
happened
in shadow in projection right is like I
don't notice because that's the thing
about projector like projecting it's
like you can't project really right like
you get by knowing that you're
projecting it's precisely the experience
of not knowing it right so there's so I
just wanted to present the possibility I
think oftentimes people actually in
learning to listen is they end up seeing
their shadow right and as the process of
learning how to listen right so that's
kind of like what's available I think in
the projection if you kind of look at it
like that like gives it some some
distinction about like well what's
possible in those moments right and
first of all I don't think that there's
anything you can do about somebody
projecting on you like I don't think
there's anything that you can do about
that like people but unfortunately
people are free right there's one thing
about like one thing I've noticed about
the matter is like because if you can
well we're talking about this shadow as
well if you can reflect back to them in
a different frame where they're not
feeling attacked right and then right go
socratic on them right like you have to
let them sell generate the solution I
think you can get really fun that
requires a sense of calm which obviously
isn't always there yes and also someone
was willingly participating right so
this needs to be some level of good
faith at least but yeah so you
I've been straggling these waters for a
while I I feel like I'm I'm getting good
at it but it's like right like when you
start dealing with other people's
shadows right your own one pops up like
frustrated like why are you not
listening like I told you this three
times already
yeah yeah that might be a great early
practice gratitude man well well I think
it's like tell me some of the ways
actually that you're that so this is
something that you've struggled with and
you said you're getting better at it
all right in dealing with it what is it
that's happened inside of you and in
those situations that that lets you know
that you're getting that you're starting
to deal with that differently mm-hmm so
right so what's what's preventing me
from acting correctly is is my own
narcissism right like my annoyance right
like Oh things have to go my way so so
when I can get the conversation still
kind of going my way then there's an
affordance there maybe that I can hop
into right so so as as long as as
there's this generative spirit being
manifest within within the dialog right
and and you have to make sure that it
never gets that fuzzier you know because
then you're in the dark yeah yeah so so
when when you're able to to have the
general disappear light like it I think
people sense it right like it's like oh
there's something different happening
here normal and take it they get caught
in this dream but yeah maybe you need to
ask pointed questions because I'm feel
like I'm floating here
well I think it's like what I'm hearing
you say is like it's like there's
something about you owning where you're
coming from it around it I think is what
I heard right is like no I'm here to
generate right like I'm in a certain
spirit and so from that I'm relating to
you from that right yeah that's the
articulation of Agape right like it's
just the sense of growth like I have a
really strong moral obligation sense
that when I feel that someone stuck that
I I need to do whatever I can to lift a
little bit right so there's a kind of
it's like a way of being in service in
some level right yeah something higher
going on you know I also think I would
say that like inkling oftentimes you
know cuz that comes up a lot when in
terms of one of the things that gets in
the way of relationships right I mean
obviously it's like one of the main
things is is that people stop seeing
each other right and then they then they
still talk to each other while kind of
talking to their projections right and
not really necessarily seeing the the
other as and so it is something beyond
their own representations of them right
and especially if you've got like if
you're triggered or there's a like a
pattern going on the guy from my do your
father and like you know there's like so
much there's so much there's so much to
understand and unpack in that this is
why relationships I think are such a
huge place upon which we grow by working
through the things that get in the way
of intimacy is almost synonymous with
realizing yourself right in realizing
the other right in all of in all of the
all of the more nests of the other right
and the suchness and the mortis of the
other is to in some way be able to
distinguish right your representation of
them from them right and that's not that
that's a that's a big that's actually a
big deal right because it's it's really
easy to confuse those things
when there's emotionality but one of the
things I'll notice is that when somebody
when it starts to occur to me that
somebody's talking to me but they're not
really talking to me right um I'll be
like you're like especially if they're
like maybe maybe reactive to me right or
something like that and I'll be like
what what am i doing right now and I'll
just get interested in like am I like
loving you am I being mean to you am i
what am i doing they're like oh no oh
you yeah you're trying to tell me what
to do okay so I'm trying to tell you
what to do right there's a there's a way
where you do it like a genuine genuinely
like who look like who am I to you
because there is this phenomena of that
there's a guy that they're relating to
in their head and that that's something
that they can share with me about Who I
am to them right and it invites it
invites
it it invites it out into the open and
then we can get interested in that right
and maybe you know I mean a lot of times
I find out like well actually yeah I was
a dick right like you are just
projecting yours that was accurate but
there's a there's a way that we can get
we can feel in good faith right in the
spirit of like no I actually want to
connect with you like what is going on
for you like Who am I might like telling
you have to do am i what what's what's
what's happened of feel that as I asked
that like it invites the other person's
world out as legitimate but also you're
presupposing that there's that that
there is a difference between there can
be a difference between how you see me
and who I am right and so that that
curiosity invites that in to become part
of the relationship and to relate about
I'm just curious guy as you've done that
more and more
has there been more convergence in what
you thought the other person's answer
would be and what they answered like
have you become better at figuring out
how you're being perceived by them
before they do before they tell you that
makes sense
well I you know what did you think I
just I think I would say I've gotten
better at noticing when they're
addressing somebody that and they're not
addressing me like the the the sense of
feeling that difference right so for
example like a good like a really common
thing is like when people go on rants
yeah we all go on a rant we all have our
rants like well we'll be talking and
like we'll be we'll be addressing
something going on right here and then
I'll just start going on some
ranch right and then you're sitting
there and the person is going on Iran
being there like whoo they're like not
even even noticing whether or not I'm
I'm listening to them right
but there's that's one example of all
these subtle ways were like the I vow
connection you can start to you can
start to feel when it's there and you
can start to feel when it's less there
and just that you could say we'll call
that relational proprioception is
something that I think is developed like
in articulating a lot more through time
and what's great about that is that like
is that just kind of noticing those
differences you don't really have to
notice anything else right you don't
have to know what the projection is
about you don't have to you can just
notice like oh yeah it seems like we
just disconnected right there was that
is that true right
like look what happened for you right in
that moment right there did that answer
your question or do they go on a rant
yeah no I think well I'm trying to get a
sense of you know you know you does the
practice that you're doing and asking
that question help you help you figure
out am I being received the way I mean
to project myself or that part yeah oh
that part yeah totally
well it's it's what's interesting about
that one too is is you're just Nate
you're naming a part a subtlety of
relationship that
I think is going on all the time right
which is on some level I have like part
of a tuning into you is somehow sensing
Who I am to you who I think you think I
am so for example it's like just so just
imagine if that's who you thought I was
right now to you guys was something that
was trying to like destroy destroy that
the the discord server right or if you
thought that like I hated you and I
didn't want to be here right if there
was a sense in which on some level
you're either perceiving that or
thinking you perceive that that that's
so much regulates or like you'll you're
you're in relationship with that right
so I think just understanding that that
like part of a tune meant right into a
tuning to you is also a tuning to a
sense in which we're always doing
anyways right which is I'm also attuning
to the domain of the me that you think I
am in this moment so I think that we're
always on some level attuned to that
right in fact if you're not like if
you're if you're not attuned to that
like that's a big part of coordinating
in an interaction because I do so much
relationship has to do with coordination
right they're kind of back and forth
there's so much communication goes on
there right I think I yeah I I think
you're right though I think that that's
just become a lot more of a sense of
like that I am tuned into Who I am with
you and I can like if you went or
something or or if there's a sense where
all of a sudden it looked like that you
are trusting me or all of a sudden I
could start to feel that and then relate
to it in some level right right
encircling is where you practice being
really really like you practice you know
yoga boots of that stuff where you like
explicitly say I'm imagining that you
hate me right now right is that true
right like and you're like well it was
early hate it's just like I wanted to
destroy you for a second it was like
okay you know what
so so but I think that where it plays
out in in your daily interactions is
yeah it's a way of caring for somebody
right it's like the way of caring is
like are you trusting me like are they
trusting me right now like it's a way of
tuning into all of the characters in the
dialogue right so I'm being able to
respond to it
do you like I'm I'm sensing here and
maybe well I'll just talk about myself
right like at a certain point right like
you're you're in the space where you're
so like so attuned and I'm like worrying
if there's like an arrogance or like you
you're like five levels higher than
everybody else and it's like well like
is that even healthy right like I'm Dee
do you sense that tension somewhere or
do you think like because I think it's
like I think Mike's my experience has
been the more you could say relationally
attuned it seems to just my general
sense is that it seems to like it seems
to allow it seems to afford a lot of you
like implicit and obvious humility right
like it's uh I think I think it's kind
of like where you're coming from with it
right being able to be really attune to
the moment right the part of part of
being attuned is this is if you think
about you you think about like to be
attuned presupposes a tone right a tone
us right in which you're like like so
for example if you were chanting
together right there's that experience
and you've ever chanted together it's
that experience of like everyone hits
the same note in the whole world that
the whole
field gets different right where it's
like you're right on everyone's when you
go off a little bit and the whole thing
sounds different so you're constantly
part of tuning right is this sense of
like not like I'm doing something from
you or I'm seeing something that's true
about you that that isn't already
feeling into the relationship so what's
you know it taught the thing that it's
it's like I think the humility comes
from that you're tuning in to something
that's kind of not you right but you're
finding out what's true there's a
quality of life not manipulating you
coming into relationship
but I think I mean I think your question
probably comes from well actually what
is your question come from well well no
well I guess itself darling I guess for
example with my parents right it's like
I look at them and I I see them as kids
right like there's so unaware of so many
things and it's like well what do I do
yeah and I still have to deal with yeah
so so yeah III inevitably end up being
arrogant because I know everything right
and I have to express it yeah well I
it's funny like when you said that it
was funny I had this sense of like and
he said like what was it he said like
they don't know they don't know so many
things
right I had this sense of like
one level I felt this like okay I'm
already always irritated with them like
I get that sense of like I'm already
showing up on some level anticipating
them being stupid assholes and I'm gonna
have to whatever that is right but then
there's that sense of like the thing I
got curious about is is he's right
before that though there was before the
irritation
what is the experience of for you them
not knowing
like what is that what's the experience
that's hard about that because for you
in your you want to lift him up and you
can't yes
yeah then what's that leg done I'm
dragging myself down in the process
which is all right today right so it's
is it like it's usually in talking are
you talking with you just like right now
like when you said I want I want to lift
them up in the process I just felt this
sense of like Oh like I felt like closer
into my own skin or something in that
moment like something innocent I think
it was a response to it when I imagine
to be an innocent an innocence and your
behalf or the wall that's there and I
keep running into it yeah yeah yeah and
you still care uh-huh
right what's there for you right now
yeah yeah I think it's kind of like we
just take that example right there like
um I mean the thing I were to get
question likes is that that's that's I
think the thing it's like what I'm
really kind of getting is that you you
you care about them and and
that caring about them has put you into
various like frustrations and probably
dilemmas and like as you said walls and
there's been a whole experience of that
right but the sense of innocence I get I
just noticed I have a response like an a
heartfelt response to you and that like
oh yeah
like if you didn't care about them that
seems to be what presupposes all the
struggle well I hope getting strong
enough to carry all the burden that's
the that's the only solution yeah yeah I
appreciate you sharing all that with us
yeah you really do percent Persephone
has a question to read how do you deal
with erotic feelings that arise in
yourself or others during circling oh
you just just act on them I'm just
kidding well it depends on like you know
I mean there's so many things to kind of
consider and that obviously right thus
the best the question
and how disclose if you want to be right
but they're all things that like that
are you can you can share them right you
can share them as long as the intention
right is to share them with the intent
of being in relationship right here
right like that's the
that's kind of you could say is the
underlying way of communication I think
it has to do with like right speech
right which is where it's it's it's it's
what isn't is is is when we shares is
often times I think when we share in
kind of an inauthentic mode I'm talking
or saying whenever I'm saying I mean I
make I mean you may even be using kind
of like authentic speak language right
but my intention is to actually control
some outcome right and that and that
what we're trying to practice encircling
is is really just start to notice what
the truth is for you right as you as you
see it is pay attention to that to that
level right and
and then in their tuned way right share
disclose what's most real for you and
then in that way you need when you do
that right you kind of know that you're
doing that because you have no idea
what's gonna happen after you get done
sharing it right so like like you can
share that like I think the thing that
would be I've seen a lot of people where
it gets a little bit shadowy is I've
seen a lot of people share that kind of
stuff right in order in order to make an
outcome happen right like so you really
want to like really like the place that
you're coming from is that like yeah in
like this is what's happening with me
right and like if you want to roll them
really share that and risk that and open
that up like really without an intention
of an outcome that's the that's the best
thing that you want to practice
you
what makes me wonder you know encircling
and you know yeah you said talked about
how much you want to disclose or do you
do you encourage people to disclose the
thoughts that may be more inappropriate
and normal that you wouldn't normally
disclose in normal conversation our
masks that you know or if you you know
you want we keep in how do you get me
fat during during your sessions well
it's kind of like it's you know it's
kind this is a good this is a good way
to look at it like if we say
right of all the things that go through
my mind right with another human being
what are what are those things that if I
say them will invite intimacy right
right it's like um and I think what it
is is it's those things that if I share
them and I have the experience of you
not understanding me and or not
accepting me I will in fact feel pain
right like that basically is I think
that's but if if I share them and I feel
like that you're you I feel understood
and I feel accepted like I will feel
closer to you right but if I if I share
that and I risk it and then I feel
rejected I will feel pain that's the
thing about intimacy it's it's it's
that's a good a good like it's a good
measure right of the place that you want
to come from or what you're practicing
when you're circling is it kind of a
proactive vulnerability right
that's the edge I think right that's
really the edge
sometimes you know sometimes sometimes
people actually you know people actually
it's an edge for them to share genuine
like love and appreciation for somebody
right
like and it's a lot easier for them it's
not it's less risky for them to be
critical right so it's like for that
person is that maybe oh the thing that's
most real right is is oh I'm actually I
like you a lot
right and then it's like for you it's
like it maybe
yeah I'm just noticing when as you were
sharing I'm I'm I'm don't want to tell
you that I like you a lot
it's like that's the
that's the practice
I think you have a question
read it
okay he says nice picture I think the
painting behind you who's your favorite
philosopher from that picture and why
Oh Socrates
yeah Socrates Oh
anything I think it's like Socrates is
this
you
well I'm learning what that actually I'm
learning about that with Socrates it's
like he's uh
if there's a way in which I I feel like
that Socrates
really deeply deeply exemplifies
they're both eyes courage right and
and letting go of all support like all
all propositional like supports all
reasons all reasonable things right and
and courageously dismantles it
in such a way that that's deeply in
relationship right where the where you
really I think he exemplifies courage
right and especially courage in a
relationship and a kind of humility that
I think is deeply Socratic that I I I
admire
I mean I think I think we've reached go
Oh at mark mark has a question
hello Kay I was about something though
I'm a little bit skeptical about this
circling thing right it looks a little a
little a little like therapy to me and I
don't like therapy so I was sort of
wondering the one thing in the most of
the descriptions that people talk about
when they talk about Strickling it seems
like it seems a lot like group therapy
without a second topic and I like what
you've been highlighting here because
it's given me a better flavour so maybe
I can let go of some of my trepidation
around it right okay just wondering you
know what it what are all the features
that that orange group therapy other
than the fact that it's not around one
topic right it's it's more around
related you know individual
relationships to some extent right
individual relationships if you could
isolate the things that are sort of like
in addition to the group therapy aspect
yeah I would be helpful for me to just
sort of let go right well I think
there's probably some of your skepticism
is founded right like in my opinion
anyway so like so I think that there's
it may is one of the one of the
difficulties has been for me right with
with this and watching a girl all over
the world is just watching it like a lot
of people calling circling what looks to
me is like kind of no no no shitty
therapy or something so I I think I
share some of the skepticism and I
personally just doing a lot of work of
trying to get that to get that clear
fundamentally the reason why circling is
in existence is is to be with what is in
its totality right like and and to be in
and to realize it I think it's
ontological right it's not I don't think
it's I don't think it's psychology right
it's about it's about deeply being human
together and practicing disclosing more
and more and more and more of what what
is with that sense of of a aspiring to
the mystery and so I think that that's
the context of it right it's I think
where it's not it's definitely not
therapy in the sense that actually be
precisely because we're not there to
we're not there to get over something or
even to improve something right like the
reason why we're practicing is because
we think that there's something we're
gonna get out of it but it's not like
it's not like we're working through
somebody's issues or that we're
analyzing somebody right it's more like
we're just getting in more and more
relationship with what it's like to be
together and I think the kind of
the the the fight this sense of Ilia
right the that Philae attic relationship
of of where the way I'm responding to
you relational relational II reflects
back more than my response right the
thing in that that that movement of like
that kind of autopoietic reciprocal
opening right is I think is the you
could say is is kind of like really what
I think circling in essence really
highlight is is being with you in such a
way that like through being with you
like I encourage you to reveal more of
yourself and need to reveal more of
myself in a way that increases like a
deeper sense of of relationship right
and all the things that come up in the
face of that right that's really the
that's how I would say that it's it's
it's not working through trauma cooker a
it's not it's not it's not working
through your mother issues it's not any
of that stuff
although
in fact I was just writing about this
actually because this is what I on this
on this paper this paper of that it in
and understand some of the confusion
because a lot of
if you look at it you know there's
groups it looks like it looks like
something right out of a human potential
movement right like on some level the
way that it's structured but the context
is what's decisive with it right and and
so I think in a lot of ways in a very
very deep way right for me
it's a it's it's really it's really
about like confronting being right
like really asking the question of being
and what is it - what is it to be you
and to face to really like face who we
are and how we understand things and to
be with it like more profoundly in the
look reality in the face and and - and
to look at our tragedies in the tragic
element of life and like and just
continually wonder ously step into it in
more more profound ways that's the
practice
yeah I see I mean maybe I could stab it
reframing this into my crazy framework
just in case it's great so I'm thinking
of this in terms of you know I like to
use John's language for some reason
because it's so helpful
III think of this in terms of it seems
to me like you're you're taking a
situation that looks a lot like group
therapy to your point right I mean it's
anyways right yeah yes dad confronting
issues head-on you're confronting beings
so that's one frame up in the group as
they react and interact rather than the
thing they're interacting about is that
is a sound yes correct
yes yes yes yeah that's another way
that's definitely another way of saying
that's a perspective switch to the frame
of we'll call it beings right and then a
discussion on the beings and there
is it would it be their family cents or
their felt sense in the moment maybe
something like that and then that
facilitates I mean that would is what
would facilitate a good circle sample
does that sound accurate yeah for sure
well let me ask you what is some of the
things that like in listening to me what
is
what are some of the things that you're
hearing that has your skepticism be a
little bit relieved yeah
well the more I listen to you the more
the easier it is for me to understand
what you're saying right to some extent
you just play up here right and I'm I'm
a humble little down here right it's
it's hard for me to follow some people a
lot of people actually because I don't
want philosophy just just a feature or a
buck depending upon how you look at it
and but but what I'm getting from you is
these little tidbits like genuine
opening and approaching people with an
assumption of acceptance I was like oh
that's that's an interesting way to you
know to talk about a problem right I
mean that's it's in some component yeah
I apologize I do have to go back right
it's some component that's group therapy
right like we're all here together
because we have a sex addiction or
whatever it is right and so we're all
talking about that that's their that's
their very proper thing right because
they're all accepting of each other
because they know they all have the same
problem and so the interesting thing is
you know assuming circling works and
like I mean you seem pretty popular so
it seems that you've been doing it for a
while there's got to be something there
right yeah and and so it just seems like
you know once I get this this once I put
it in my terms right with the
perspectival shift into the frame of
being right then then it starts to make
more sense to me in terms of what might
actually be happening right because like
I know how therapy works and clearly
that's not how certainly works right it
couldn't be but circling clearly works
so not confronting things head-on and
I'm a pragmatist it's like what what
what do you mean you're not confronting
things of course you go after things
just hit him right so yeah that's why I
think it was difficult for me sort of I
guess until now I like I like the things
like sentence downs I think that's
amazingly useful
practices and we've been using that
everywhere it's like oh well let's let's
experiment with some of John's stuff oh
we need some sentence temps yeah right
and so this is making more more and more
sense about you know maybe what you're
doing when you're breaking into that
frame is your gendering a greater level
deeper level of a community AHS that's
not Kate it's so possible at the other
way
yeah right yeah and and actually
intending intending to it right so what
one of the you know one of the things
I've noticed about about you know hardly
ever happens right is most when we
relate or we communicate it's usually
triangular almost all of our
conversations are it's like where
there's me there's you and then there's
like what we're talking about right and
but it's it's very it's much rare to
actually have the about be the thing
that we're experiencing right now the
relating that's that's happening right
now and that seems to be you know
usually that for most people I think
happens it's just a dimension that's
hardly ever touched right and when you
touch it it's really interesting it's
immediately alive right like if I all I
got to do is just like if you're if
you're at the you know if you're with
the grocery store clerk right you're
sitting there and like it's imagine
doing the groceries and you're like oh
yeah being with you I'm noticing I I'm I
feel love in my heart like what's it
like for you right now you there's this
level where you're like whoa like you
just get this sense of like that would
just be inappropriate right well I think
what it reveals is how the that we just
dropped into a level of dimensionality
that's a lot closer in right and so you
could say circling has a lot to do with
starting to tolerate the and you could
say the the various anxieties and
exhilarations and the whole experience
of whatever that is that gets Wiggy when
we start talking about now that thing
that just goes like oh like there's
something about it is so confronting of
our own existence right that um that
when we bring that into the into the
fray there's just a different dimension
that that opens up and so like kind of
like getting good if you will or
proficient of them engaging the
machinery that can move towards those
those situations and I think is it's
another way of thinking about it so okay
yeah to go back to John's frame won't go
away this is yeah this is interesting so
it sounds like you're just forcing
people in in essence I hate to use the
word forcing but it's that sorry it's a
clumsy it's a clumsy way of saying it
but hopefully you understand what I mean
you're forcing people to deal with the
participation in the group so you're
forcing people into a perspective frame
with the prospective switch and that's
what's affording them you know sort of
the clumsy ability in essence to
navigate that space right and so yeah
and so you know just to put the finer
point on it
although no one here needs it except
except maybe you is that to me is part
of religio right that's that's what your
exercising is in village you I maybe
John will disagree I haven't I haven't
really nailed down his definition of
religio so hopefully you won't want too
badly if I have misused it here
but I respect I will switch into this
participatory way of relating and that's
specifically not therapy to your point
therapy is all propositional
okay yeah yeah yeah totally totally
worth you have it do you want to
rephrase the person like do you have a
better way of articulating that yeah
just tying tying people up yes actually
right like original might be a better
like kinder version I'm a pragmatist I
don't care about kindness yeah we've got
a couple more questions but I just want
to check on on time are you okay for for
a couple more yeah I forget
yeah thanks basically had this sense
that I was kind of maybe not
representing John we're Vicki's
curiosity accurately so I wanted to you
wanted to invite you to talk to him
directly on that topic what did he mean
about dropping a problem into a circle
my sense maybe I'm wrong
be curious to correct that perception if
it's wrong but yeah it was more about a
neutral topic or more of a community
level problem not so much in the
therapeutic frame of an individual's
issues without said moving forward now
on to my own curiosity and before doing
so just wanted to practice maybe what if
I'm grasping what at least part of this
is about what Mark said about
approaching something with a frame of
acceptance my heart hurt so that was
this sharp pain in my my chest that was
really curious so anyway I just wanted
to put that out there on to the question
itself so you see actually can we could
we pause first I guess yeah yeah so that
were so right there like see that that
came that came into salience for you
uh-huh
that's interesting what's interesting
about it
okay so that stick me another direction
but that's fine okay um the physicality
of it was the first thing how sharp who
felt like I had a knife you know really
a knife deep in my my chest so that was
really intense the physicality of it as
if there's this quality of wounding
around acceptance and whatever it is
so yeah mmhmm right so is it is it kind
of like is it if you feel into the sea
this is this is what I'm doing right now
like this is this Sensibility yeah I
just do circling this very sensibility
here of like I'm in relationship with
you you say something and then I have a
like I have a response from myself yeah
then I don't understand totally mm-hmm
but we can then listen to it right and
follow it all the way down and find out
what you understood or what the what the
sharp sensation understood right right
about what it was responding to right
right and go with it instead of trying
to do whatever to it right right gotcha
yeah yeah totally so it's like so for
example is that is it kind of is it the
sense of like oh when he said wounding
hmm I got this sense of like oh is that
like kind of just the idea that somebody
would just that except that just a
mentioning of acceptance as a practice
um highlights where you haven't been
accepted maybe is it like that kind of a
sensor yeah maybe I don't know maybe and
also just the sense of that that that's
possible so mm-hmm
I don't want to go Sion on this thing
but and assume there's
wounding around acceptance or lack
thereof
and developmental issues so anyway I
would assume that personally I don't
know it's it was just fascinating how
physical it was there was no content
yams of you know memory yeah it was just
this physical sensation as I was trying
to formulate my question and think okay
did I represent John's question but then
I was listening to you guys and
something came alive for me I was like
thinking about that and the body just
went in the other direction like the
mental discourse was you know digging to
whatever and then the physicality of it
and that just that mismatch was
fascinating that's why I brought it up I
don't have you know to put to practice
what I was seeing modeled by you and
also knew yeah your videos etc it's all
about what's what's in the body what's
what's alive in the moment regardless
what blah blah blah was in that in the
end yeah
totally
the sense I just like the right I went
out with you that was really it was
really really great like Google it was
just alive that them for me is alive
yeah
you know when you're talking about the
curiosity thing you know going back to I
think to the question that was asked
about curiosity mm-hmm that actually I
was like oh yeah there's a distinction
here right and in the difference it's
and I know John talks about this and
I've noticed this too is that I think
that there's there is a very very big
difference between curiosity and wonder
hmm right
mmm look like in that it kind of relates
to like curiosity is more the
problem-solving mode I mean where if you
increase the experience of curiosity
it's not play it's not pleasant whereas
like with wonder right
you increase wonder it's it's it's it's
well if you get too much you know you go
into it you lose your grip right he'll
go into horror but like but that sense
of that's the that's the thing that I
think that were like we're practice
there were man using mm-hmm like and
maybe the virtue right I think maybe the
virtue this is what's fascinating to me
about purchase right like is that you
can be a virtue can be the tale oh so
that's organizing all of your
perceptions and what you're doing and
what you're and you can find out about
it after the fact right hmm
and I think I think a lot of what but
virtue that's being practiced and
circling is and I talked about this
actually I think last time on the UM
Dysport server is
leverets hmm right in reverence is is
really interesting because when you have
deep reverence for something it
simultaneously has this simultaneously
discloses your own finitude right
there's a humility with reference but
the humility is really given by the more
nests of of what's before you right so
there's this kind of way where you have
deep reverence for somebody all right
it naturally leads to respect no II
respect is you can respect something
without having reference for it you can
follow the rules and all that kind of
stuff but like when you have the respect
that comes from reverence and that has a
lot to do with feeling you know do you
think about it like tuning into that
which is and it really is from wonder
right of leg not like I'm trying to
solve this problem so I can get it over
with but what is like like what's the
mystery here going on right like in into
tuning to that and tolerating that and
opening up to more and more and more of
that right right yeah yeah as I was
hearing that what came up for me was a
sense of
well almost devotion almost a devotional
quality to be in that presence and it's
now it's not like that submissive
quality oh there's a rule I have to
submit no not about much more of a beer
horizontal quality of relating not you
know vertical the rules I must follow
I must submit yeah no so yeah anyway
that's that's that was rich what I
wanted to ask is a more maybe less
wondering and more curious given that
frame I would assume there's you know
diversity in levels of experience
encircling and I'm curious about how
does that show up and is there like any
kind of like in martial arts for
instance or you know you have different
classes for different levels of
proficiency does that happen encircling
you get like advanced circles and move
you know beginner circles or not so much
could you speak a little bit about that
if that shows up and if yeah how that's
dealt with oh yeah yeah it's well I
think it what's what's what's
interesting about circling is there's
another thing that's interesting about
like making it to stick in terms of its
distinction from something like therapy
is that most of the people that get into
circling the practice circling is
actually on some level as learning is
what has become the practice circling is
learning how to actually facilitate it
that's what so imagine like it's B's
analogous to going to see your therapist
and what and how you get over your
issues is learning to how to become your
therapist your therapist therapist right
right um like so so there is a Talos
right that there there there are there
are levels and distinctions and there
are kind of you could say belts you know
different versions of Bell because
because there it is aspirational right
there is a sense of aspiration
and
what's cool about it also what's hard
about it right is is that those levels
are it's it's a it's a skin it's so
relationship right it's like
[Music]
there are skills in relating mm-hmm
however if you have all those skills and
you don't have any capacity to be
related right um in fact I know people
who are we're kind of like autistic or
something and they've like read books
and stuff and they they say all the
right things but they don't have the
capacity right Johnny related mm-hmm
right so so I think it's like when you
start to deepen a capacity right of
especially for human beings relatedness
that now we're starting to talk about
development like though you're starting
to talk about like what it is to develop
as a person right mom and in so in that
sense there's a way in which to become a
better circular right is synonymous with
is synonymous with development Eva
that's what that's what makes it really
really I think awesome and inspiring and
also terrifying right
relational capacity if that's fair
increasing mm-hmm perfect thank you yeah
thanks Connor you bet you yeah nice
talking with you
likewise Thanks thanks for feeling the
pain in your solar plexus when we talked
about acceptance yeah like last question
I think on our list Emanuel really
connected to becoming your therapist
also the subject that you were guys were
on was also something that was on my
mind I would like to specify the
question that he was asking like how
would you present circling to kids in in
like a game fashion well yes yeah well
you know it's funny if if the I think
what I found is that when when kids our
kids are having a childhood that wasn't
like mine they kind of already huh right
like they can it's always a challenge to
get them to hold their attention on
something but like on some level there's
there's a way if there's an openness
right a visceral openness that kids just
naturally have right that that lack
self-consciousness so there's on one
level there's a there's a there's a a a
like a an innocent authenticity that
kids have but I would say just in terms
of practice it's like the relating like
more of the authentic relating games is
probably the best thing with
right because the whole thing with kids
depending on their age is like how do
you get them to actually pay attention
to the thing right yeah encouraging
right so maybe the context would be with
their parents right so yeah really so so
then there's an adult in the room who
supposedly has yeah yeah so yeah what's
the context tell me it tells me a little
bit more about the context of it right
so what I what is in my mind right like
I'm I'm with Mark going to Jones ideas
and we're trying to see okay what's what
does society mean and we came up with
this idea to build like a game each
thing right like a tabletop style of
game where we present all of these
packaged psycho technologies to families
or whatever writers groups of students
or whatever and then then have them
participate in these things and then
those things supposedly afford things to
them like you're opening up themselves
and yeah I have a you know speaking just
in that world I've done I've worked with
with people where with families actually
in the way I've done it is I'll I'll
like basically move in with the family
for like two weeks and then and then
just I mean I'm pretty I think I'm I'm
relatively got whatever skill that is it
can kind of lose the guests in the house
feel pretty quickly right so like you
know that them the families before they
know it or just you know they're not on
their best behave
here or something right and so the so
just and that's been I probably learned
more from those experiences that
anything man right so what will just
happen is I'll just like kind of blend
into the family into the background and
then the family will just start to do
their family thing right and then I'll
be in the corner right like say like the
mother comes out right and I'm in the
corner reading or something and you know
the mother comes out and she's panicked
already frustrated with her husband and
upset with their kids for not
appreciating what she's do it the
breakfast that she's about to make right
you can't right then the kids run past
and they don't eat and then she's
frustrated and then does that sulky
thing and then right then the argument
starts and then you know the dad comes
out and does whatever whatever the you
know the dynamic kind of like locks and
loads and right before it locks and
loads and you could say takes the family
dump if you will I'll be like pause
right like cause everything kind of
stops and and I the thing I've noticed
is that what's what's what's amazing
about those experiences is that is that
I'll just cut I'll stop I'll stop that
dynamic right and then I'll just start
to unpack it with them right and I'm you
know and there's a lot of prevention
that you obviously need to have there
and stuff so there's a lot of background
with that but like you know then I'll
just have them start to communicate
their experience which is which is
they're just genuine feelings and what
starts to happen is at some point you
you really kind of feel the family
system or the family drama lift right
like like and in the family system or
the drama is some version of what makes
it drama is like there be it's being
dramatic so that it can get the drama to
stop right that's the that's the whole
thing about the drama is like I'm gonna
hurt you so you'll stop
hurting me right that that whole
iteration of that thing and so the
dynamical the dynamic will be released
and it reveals like the real tragedy
like the true tragedy right like the
pain the familiar pain of the of the
dynamic is released but then you're then
you see these people so it's so
incredible like you see these people who
are designed to love each other then
have no idea who each other are right
and that nakedness right and that
vulnerability of realizing that they
have no idea like who each other they
are and then beginning to facilitate
that that conversation right like live
and it seems it seems like with kids
that that the way I've seen it work
anyways is like really it is really true
like like the jump like what the parents
lead the charge on that right the more
disclose of and honest and open and you
know responsible they are about the
communication and transparent right the
kids just respond accordingly and that's
that's that's that's the thing I've
noticed about with families that work
with families myself yeah totally I
guess I'll end with asking you what is
it like to be you right now here with us
at the end of this conversation
oh it's C I feel a sense of warmth and I
I feel as it's funny I feel a comfort
like at just a comfortable familiarity
with everybody like there's just a sense
of like
I kind of forgot that we were doing
something right I just feel the sense of
I think what I'm responding to is
one is I'm like I'm I'm responding to
and appreciating
like the ice
it's actually what we talked about the
beginning is like I really just get the
sense of that there's that like the
cosmic wonder that you're all touch with
the cosmic wonder and then some level
you're all here you're all very
different right but like ultimately
you're all here and I feel that sense of
residence with that and the sense of you
are together this and that you guys have
really built something here and there is
a we happening here and so I felt I just
feel
a certain a certain sense of a disc a
disc or did homeless really great breath
do you mind if I ask a question sure
so you mentioned a distinction between
curiosity and wonder and you also
mentioned Socrates so in the Socratic
dialogue method I'd like to be a little
bit skeptical and challenge you a bit
and say that I don't think they're
diametrically opposed I think they're
actually interconnected and they feed
off each other I think curiosity is the
desire to know or want to know something
whereas wonder the squealing of awe
which i think comes from when you learn
something and then the reverence is the
respect I think you feel
once you've encountered that awe it's
like the app traffic coming down would
you agree with that or yeah that sounds
about right
yeah that sounds about right to me I
heard it once but somebody described it
the other day I thought about this ever
since when he said like yeah
or wonder right is that experience where
you're in a room and you've been in the
same room your whole life and all of a
sudden you push against the wall and
there's a door that opens right like
that experience of like the thing that
you that you've been inside of your
whole life revealed revealed more of
itself and in some sense it's just right
it's been like
it's been hidden in plain sight
there's something about wonder that has
to do with
um that sense of it's not so much it can
be right the sense of like discovering
something brand-new right but I think
that the way that I'm thinking about at
least what I'm using it is that sense of
where what is most normal through feels
it's uncanny that's right when it
reveals its its
it's hiddenness right a leaf l fa a--
right
just so there's that way the height of
your talks about right truth not as not
as correctness or correlation right but
but in a more primordial sense the
Alethea sense of truth which is
Lafayette was a mythical Lake of
forgetfulness so
Alethea is the event of that which was
hidden is the event of it sun hiddenness
right so when people go like a good a
good place to notice that when people
like when somebody says the truth and
all of a sudden they go mmm oh ah like
that sense of mm ah like you could eat
there's a wetness of those are like
almost like a little only fee as I think
of them there are little moments where
it's like Oh like little moments of
insight where it's not so much way out
in front of you but it's like further
behind right the door opens up you're
like oh the the thing I'm most familiar
with just revealed something about
itself and I think one of the things the
wonder is part of that is I always
thought for years that what what that
highlighted with ilithyia was was the
emphasis on what's revealed right but
it's like the the more you think about
it the more I'm realizing like no it's
actually it's unconcealed this it's
unhidden this so so on one level it's
true right Bob goes to the lake of
forgetfulness it's missing the Bob's
missing right he's totally concealed
then all of a sudden bob is not revealed
and there's that experience of like oh
my god Bob like I didn't even know you
were and so it's it's true bob is
revealed but the mood or what's reveal
about being is that being is concealed
right that being dwells in its in its in
its concealed in its hiddenness right
and that's the profoundness of
of content concealment is present that
there's a wonder happening like in the
thing that's most closest to us so
there's a that's one of the things of
why I think reading Heidegger and
circling for me like went real
hand-in-hand in ways it and I didn't
understand at the time but I think has a
lot to do with that you know where what
kind of phenomenological existential
phenomena her mimetic phenomenology
really does is it tries to it tries to
to to start to see what is most most
that's most concealed in its nearness
right what's like what's concealed in
it's obvious and I think circling has a
lot to do with that of like okay what's
like what what's going on right here
what's the thing that like how come I
felt this way what's and just unpacking
that level of things so that's why I
think it's really really like about
fundamentally wonder
but I've made the thing that you said of
like yeah that sounds like actually the
Socratic dialogues I was thinking about
like where Socrates poses a problem
right and in everyone then he just
watches everybody just be confused and
the unhooks all the problems and then
some level you're watching this like
everybody's like getting frustrated
right because no one can say the virtue
and they thought that it was true in and
Socrates is like like pulls the rug out
from underneath that and and at the end
there's this quality of
no one solved that problem but there's
this thing that's present right that
like has is John often often highlights
this is like nothing we didn't solve
that problem however everyone wants to
have their kids spend more time with
Socrates right there's this kind of
relatedness that's there that
through that so I think I really kind of
get what you're saying as well
all right my face is starting to hurt
from I'd like not doing so much so
express my gratitude that I'm I'm
feeling to you guy thank you so much for
for your time your attention and sharing
with us and and and I want to I such
gratitude to everyone here and this
community in this community that's
developing and and well thankful that
every you know so many people were
opening up today and that's that's great
so thank you so much to everyone you're
welcome back any nice to meet you thank
you the back thanks so much take care
and thanks manual for recording