yeah or we sit around and talk about how
we're creating an idea cafe with
together tech and fix the world we're
always down by every Friday it's where
the world feels incremental II better
every Friday but you don't feel it yes I
also threw some things up on up on the
agenda but I think don't actually
remember what you had said you were
doing philosophy could you know I wrote
it down and come just quickly looking
into no that was for the week before
wasn't it looking into just in time
coordination that was clearly for the
week before oh
is there anything okay I don't think you
did take anything on I think you're just
said you were going to if the website
person contacted you you would talk with
her and I'm guessing she didn't contact
you yeah
so I said I would contact her and find
out what's going on and we are going to
meet next week while our kids are in
school for her to run me through it she
also got me to sign up for a MailChimp
account and for some reason zoo even
though I've kind of said a few times and
we don't mean sue integrated I'm not
paying for zooms so they can integrated
and website but I think I did say but if
it can be done with the free account
then we might as well
right leg me if that does become a space
where we're hosting idea cafes on the
website that would be great but also I
feel like you'd have to use a paid
WordPress site too like that's too much
the I didn't realize you had a had a web
site integration I neither did I except
for the fact that she's you know yeah it
doesn't surprise me but my guess is
gonna be done within the next week okay
for the information cool MailChimp and
she's setting up that piece of it also
through MailChimp they have their own
video oh sorry
website creation tool that I was
thinking of using as a landing page like
for the what an inconvenient I'm not you
know fixing the world the world
no she just resonated with it but it I'm
in the middle of fixing it and I mother
me in it was I saying oh yeah for a
landing page
I have almost finished the video series
there's one or two more that I want to
do and then I have to actually put like
the descriptions I have eight up with
the thumbnail which is big for me and
they're in their own playlist but
they're all private and now my
insecurities alone were my
indecisiveness kicks in now I'm like
wait do I release them all one day apart
or do I release them all at once with
like the landing page so you can follow
through and it's in the description and
I think both I want it to be unlisted
but released every day and I don't think
you can do that you can go from private
to public but I don't think you can go
from unlisted to public and have it
scheduled yeah so I don't I don't know
if I'm a schedule you can do it but you
could you could you could have them all
unlisted and have them linking to each
other so if someone wanted to find them
they could but then yeah so you want to
use the new YouTube kind of official
kind of release party thing it's not a
party thing but it's a release know like
more people watch it when if they're
subscribed I mean I don't even know how
like I get people's notices and if it's
released every day that more people will
watch each individual video but if
somebody starts with the first one and
they were like me and they want to go on
to the second one like for some people
will be more effective for them to have
it as a chunk and for other people it'll
be way more effective to have it as one
and it is a playlist so it's like
releasing one on playlist every day
I don't know I'm gonna play with it and
see how it goes and create the landing
page or just really a Google Doc with
like the different linking to it
I don't know well I'm gonna I'm gonna
figure it out but it's some of them are
better than others for sure some of them
are more scripted some of them are less
scripted but it's about getting me the
gist of what together Tech is and why
mm-hmm and do you have a kind of a brief
overview like is the first video pretty
good for that no because like all of
them are kind of an overview it's like
tech is powerful like is risky I might
want to do one that's an intro but I
like even not like maybe one
I'm done I'll do the one is an intro and
release that one first because it's hard
to kind of know about having that I
think that all has to be helpful is the
first one on the on the website is to be
kind of an overview of some sort or you
know on-ramp so people don't feel like
they have to watch all eight videos to
get kind of a concept yeah yeah which is
basically shadow check as a cooperative
we're gonna run with transparency and
democracy and then you want to what that
is and why and then you go on to the
next ones
yeah and then you can tease the you
could teach the videos or some of the
other videos yeah and then I won't feel
like I need to explain everything I'll
just be like you know yeah like you
literally just say Tech is risky Tech is
powerful together it's more risky
together it's less powerful after the
elevator pitch is the video like that is
kind of and then the idea is also as
people have questions to release answers
to those questions along it to like it
kind of becomes its own FAQ more for the
big questions that I know I've gotten a
lot of I did with one of them like one
of the videos is um this has never been
done before because everyone's like oh
yeah we've tried that no no you haven't
you've tried creating an alternative to
Facebook you tried create an iamb to do
for politicians you've tried creating a
food up you haven't tried any
cooperative that we all own together
that's completely transparent so that we
can keep improving it so that there is
no failure
cuz you feel that it you didn't try it
because you failed at it and we didn't
learn from it right like we don't have
access about information that's the
thing that people haven't tried and so
right and the voluntary piece both like
everybody's invited
no matter how technological or
untechnical you are like everybody's
invited to participate and a lot of the
things that are out there arms right I
can't come and help make Facebook better
if I wanted to I can come and help a lot
change get better if I wanted to you
like yeah you can no I can I don't have
enough ability to be in those phases to
contribute in the way that you want me
to contribute I can't just say what's
not working that it's hard it's too hard
for me doesn't is in enough of the
contribution whereas it will be in ours
because that's a really important piece
of a contribution of like this isn't
working right like create the beta
create the thing that works enough and
then looking for ways to make it better
that will both be the tech people who
know how to do it and the people who
have no idea how to do it I can see the
broken piece can see the this is why
it's not easy or just it's not easy why
why isn't it what would make it easier
you got experience that even with
discord I'm like I don't like it it's
too hard they're like it's easy I'm like
it's not or it would be it's easy once
you know like the actual discord isn't
bad it's that it's not integrated
because they don't think they go off of
Facebook and other things for obvious
reasons at the same time so game B has
one and if I click on the link it
creates a new discord account right as
opposed to no I'm now part of five
different communities I want to add that
to my community and it like assumes
because I'm not logged in that that's
not part of it and so that I have like
eight and then it like deletes your
account after a while then you can't use
the old link it's just not the best it
isn't my crowd democracy one and then I
can link you know my cooperative one and
there's you know called Salaam and
there's game B and there's all these
like if I could have them all those
sound like amazing communities to be
part of on discord and I'll figure out
how to use discord but if they're not
integrated every new addition breaks it
and I should know how to fix that right
like my guess is it's easy for somebody
who has more more background but I don't
have to do that with Facebook every time
someone adds something to Facebook it
knows it's part of my Facebook account
it doesn't require me to relog in and
you know name me the same with Twitter
like it asks for permission to give them
permission to use my Twitter information
to use my Facebook information that's
what I want this court to do like oh we
already had one for you would you like
to add to this instead of creating a
whole new one
but mm-hm this court doesn't care what I
want we don't own it it's not you know
it's for gamers yeah I mean they
slightly care but it's only only and how
it meets their other needs
but yeah yeah they care about making it
work for the 75% instead yeah for their
yeah for their use case their main use
case primary use case yeah so could you
have on the agenda I set up a patreon
account not really a set up a patreon
account more just to see what that's
like to see whether and part of it is I
mean I have this personal issue that if
we get funding for anything it can't
come to me or it has to be my money like
meaning it has to be my money I get to
use for rent and food and such if it
comes to equal so we need like a
corporation of business or more people
to be posted you know what I mean so
that it's it's an actual entity in and
of itself for that not to be the case I
mean that is just the way it works when
you're on disability they're like well
if you get money than that you know what
I mean you're not allowed to be having a
not-for-profit or a business and doing
business like things like taking the
gross in the net and just subtracting
what you're actually taking for your
part piece event if we were paying
ourselves right like it's all kinds of
rules so part of it and end
incorporation protects us from things
like lawsuits if unless we pierce the
corporate veil unless we do all of those
things so I'm not saying we're
necessarily ready to incorporate but
starting talking about structures of
incorporation incorporation itself is
slightly expensive I mean it's not tens
of thousands of dollars it's like a
thousand dollars but like even then what
is it or not-for-profit is it
cooperative if it's a cooperative
there's very specific rules that are
followed including it has to be if it's
here a BC cooperative and then it has to
apply to be Canadian and then there is
no such thing as a global cooperative
but there are platform cooperatives
online and I don't quite know how they
work but there's a organisation here
called BC Cooperative Association or
something along those lines that offers
a half an hour consultation for free and
then has fairly cheap things going
forward for them helping you how to
figure out
how do how to incorporate under a
cooperative model and I don't know if
they have someone who is more
understanding of a platformer
cooperative but looking into that and
possibly setting that up and asking them
if it can be on camera like it might
only be in them or I don't know if you
would also want to be part of sitting in
on that conversation because I could
possibly schedule it for this time
period and be a during this time and
they just join us on here if they're
comfortable with that and ask the
questions during that time yeah that is
something I might be available
especially if we do it at this time and
it might be good so yeah it depends on
that comfortable well comfortable they
are with that the other option is
because I do want to do everything
transparently but we can only be
transparent right a few people were
associating with especially at this
state agents parent and being
transparent about that right like know
that you're not comfortable being on
camera and having it on YouTube so it's
not going to be but if they're
comfortable just recording it and then
putting it up so that people yeah and if
not then you can do a you know maybe
it's best if I'm not there and then you
can you know kind of say what happened
and then that would be the official kind
of transparency thing yeah that which
puts my brain so it's a little that's
one of the reasons I actually really
like transparency in recording it is I
can go back and be like oh yes that's
what I said I would do that's what it's
harder for me to articulate it to
somebody else in the future what it
happens but I can take notes and make it
work because I won't definitely be
taking notes because that's the kind of
thing I know cooperative so most of it
will stick in my brain but yes contact
you know by the time yeah there's one
kind of cooperative financial structure
I'm aware of actually I can't remember
the name of it right now it's but it's
designed for open-source software
products
and they have some requirements that we
wouldn't meet right now but what's great
about it is that they keep all the
accounting online and then you kind of
you kind of Sindh in reimbursements or
bills or stuff like that and then it's
public to see where all the money is
going is that open collective so I don't
know if there's other options coming out
kind of like that yeah open collective
calm because yeah the question is if we
have individual members either give me
an $10 a month or like wow this is
amazing here's a million dollars
like how does it go from them to the
entity without needing to pass through
us right without it needing to be taxed
and all that stuff cuz it can go
straight to open collective through
patreon that would be amazing even
though of course patreon is gonna take
their cut that's part of the
transparency and then if we need to you
know take part of it for running this
stuff like if we start paying for street
art or start doing that stuff or start
taking a salary if needed eight like
those were not at that stage for sure
for the salary part for ourselves but
for you don't I mean for mm-hmm
that were transparency where money comes
from where it goes is the important part
but also that we're not screwing
ourselves over in the meantime right if
we get ten thousand dollars and then
theoretically we have to pay taxes on
that ten thousand dollars as at Lee and
or Jubilee and then we take that ten
thousand and spend it on idea cafe
there's all kinds of real world
implications for us right when we're not
amore braided and we're not right we
don't have that that entity that we need
to make sure is not it's there it is a
cooperative the ideas we are owned by
our members even if the membership right
now is too much that's what it is
members of the board the board's the
members and we're open to more people
being part of it even if we don't have
the technology yet to vote I so I don't
know um can you look into open
collective and see how like what yeah my
turn over right now they yeah they've
changed so I'll definitely have to read
up on it it used to be it was you had to
have
and a software project on github and the
youth had to have a hundred stars on it
so hundred people had to have liked it
is github blockchain no it's just
open-source software it's a to think of
the term it's it's just a code
repository so it does keep a history of
all the changes to software so I guess
the question is does it make sense at
all for us to be on there but we don't
have code because we're you know what I
mean like we're working around the code
at the moment like it's you do
well we're creating it right and looking
to do it as transparently and
open-source as possible but we're at the
very beginning stages but if we can
start having membership people who want
to start working like that might be a
great place to find people to code it
right we're willing to work on a passion
project and it might be that we have to
first have a beta before we can go on
there it has some code yeah so at some
point we will have codes and I kind of
have assumed so far that where our code
will be open source so I imagine we'll
have a github account that's the kind of
the standard default just like high in
binary that's our code well yeah no it's
not that
it's pretty common on projects like this
to have we have a readme file which is
also kind of a I don't know I'm not
quite awake today it's it's Thanksgiving
down here in the States so I slept
really late I've had pie for breakfast
yeah usually there's a readme or a white
paper and so that would just be kind of
the stuff you've written so far or link
to the videos and stuff like that on the
readme page actually is what we do
so yeah that's not uncommon I just don't
know that I'm trying to see whether they
really have a requirement anymore or if
we can just apply to be they do talk
about the need to have you need to have
a fist
goal or the fiscal host which is whose
bank account it would go to and so we
still have kind of the same problem we
still need to either incorporate so that
the corporation can own the bank account
or you know some sort of I did too I
know here we have entity that's between
those two there's a cooperative which is
a very specific structure but it can
only be BC which means our board needs
to be I think 50% BC people which we are
oh but when the third person joins that
would mean they would have to do from C
which is very restrictive right I don't
know if the same rule is applied have to
be on the board itself rather than you
know so there would probably be kind of
like a fiscal board and those people
that are responsible for the funds might
have to keep that split but I don't
think it have to be like every member of
the co-operative no but on the board but
that's still up on voting people in for
it I mean part of this is transparency
like these are the legal structures we
have to work within so then therefore
owed like here are the people who we
have like we have to vote in 50 percent
of people from BC and then the other 50
percent here if we're voting with liquid
democracy and you get to transfer your
vote between them it shouldn't matter
that as much as it would if that wasn't
right well as long as the people on the
board and even and I don't know if
that's allowed to be in the bylaws and
BC like here but but you could put in
the bylaws that the board votes the same
as the community so there's a legal
separation there's the board and stuff
and then it doesn't really matter
because the board is just kind of a
figurehead for for the legalities which
is really all we want but as long as
there's a few responsible people on over
50 of them are BC and of course if we do
something the US for corporations we
don't care where you live as long as we
get your money which is also I mean I'm
in Canada and our taxes are higher right
I'm guessing what state do you live in
I assume Texas Hara I'm down in Texas
and we don't have state tax so it's just
federal tax
yeah so yeah figuring out the financial
structure is something I hadn't really
thought of yet mr. no but it is
something that eventually I kind of
before we get before I don't know what
your lifestyle is as far as maybe you
can have the money and have it but then
it's still like if you get taxed on it
it still is like your income and in your
texts on it but if you have a lower tax
rate then we just have to deal with that
right like yeah so your salary is the
tax that would it would cost you right
so it's like you say you've got $10,000
you pay 3,000 but then the issue is if
you're getting if this you have your
employment that you're getting and I
think you are you self-employed so you
don't know how much yeah I'm fully
employed right now so yeah it would be
it would add some complexity yeah I mean
I could definitely have it in a
different account but yeah I'd have to
talk to an accountant and a tax for
things like patreon sometimes it's
different because it's after tax from
them you don't get taxed on it but it's
state by state province by province
whether or not those things are I know
for me it counts not in the tax not with
CRA but with the disability people in
sighs there's just ridiculous rules like
when I first looked into it I mean I
know business I know finance enough and
I had had my own businesses and written
stuff off and I was like okay so hey if
I have if I buy a car for $1,000 and fix
it up I can't but if I couldn't did it
and I sold it for 2,000 like yeah we're
taking 2,000 off I'm like but I bought
it for a thousand put labour into it put
stuff into it they're like no we're
taking off what you sell it for which is
not like so people who have disabilities
and who are poor aren't allowed services
this is what you're telling me because
you can't have a business that has no no
that doesn't cost anything so it's like
you're anyway so it's a ridiculous
structure but it is the law until I'll
be able to get off of it that is in the
you know you want to get paid with this
I want eventually a paid with this so I
don't have to rely on stupid government
rules too
work with yeah there are some fiscal
hosts that they have so I can have a
look and see if we would could
potentially be accepted so yeah actually
so there's an open-source collective so
if your software is open source which I
think ours will be then if you have the
hundred github stars then they'll
consider you we would still have to sell
them and then there could be the fiscal
host and then we would you know if I did
some programming and wanted to build
that I would just plug you know sinem
the bill and it'd all be tracked online
and open some people can see exactly
where the money is going and stuff I
didn't understand that so stars are a
currency I know in in in github stars
just alike it's like in facebook so make
sure yeah for them to make sure that the
project is something people are using
then you have to have a hundred people
say oh I want to remember this project
and and use it but the problem is we're
not making a lot of times in github
you're you're open sourcing the code for
other developers to use but we're not
making this for developers we're making
this for end-users I mean yeah so any
developer that is using the code
wouldn't be using it most likely
wouldn't be using it on their own site
so they normally wouldn't star it so
we're kind of in a quirk there but when
we yeah yeah so it's kind of a chicken
and the egg thing everything's a chicken
and the egg thing with this thing you
need money to make it you need to make
it funny where you could have the
conversations you need to have the
conversations you know what it looks
 to create it and I would like to
have a larger cause like you know one of
the things about the tech cooperative
that you've said is that it's you know
you want to get the input from a group
of people as opposed to just to you
right and right now we're just at 2 so
we'd still even probably before we
collect money I'd be ideal if we had 50
or 100 people that are interested in the
idea and giving feedback so that it's
you know it's an a
collaborate it's a this it's built from
the opinions of those people the larger
the group the better so maybe you know I
was kind of thinking about getting the
funds and stuff but maybe the bigger
thing is doing exactly what we're doing
selling the idea or you know getting the
idea out there and just getting people
to sign up and be part of a community
for building this so this is part of the
question again in chicken-and-egg is are
we getting people to sign up for idea
cafe or for together tech so I my
suggestion is that we do together tech
because what I'd like to have three or
four ideas and see which one takes off I
think idea cafe is something we
definitely need because but but it may
end up being more administrative and not
be something that people gravitate to
and so we'll have to we'll have to build
it as part of the process but it may be
it may not be what draws people it may
be they may prefer like a Facebook
alternative or you know we'd like to
kind of see what the traction is in that
so that's why I wouldn't want to have
them sign up for idea cafe and the email
list I'd rather be together tech of
which idea cafe is one of the primary
yeah which is what the the video series
is right it's about together tech and
one of them is about idea cafe like this
is our first project and so yeah if we
move on to a different project that's
not gonna break it that's not going to
be a problem I'm also talking with our
nest oh this week it was supposed to be
like this past week but instead it's
next week so we both have moved it
forward where he said you can kind of
help with video and ID we have even
really talked about what that means
like whether that's like a crowdfunding
but it like one video right there would
be like a crowdfunding video
oh and or and then idea cafe or together
TAC because I think together attack but
idea it's it's all of its difficult
because it's like we want people on
board for together text so that if for
some reason we don't move forward with
idea cafe those funds are available to
create our other project but at this
same yeah I think I've answered my own
question
it was just one video to have almost a
patreon type video for together tech
that is here's what your coming on board
to help create and we will this is not
even mentioning the first project and
then having people come on board and
using whatever method we have to have
conversations with zoom with the current
schedule and of like pick a time that me
and you are available and then having an
idea cafe with a large group of people
about together to write about these
things including someone's like hey we
should do this we should make this
happen
yes what a great idea or whether he can
help me make the series of video which
is just me talking for five minutes
unscripted unedited on each kind of
topic into something that's more like
what Eric released he has a video series
called none of the above when we're
putting voting for none of the above in
politics and the like he just splices in
graphics right like it's fairly simple
it's not top of the line YouTube videos
but it's definitely better than what I
have because I can't even edit let alone
put in other things and so he's able to
take the video series and work on them
one by one and then it starts out with
just me and then it slowly does that but
I haven't talked to him so I'm no idea
what he's he's looking how much work
he's looking to do and or what his skill
set is to be able to do those things but
if he did can't it is it's up there and
I'm gonna have do one of the videos so
many videos a bad is like how you can
get involved right which is like you
come watch this and or we need like
basically marketers people who can edit
people who like the job descriptions of
people that we meet you and I don't
fulfill right like including I mean
really if someone can come and do the
coding because you're not available to
do the coding that would be awesome um
and we'll always need more developers
yeah but definitely marketing and then
anyone who wants to like helping with
documentation and stuff like that is
always helpful
untrained yeah like a min really
anything really if you have this
particular skillset come bring it on
board I mean that is what a quality this
property yeah and the first thing is of
course getting on the email list or some
other way for us to communicate joining
the community is really the main goal I
would think of that and then we will be
reaching out to the community to fulfill
skill sets but yeah yeah yes so joining
the email list come participate in this
and but there isn't like I have a
MailChimp account there isn't really an
email list like I don't actually know
how to get people to be part of the
email list besides once the websites up
like figuring out that piece of it I
don't like I'm a MailChimp account I
don't know how people give me their
email with that are you know right yeah
if we wanted to we could set up a
MailChimp form on the MailChimp site
itself so it doesn't even have to be on
your website and then you can tweet that
link and so anyone who's interested like
the people that are that are normally
watching our streams which I guess who
don't have anyone today they could sign
up without having it integrated to the
website yet if you want either you know
I could sit down with you and we could
walk through it or you can the the free
mail chip account you don't have
multiple users you only one user so
you'd have to give me the password and
then I can I can go in and build it real
quick and then you can edit it so
whichever way you want we could set that
up and start having have a tour people
can sign up like I could post it on my
social media or social media and just
see what interest we have I think it
would be a lot easier after you have
that kind of intro video because we
could link to that yes yeah like I said
I'm I think it'll take me I mean I plan
to kind of work on it today tomorrow
into the weekend so my kids something so
that everything stops right for that
period of time but finding yes to finish
the video series which I think honestly
it's done I don't even need to add
anything right now I think it's kind of
sad
alone it's just that I want to add the
in it notes not done the intro piece and
the how to get involved these are two
pretty good book at these and then even
if I don't have the video descriptions
yet it's about do I I think we already
yeah I make them all unlisted and if I
can figure out how to make them public
one day at a time
great if not like it's more about people
coming on board and signing up but if
that's what is your gut like is it
better to do one day at a time is that
going to get more people signed up or is
it better to do it as a chunk and I
think it would it probably be it
probably benefit through one day at a
time
I don't or one yeah one per day but if
it's if it's too much trouble it's
probably not worth spending too much
time to figure it out like can I put a
link at the end of each video to you can
sign up here yeah probably
mm-hmm if we if we set up that MailChimp
thing yeah it would just be the
MailChimp short link and it would take
them to a forum where they could fill
out on the MailChimp website and then
later on when we hook it up to the
WordPress site we could then switch the
links out that way people identify with
the WordPress site and not the MailChimp
site also it gives us the ability that
switch away from MailChimp had the
feature for what yeah okay I think I
think that's within my scope to be able
to do that and if you want MailChimp
forum that is not necessarily within my
scope it would take me a day to figure
out how to do that so I love you I will
send you the my username which is quite
email and then the password and yes
aniss no sorry the website person is
also on there because I gave her the way
to treat yeah we all need that yeah so
she's already yeah I don't want to mess
up if she's already made a form that I
just may take the external link for that
because when you're building when you
build a form internally it also builds
anyways so yeah but I can take a look at
it and figure it out but there could be
more than one form right he called me
one user or there could be more than one
form yes
like we just want their name their email
do you want know where they're located
probably like countries I think it might
be nice to have that as an optional
field and then that's it
yeah the fewer things you ask them up
front the more people also happen so
some places it's just email address but
a thing would be helpful no good a name
mhm
for sure plus Senate like I know it's
the people will be like Jubilee and
they'll email me you know with my name
they clearly aren't IPT for those out
it's like part of the part of the
process but it does make you more you're
gonna open it more likely when it has
your team ahead then when it doesn't
for obvious reasons so yes I will send
you the MailChimp create the other two
videos and then do the work - like
upload it like to get it streamlines
that because I haven't linked the other
videos to the other video so just list
at the moment and once I get that link
to the the account I don't say it on
videos or I'm not like sign up here but
if it's just on there I can say it in
the last one like how to get involved
sign up here and then also I can put it
in the description which is an ideal but
it's better than nothing I can also
possibly figure out how to do hun does
too much of my scope like a 10-second
end piece of like sign up like I caught
it in something though say like and
subscribe and it feels weird to then on
the ends be like but maybe like to
something I can just tag on to the end
of all the videos that is if you are
interested click this link and sign up
yeah what's you yeah I I think if if you
say if you're interested check out the
the IQ : at the doobly-doo but that's
not the official name of at the
description yeah
then I think if you say that this is the
type of thing to wear if they're not
interested enough to go and find the the
description section then that's okay
they're not going to it's true
and the truth is at the free mail chip
Academy only we only have 2000 Bentley
and that seems like an astronomical
amount right now because I would love to
have 2000 but I don't want 2000 you gave
me your email just because you want to
see what it's like I want to then take
your email off if you're not actually
interested right no so if yeah the more
if they have a little hoop to jump
through I think that's probably good a
little bit of if they're like how do I
get involved with this that is a
different energy about it alright so the
main stream account that funding we
talked about that the other part was
what we talked about last time which I
think does come into the MailChimp and
that is um introverts like getting those
50 to 100 people especially if they're
introverted would be amazing because I
think this is like I said a site the
idea cafe in particular speaks to
introverts it works for introverts and
if they don't know it does and that's a
big problem with marketing like solving
a problem people don't know they have is
not really solving a problem I wasn't
able unlike I don't know introverted
questions like I know I am an introvert
and I know that I care more about having
a conversation about something that
matters and so picking something that
matters and having conversations about
that is the thing but YouTube live it's
just it makes sense that that's not for
introverts like that is there poison and
not there yay I get to be on stage it's
not like I've had to push through that
and now I'm kind of lucky I get to be on
stage because I know what it can mean
for the world but it still isn't a space
I want to be it like it still is in like
yeah I get more like it's it's together
tech gets more followers not I get more
followers right like it's very different
energy that I wouldn't be able to if I
was a participant and not a founding
member it would be different but so how
to get introverts to where I am how to
get introverts to like this is bigger
than that this is bigger than you were
uncomfortable so let's own your own
comfort and let's find ways to work
within that like let's find ways to do
this on zoom and
on YouTube right but like they need to
be on board before that happens and I
can't think of an idea cafe question for
introverts but what I wanted to mention
was I talked to I kind of mentioned it
general make a conversation on Wednesday
and Heather had been chained she's
participated in one of them before game
B and where it was just the two of us we
both shared and she was like well it
feels weird she's like it felt like I
was on the spot to say that five minutes
of stuff I was like I get that and yet I
don't always make it clear that you
don't have to write especially there's
more of us that you can always pass on
the five minutes and just be part of the
conversation but that even like that
information right like extroverts will
tell you that introverts won't
until you ask them and that's kind of
like like it's perfect no actually this
is the piece it doesn't work and so
finding in introverts because social
media is designed for extroverts it's
designed to kind of be to put yourself
out there and have people judge you for
it it's not became that and who was
designed to be that but it's like fuels
the extrovert piece and like them
showing off piece that introverts don't
have like and yet what we're creating I
think gives them something that doesn't
exist
but they're not going to see it as that
because of what exists currently yeah I
was I think it would be worthwhile maybe
adding a video to your collection just
saying that we're specifically looking
for introverts to give feedback because
of the you know prostate a different way
but because of the bias that that other
systems are built for extroverts so at
least if they see it they would feel
welcome I think the issue with that is
just that there's one video one idea
cafe and it doesn't include that it's
about together tech right and together
tech isn't necessarily designed for
introverts the design for everyone
so yes introverts come be part of it
like check of folks everybody like in
fact we
the people who it's hard for currently
and to tell us what's hard for you more
so than we want the people that
everything works for if Jane is working
for you you're maybe not ready to create
game be and all about science
specifically what we're focusing on it
is like we're focusing on creating the
technology that helps us collaborate on
a massive scale so that everyone can
come and say what works for them and
what doesn't work for them and so
getting introverts into idea cafe more
than together tech yes although I don't
want them for all of it yes it's not
together Tech and it's specifically
gonna give introverts more than it gives
extroverts but idea cafe does yeah
although maybe it's maybe it is just
like it over yeah if idea cafe though is
the main discussion platform for
together tech I don't think it's bad to
explicitly invite introverts and to get
together tech yeah as well and I think
maybe for idea cafe just to make it more
comfortable to introverts is to have
some prepared language that explicitly
says that you know optionally a five you
know discussing for you know giving up
to five minutes of your you know so kind
of put that into the phrasing and have
it written down somewhere so so we can
reference it at the beginning of each or
make that intro video that we talked
about for I think and because actually
all an idea Cafe YouTube channel to link
people to to say here's how it works
you're free to not speak and maybe even
another video that's also like
specifically to introverts like this is
something you're going to need to try
first and help us make for you right
because like there's something here it
isn't in the other social media
platforms and as an introvert like I
want this and I want you to help create
this and I want to help you help me
create this for like autistic people
introverted people people who normal
communication online social media
doesn't work for you
because of the unwritten rules and you
know being forced to share and feeling
like you're in the spotlight well beyond
the spotlight because you too
and that piece like that isn't today
look like the intro that we are not
recording them public right we're doing
them private and then we're deciding if
we want it to go public we're voting so
everyone gets to say at the end whether
it's so it's like the best of both
worlds to a degree but and I'm wondering
is it is it really voting or is it is
there another word that implies it's
because you need consent from everybody
right so any one person can say no I
don't know the proper wording for that
neither do I especially since to some
degree to be part of it
I want you to be okay with that it could
go public right and if something happens
during it that it also is okay if you
now aren't comfortable with it going
public those are different thank you
right right but do you or maybe maybe we
should because I we would still want the
conversations to happen even if there's
a subset of the group that would never
want it to go public right I mean the
idea Cafe YouTube channel maybe not but
the idea Cafe specifically yes and I
guess that's so the YouTube channel is a
little bit my platform for idea cafe
right like meaning if idea Cafe the
platform existed these are the
conversations I would want to be a part
of and I don't care if they're live I
don't care if they're recorded I just
want to be a part of them but I'm also
hosting those conversations to be able
to create the platform so I don't want
to host a conversation on a topic I
don't want to participate in but I'm not
going to learn anything in and have an
aqua public right right right
I'm not even having those conversations
because any conversation I host is one I
either want to see showcase or be part
of the only issue and it's just my
that I have to deal with is the if it's
just to showcase it right like I reached
out to a couple friends who deal in the
in the
conscious dyeing space there people who
like are working on hospice or after
like art after life care end-of-life
care and that that type of stuff and to
host it for them to have a conversation
I don't know if I want to host that in a
way that like if it wasn't gonna be
going public right my Aykroyd
we're in community together you guys
know this conversation all day every day
it's to kind of showcase that these hard
conversations are powerful to kind of be
in in public but at the same time if we
have the conversation and then it didn't
stay public because they didn't want to
be there um okay there's there's
something there for me to learn and to
next time I have one make it more clear
or whatever whatever that is but yes
yeah so and you said you hadn't come
with any ideas had I don't I
I've well we're talking I came with a
few that I throw out and see if there's
a reason why they wouldn't work like you
know just an opportunity to share and
learn tips for introverts right so it's
not that we would come unprepared for it
but introverts giving other introverts
tips because both you and I are on the
introverted side but we've learned a lot
like we're both you know doing a public
forum and scripted which is terrifying
so I think you and I would would have
stuff to contribute to other people and
I think every every introvert would have
things to share and things learn from
each other so that I think that'd be a
topic I'd be interested in particularly
it's maybe we need to stop making it
focused on that it needs to be a
question but I want it to be crushed
into question because it is right I
couldn't yeah yeah I was trying to
phrase that his question is my mind
before I said it but I can because like
you could do like what's your
introverted journey like you did for
some of the other topics but I don't
know that introverts would want to get
on and talk about their day so that's
why I think something with an action
would kind of pull more introverts and
some you know if it's
obvious what the value proposition of
watching the video and then learning
that it's a safe space it makes what
makes a safe space for you as an
introvert I don't know what they pick on
and share that but like that kind of
question right that is yeah more focused
I don't know whether that's my autistic
side or my introverted side that likes
having structure like that though it
likes I want to answer a question
because it's structured even if I don't
want to be in the spotlight I'd rather
be in the spotlight with a structured
question been in the spotlight free
range yeah and I think well I think
that's a great one to start I mean I
think we'd try that one I really like
that one and I think in general oh oh
yeah no it was it was what how how can
we make idea cafe a safe place for
introverts there's probably a lot of
different ways to phrase that but that
was kind of one phrasing because I I
think I do I do think one of my theories
about introversion is that the reason
why is that introverts I think tend to
be less they have to be more don't have
to be they are more conscious of
everyone else's opinions it's watching
them and thus affion something live I
now have to take into account everyone
in the world
all 6nf million people yes there's a
billion people it's a lot more and
Counting yeah and so we're less
intuitive in the in the social sphere
and so I think having a structure works
for a lot of introverts because two
things you don't have to worry about
what am I going to talk about and you
don't have to worry about what is
everyone else thinking as much because
everyone has an agreed structure I think
that's one of the reasons why I like
structure is because it it makes the
social interactions less complex and
thus easier for me to intellectualize
when you know people say oh you just
need to like go with the feeling and I'm
like no you don't want to talk to me
what I'm just going my feelings so
that's it's not very nice I have to
moderate myself yeah and that is a piece
of it for sure like what those things he
said the company that it lessens the
complexity of the conversation and
that's huge and that is what like
Heather and I were talking about the
Omega Rule it's like this is less
information coming out of so we like it
versus the extroverts who are like wait
where's the extra information we don't
know how to function without that extra
information and that's bird like that
this is designed for introverts and so
how do we how do we get them here and so
having that so I like your question I
think that'd be great one for introverts
and then maybe maybe during that one we
could say what are some other idea cafe
questions for introverts and have people
brainstorm that or afterwards the issue
is like and all of it um finding the
time that works like finding another
introvert that wants to have that
conversation that isn't us because
clearly we're not be like we can have
that conversation during this time right
but having that conversation with
another introvert at least and also more
like I tweeted on Twitter I you know put
it on Facebook but like people don't
jump at it to come be part of it right
I'm like I can't necessarily as an
introvert do the market even the same
way an extrovert can of like this
thing's gold come onboard like it's
awesome but if you don't see the beauty
I don't know how to kind of you need to
come try it you need to try it to know
that it works for you and so and it's
all true like I want to have a slightly
why in Traverse need to do it before I
have the introverts come on I want to
hear what they have to say and make the
video for them and I have to pick one
and do it so you're thinking if we put
that idea out we wouldn't get any takers
I mean I can try you can try to put it
put it out there I can put it on my
actual Facebook group and then the idea
Cafe Facebook group looks like so small
that it doesn't get traction which is
the issue like you need hundreds of
people in a Facebook group for people to
like it so other people see it so that
it gets anywhere in order for that to
happen you have to be putting content
and I don't and I think and I mean in
the game be space there's there's quite
a few introverts
but I don't know if that would be if
that call out would be appropriate yeah
it's like recruiting tonight
if you're doing an idea cafe with the
game people game like you have the game
be idea cafe maybe just on one of those
videos put out hey I'm doing another one
on introversion so if anyone's an
introvert maybe you could participate
that one yes that sounds like a good
option and I will specifically invite
Heather because I know she is a
introvert and game B and to ask ya if I
can send her an AI and then put out
whatever that time here he is for to
come be part of it and gave me
specifically inclusive so they might
find the the goal of making something
else inclusive has fun interesting to
the game people that are also interested
in babies at a market to people who
don't even know they have a problem that
you saw are solving for them is also
what the together tech is all about cuz
it's like every new app that comes out
it isn't something that's saturated is
something people don't know they want
and you have to market it to them and so
when you have people and you know what
their issues are like introverts hey we
have something that might be really
perfect for you like already having that
like when we have when we have a million
member this won't be a problem yeah he
said you put it out to the introverts
right and you're like hey you a
self-identified as an introvert this new
project would be perfect for you come
try it out right tell us what you would
like as an introvert as an autistic
person as a queer person is whatever
like the problem you didn't know you had
was solves for you or you knew you had
if you didn't know there was a solution
like that is kind of the the tech space
you either know you have the problem and
a million people have solved it and
finding the best option and they're all
paid or free and crappy or you don't
know that it was solved for you how do
you get people there yeah and I keep I
do listen to a lot of startup podcasts
that are always talking about you know
pick either like a vitamin or a
painkiller you know it's it's the pain
is like something people know when
they're actively looking for vitamin C
something
can they kind of think they want and
then there's like the third rail that
you never touch which is something you
know solving a problem people don't know
they have and aren't looking for which
is where we end up and where a lot of
the kind of other kind of I mean game
B's kind of getting more into people
know there's something wrong with the
system and it's not ruling that but but
yeah there's there's a lot of value in
the world that we're missing out because
it's not an idea that's easily easily
spread or easily monetizable or possibly
monetizable so it's it's just going to
be hard yeah no I like you have the
vitamin painkiller and finding the peace
in it right because there is and I guess
that is the question is what is the pain
for introverts to not have something
like the idea Cafe and I think that even
is like do you don't even know you're in
pain like you don't even know what it is
to connect with people who are also
introverted who are also autistic who
are also like share your like it's
like it's amazing and but it's selling
them something they don't know maybe
like if it's not the same as what makes
that's where like the question of like
what makes a safe space because when
you're in a safe space and you get to
converse in that safe space it's already
its own reward
but then you're also not going to go
advertise it to other people because
you're an introvert oh I just had an
idea on on the phrasing the tips for
introverts as far as a question kind of
like what have you learned to cope
sounds the wrong word but cope with your
introversion I mean that's not that's
not a solving question but it is an
interrogative source things that aren't
cope right like what have you learned
from being an introvert what has Peter
ever taught you or because that would be
what it teaches all of us right
I had this human rights class I don't
even know we were talking about all the
different kinds of privilege and
literally all privilege like ageism
something where you start out on
privilege you become print
then you end up on privileged right um
being tall is like certain amount you
get privileged and then when you're over
tall you that kind of goes away a little
bit because life doesn't function free
when you hit your head on doorways and
stuff but I had mentioned I'm like
introvert and extrovert they were like
in person he was teaching the class like
dismissed it was like well cuz I'm an
introvert but I can just not be one to
like teach this class and I was like
switch that with any other privileged
part like like oh it's okay I can just
pretend I'm not queer to come in and
teach this class like that's like that's
literally privileged like that is kind
of what we're talking about in this
phase and she was like okay like we were
even like right handed left town and she
was like yeah right handed privilege it
was like you don't think introverts are
perfect like you have to show up as an
as an extrovert to allow your entry like
I'm like goddess the definition yeah
that it was I mean I'm sure that person
wasn't familiar with the game a game B
philosophy but game is very much set up
for introverts so much of our society
stories yeah sorry
yeah yeah yeah being an extrovert does
give you quite a benefit in pretty much
in society yeah so it's like you have to
fake it you have to cope instead of like
what do you have to give this unique
because you're an introvert because we
spend a lot of downtime because you're
not necessarily seeking out interaction
and I know I have a lot to give because
of my introversion but I have to be
extraversion to like get it out there
and that itself is a broken piece let
too many people are sitting in their
basements and garages with solutions to
all of our world problems but they're
introverts and autistic and they're like
hmm I'm not willing to climb a mountains
you let this to get this out there it's
like to be an entrepreneur you have to
be an extrovert you have to get home for
your own and the people who are
coming up with the best ideas are the
ones that are like a lot like in my mind
are the ones that are probably alone
having all of that time to think about
it and yet if they have to climb that
mountain it's not gonna happen
yeah yeah depending on their level of
introversion and and there's a skillset
that they've learned to counteract that
yeah yeah I may be maybe a good thing is
you know what's great
being an introvert would be one of the
other topics like it's weird because I
think Twitter there are more introverts
on Twitter than there are on other
social media sites because it's not
pictorial because it's not in yet at the
same time they don't know that they want
to be on video they don't know it is
like they don't know and so um yeah
anyway I don't really know what I was
going with that but okay so what are we
taking on for this next week as we
theoretically got two minutes yeah so I
you're gonna send me the MailChimp
credentials I will see about setting up
a URL that we could use on social media
in the short term till we get the
website up I think that's the only thing
I'm really promising to do all right
thanks I took on a lot so I'm not really
promising to do a lot of it but presenta
I will send that right away and I'm
going to do the two bookends for the
videos the intro video and the last part
and then put them all on a page and then
I'm gonna go and work on getting the
links for every video in the description
for every video which will be me
listening to the one being like oh yeah
I said that
Beantown which is funny I can't write
this stuff out but when I do a video
that all the sudden I can write it out
run like that's literally just a pimp
like that is I could just take the
descriptions for all of this and it
would be its own which I will probably
do as well yeah and that and then
bookends bookend videos anything else
that was super important like even the
introvert stuff maybe doesn't need to be
if I feel a calling to do the introvert
video right video as well as which are
there's two one is the idea Cafe itself
just the description which isn't for
introverts which is or just see what the
idea Cafe is showcasing that yes it's
also for introverts and then a specific
college introverts like this is for
you don't even know it would you
probably be that it will kind of be them
solving a problem you don't know you
have but that's part of the transparency
where I'm not doing the old marketing
style of but but I can get into it I can
do the painkiller vitamin part as well
in as long as I can also say don't even
know this is for you but it's for you
cafe intro yeah I think that was all
right so we can say goodbye to YouTube
now goodbye YouTube see it's Friday the
world doesn't fix itself the meantime