please take those feet again
can everyone please take their seat all
right so I would now like to introduce
our second speaker dr. Arthur Hanson now
when I was reading through his through
the accomplishments of dr. Hanson I have
to admit that I was a little intimidated
one of the first questions that came to
my mind was what was he doing at my age
well the answer is selling seventy five
thousand pins with a slogan on them that
he came up with give earth a chance
dr. Arthur Hanson is an Officer of the
Order of Canada and distinguished fellow
with the International Institute for
sustainable development following his
term as president and CEO from 1991 to
98 he has worked with a number of
organizations around the world providing
initial guidance conducting research and
advising on innovation for sustainable
development environment and economy
relationships biodiversity oceans and
international development dr. Hansen has
a strong interest in linking science to
public policy and works closely with
government bodies in Canada the United
States and Asia on specific on specific
problems related to environmental
management and mechanisms of
accountability and governance for
sustainable development in recent years
much of his professional time has been
spent working in with China he initiated
some of the largest environmental
capacity-building efforts currently
underway in Indonesia simultaneously
working with the government NGOs
universities and the private sector much
of this effort has involved establishing
graduate degree programs such as
environmental law and environmental
studies he served two terms on Canada's
national round table on the environment
and economy and was Canada's
Oshin ambassador with the Department of
Fisheries and Oceans in four years dr.
Hansen served for 10 years as a member
of the Canadian foundation for
innovation and as a mentor in the
Trudeau foundation he has provided
advice to the office of the Auditor
General of Canada since 1990 and has
chaired various national and
international initiatives from 1978 to
1991 he was professor and director of
the school for resource and
environmental studies at Dalhousie
University dr. Hansen with a PhD from
the University of Michigan in the field
of Fisheries ecology and natural
resources and a master's degree in
zoology or fisheries from the University
of British Columbia please join me in
welcoming dr. Arthur Hansen
thank you very much and and when you
were speaking earlier about how much it
should cost to come to the lecture or
whether you would mortgage your house I
have known people that have raised their
houses for emotions but I just want to
tell you one little story about this
teaching on the environment at the
University of Michigan which the opening
session of it was had attracted 18,000
people to an auditorium and we had to
turn people away but we had a special
secret deal with the president of the
university because nobody got this place
for free and I was a fundraiser for all
of us and it was a big week long event
that I won't go into details on but the
funny thing about it was one night at
home I get this phone call from a guy
who I didn't know at all he introduced
himself and he said you know I think it
is I had read our prospectus which had
been published in some books in that and
and he said I think it's outrageous that
the university wants you to chart wants
to charge you five thousand dollars
further one night's use and I explained
to him whether the university said
nobody but nobody gets us for free and
you're no exception this we our group
was called an act environmental action
now and so we were prepared to raise the
money he said well I really like what
you're doing I'm prepared to give you
five thousand dollars to support it but
I want you to go to the university
president and say my name and then say
he would give ten thousand dollars if
the university agreed not to to charge
us 5,000 for the so I phoned up the head
of the university development
vice-president for that and he
immediately said oh he's told you yes
please come and see the president
tomorrow
and so I go and the president of the
University of Michigan was a labor
negotiator and lawyer against not very
nice man but I walked into his office
and I had this kind of sheepish grin on
his face that I knew before he opened
his mouth that we'd won and it turned
out this is one of the biggest
benefactors to the University and in
fact his his family-owned guy his wife's
family owned a newspaper chain running
out of Chicago and apparently her mother
didn't want to give any money away her
father wanted to give money away so
instead they gave it to the kids who
gave it the good causes like the
University of Michigan and so we got our
money but the funny thing about all
those pins and that and also the Memphis
pin those things that the funny thing
about that was that the university put a
condition that we could charge no more
than fifty cents admission to this event
so between selling the pins and the
50-cent admissions I was the financial
finances chairman so every day I would
go around campus and we have this great
network of people that were selling pins
and selling tickets for the event and
and I had a suitcase which I think we
still have her on a little silver
suitcase suitcase wasn't too big because
it was filled with coins so every
afternoon I would try and casually walk
across for fear of getting robbed
because was city Detroit and I'd be
trying to be casual on my arm was be
good but there was a letter I just gave
a talk last night at Pierson College on
the west coast to PhD students from
Railroad University and they is very
very bright and competent young people
that go into the baccalaureate program
and have the privilege of attending
Pearson college and so I tried to give
them a talk on leaders laggards and the
rest of us and I've been thinking about
that already and what you're saying
Jordan because in the oceans area we
deal with leaders and there's lots of
them and we deal with lots of laggards
who see the world in very narrow sorts
of ways and we also see the rest of us
who are the people in this room at you
and me because we can't all be experts
in the oceans and I'm not expert on all
sorts of things I go out for frequent
kayak writes and talks with a guy who's
a physical oceanographer one of the best
in the field that lives in Victoria and
and you know he gets into discussions
with me that I have no idea what he's
talking about waves and things like this
I just don't understand because it's all
mathematical and it's always in so we're
all learners we're all people who want
to do good but we have to deal with some
people who really have very strong
vested interests as well and who are to
be happy to take the last fish out of
the sea if they could put it into the
money from that into their pocket so I'm
going to I thought first of all I think
we should give Jordan an honorary
something in ocean studies not just of
the ocean sciences but ocean studies is
different and we do need psychologists
and people with human behavior
understandings to bring the message out
about the oceans it's been one of the
problems scientists don't do a very good
job even though they're very good
scientists and some of them do
fortunately and then there's people like
Jack Cousteau and so forth many others
like that and organizations that really
try hard many of the big foundations
raishin international a whole range of
ocean oriented bodies and so forth
but it's still not enough and it won't
be enough I think until people who
actually have a lot of interest in
oceans but what but still like feel they
lacked the means to do things about it
and and I would include not the MPS in
that our members of parliament tend not
to understand the oceans and some people
say to me they turn to people some
people in some places in Canada turn
their backs in the oceans they're more
interested in agriculture and the things
that happened on land and and that's a
strong feeling that people have that our
parliamentarians have not risen to the
challenge even though they've cited the
government assigned those things and one
of the things that differentiates us
from Australia is that the Australians
generally they all live in the coast is
one thing surf on a fish from it
do everything near the water and and
they actually have the strong political
will there's politicians there who have
taken the oceans as a car and who are
very powerful politicians that's helped
a lot and I will come to that later in
the talk but I want to start off and
I've got a lot to say I'm going to try
and set as concisely as I can and watch
the clock so uh some time for discussion
and I want to start generally looking at
the global situation and then I want to
home in on Canada because we as Canadian
sitting here and and maybe there's some
students who are not from Canada here
this is the country where you're trying
to understand right now how we do things
and that's very very important I think
we're going to learn a lot from other
countries some of the Asian countries
good and bad will learn that I've worked
with have some very interesting models
for fisheries management China for
example they say they laugh at our
fisheries models let me tell you they
and then the LSE for example and they
say we haven't got the money or the time
to be able to debate the finer points of
the models that you have what we do is
we just stop all fishing during the
spawning season for about two or three
or four months I forgive
in the summertime oh and isn't that
they're doing it perfectly but a lot of
elements of that simple mechanism work
for them maybe sometimes we need simpler
things rather than the very involved
debate that goes on between the
scientists the fishery scientists who
tend to be all concerned about fishing
and population dynamics people like
myself that deal with ecosystems and
think about food chains and think about
habitat destruction and so forth and and
then others who take yet another point
of view which is the fisheries
economists who say get the price right
individually transferable quotas and all
sorts of exotica that I think are often
useful but there is no simple answer so
I'm going to be filling in the blanks
here that Jordan has left me plenty to
fill in and and I'm going to be focusing
a lot on habitat a lot on the ecosystem
because it's my belief that in addition
to worrying about fishing you have to
worry about what's happening to where
fish live which is in the water feeding
on things that in that marvelous food
chain that was described there and and
indeed if we don't take that into
account in our decision-making about
fisheries then we only know about a
quarter of what's really happening out
there so I just want to remind us first
of all that it's fair to say that our
planet is above water and the water is
saltwater seventy percent of the earth's
surface is covered by it we depend on
every single person in this planet
whether or not they live in Afghanistan
whether they live in British Columbia
Canada or Indonesia or any of the other
places we depend on a variety of
ecological services from the oceans I
won't go into that right now but it's
very important to recognize that
secondly it is a history book of the
earth we look at the sediments we know
understand where we get our oxygen from
and so forth and it's complex but we can
understand that and we also depend on
that as we look for the resources we
exploit where do we find out about
how anchovies go up and down because of
El Nino and La Nina from the ocean
sediments we look for the skills
sometimes it's an abuse there sometimes
they're not there and in our hands
sediments and so forth well all that
well we use is basically from
phytoplankton from the sea and other sea
creatures so we have to do understand
that it's the basis of natural wealth
and of our prosperity half the people in
the planet live close to the ocean and
that is always going to be the case
their prosperity through trade through
fishing through all sorts of different
things we know about so the oceans
governments trade settlement patterns
and it we now know and understand where
they're clearly it also governs climate
and therefore climate change but it's
also the source of conflict calamity and
crises and I don't like to talk about
crises but I have to and particularly in
this talk
people say the ocean is in crisis and I
think it's true frankly despite all what
was said at the beginning of your talk
Jordan and and I would like to think
that things are nice out there on the
environment globally they're in a
downhill turn for sure but there's a way
of looking at crisis that I think is
very important and I again I go back to
some of the experience because I spend a
lot of time in China China doesn't like
to talk about barriers about not being
able to do things and so forth what they
cautioned me and say look talk about
crisis yes if you wish
we understand we face crisis for a long
time we face crises how do you turn
crisis into opportunity and that's very
important Chinese do that all the time
crisis to opportunity and they actually
do it often they're able to solve the
crises and they're better off open new
opportunities I talked about what I call
c2s crisis to sustainability how do we
turn these things into a sustainable at
all
not easy but not impossible and
particularly when I'm talking with an
audience that includes people of the
next generation we're gonna have to
solve all the messes and problems and
open the new opportunities that come
with new technologies etc I don't want
to leave you with a message of failure
and a message of impossibility it has to
be a message of opportunity and a
message of hope and so forth and I think
we can apply that to the ocean so some
of the examples that I'm going to
present are things that seem to be going
better now than they were say 10 years
or 20 years ago so please keep that in
mind if it gets to christen just
remember I'm basically an optimist and
want to see hope for the future and hope
that the people who carry the burden
forward and the institutions that I hope
Finn can become as if one of those can
make real contributions to that I'm
looking at it
you've been my cat person over there and
some of the others that I met earlier
this afternoon
I really am honored that I can be here
to kick off what I hope will be a
successful effort on the part not just a
view of t students but students across
the country because we need we need this
kind of support and understanding and
real action that can come out of the
bigger people who carry challenges
forward into the next generation the
reason I was speaking and Pearson and
happy to do so peers in college is that
I going further and further down the
food chain I feel that we have to be
working in a very intelligent way and
communicating with people that are still
in high schools junior high schools
three schools so that they come into the
university world with an attitude of
responsibility after they some extent
but understanding particularly of things
where they can make a difference in the
years ahead so those are some
preliminary points okay so now we get
into the nasty stuff ocean health and
decline you're gonna hear these things
and and there's a new index and I've
given there's a lot of words in some of
these slides don't even try and read
them all listen to me but I'm just we're
trying to take a videotape of this and
we're going to intersperse some of the
slides so I want a little bit more
detail that's why I put it in here and
also ways that you can find this
information easily so there's this new
thing that people have been trying for
some time to get an integrated overview
of ocean health and you can see it's not
very good overall in the world 60 out of
a hundred and if you go on the website
you can find with each country where
it's good and not good interestingly
Canada gets seventy out of a hundred so
maybe we can trumpet success in some
areas but I would say that certainly I
don't see things in great shape right
now in Canada the same way that Jordan
announced as well and so let's let's
talk about health for just a second two
quick examples beautiful place Broughton
archipelago Broughton archipelago is
where Alexander Morton and others feel
that the caged salmon that are
aquaculture there are carrying an
excessive parasite load that the wild
salmon coming down the pink salmon from
very remote rivers on the BC coast are
picking up the parasite load and dying
off this is a big tussle between science
and citizen science and I must say it's
not a resolved issue I'm kind of on
Xander martensite I think on this but in
general the health of the oceans the
health of ecosystems and what it means
to us brings it back right into economic
terms now this is another big puzzle
this man who I spent a day with several
years ago took this picture in his dr.
Peter Ross who's just lost this job
because the whole group of people in
toxicology that deal with ocean
toxicological issues paid for often by
people from other countries like the
United States or and give us data that's
absolutely essential from monitoring
different animal mainly seals but up and
down the coast you can see where
pollutants are coming across from Asia
because they hit the northern stocks you
can find out the effects of drugs and
diseases that come out in their sewage
from cities like Vancouver and and then
if you go down towards the southern part
of what's now called the Salish Sea
Puget Sound where they've been building
naval ships and you can find all the
heavy metal issues and so forth so you
know I get a feeling for things so there
was a network that he was involved with
and they've all lost a job we don't seem
to worry about information anymore so
are we getting the right kind of
information on the health of the oceans
and I would submit if we don't have
people like Peter Ross then it's quite
difficult to get that information I
should also add it's a hilarious working
with us he goes up wearing a hockey
helmet because there's two ways that you
get the seals you don't really want to
be the seal the seals gonna live but
it's gonna have a few scars after he's
been visited or she from Peter Ross so
the the one way he likes to do it is you
quietly go up in your boat and you put
on your hockey helmet and then you run
like hell into the water and onto the
shore and grab the seal they have to be
of a certain size of the standard ice if
you're lucky you don't bash your head on
the rocks
with lots of algae the other way which
he doesn't want to do that also worked
is that the seal school in the water and
and then you he's got a thin nylon net
out set out and the seals go into the
net they're startled and and he tries to
get the one or two seals and make sure
that no others are in there you get
about five minutes before the steel
start struggling and may be withdrawn so
but he's a very very good scientist and
it pains me greatly he'll do fine
whether that network can continue its
work properly is beyond me I don't see
how it can health is also but people in
communities if you live on the west
coast or on the East Coast this is a
prime thing that people feel the loss
they feel the loss of livelihood the
loss of integrity of work that they felt
important over the years as fishermen or
various other ocean related activities
and whether it's in Prince Rupert in
northern British Columbia or whether
it's in communities in the South Shore
of Newfoundland or Nova Scotia this is
this very serious issue and it's one
that we don't seem to do as good a job
in Canada as places like Norway and
maybe Australia and in handling and you
can come back to that point a new line
new livelihoods emerged Lunenburg school
sailing school with a beautiful schooner
sea kayaking summer thing whale watching
and interestingly if you're into music
folk festivals and the folk festival
part of it's held right on the on the
seashore and boats come and go like
beautiful big one in the background in
the lower picture but there's also
calamity and the oceans and calamity
takes many forms the cyclone nargis for
example and Burma were over almost a
hundred and forty thousand people were
killed by terrible Mel dies the prime
spokes country for climate change and
all that is basically disappear with
sea-level rise in the given amount of
time
and and then there's the insidious kinds
of things like ocean acidification and I
won't go through this slide but just to
say that oceans and climate change are
intimately related but don't get nearly
as much attention as the atmospheric
side of things I happen to think that on
both the mitigation side and just a
general scientific knowledge base that
the oceans are basically still largely
ignored compared to their significance
then we go on to things and this is an
area that I'm very familiar with and
this brings me to tears sometimes
there's an area of the world called the
Coral Triangle Indonesia Philippines
parts of Malaysia and parts of Papua New
Guinea Arrieta and and this is the
leading Center for ocean biodiversity in
the world it's a thing that drove me
first to live in Indonesia was the fact
that I was working in the Caribbean on
something for my master's thesis and I
realized that for every species of this
little crab that I was looking at there
was six or seven species and the Coral
Triangle area if you go to that area the
reefs are being destroyed at an
incredible rate partly its stupidity its
greed its market demand for certain
things I can go on fish are poisoned so
you can get maybe a tenth of them for
aquarium fish don't water aquarium fish
and that's coming under control a bit
people go off and risk their lives to
have in the last decades risk their
lives to go into all munitions dump
dumps in West Papua and Papua New Guinea
to to take the explosives to take them
out of the shells and then go back and
blow up reefs with them
and I've seen these reefs in some cases
small islands for example in South
Sulawesi where where the the very lives
of people depend on the integrity of the
reef because they protect the small
islands around where people live and
still people will come in from outside
and blow up the reefs just to get the
fish done the fish take the fish goodbye
go to another reef and the damage that's
wreaked in that process is is quite
incredible I'll come back to the Coral
Triangle because the countries now
recognize that it's virgin that is a
crisis situation and they're trying
their best to do a number of things one
of the one of the important points is
that they talk about a blue carbon
budget in other words the reefs if
they're properly managed and that will
extract a great deal of greenhouse gases
as a consequence of the reef being there
and more let's do it permanently so
there's always good news and there's
lots of bad news West Africa the fishing
the term which I don't really like but
it's a illegal unreported and it's
unsustainable as well but fishing and
this is one of the prime areas that is
bringing people in from the surrounding
countries and taking fish caught taking
fish illegally and then these fish will
be transported office as a Korean vessel
on the bottom sort of be transported to
Korea possibly through Europe and some
sold in the EU as well and the bottom
it's a mother ship with illegal trawlers
that are out there and there's no
spotting mechanisms where local
populations because as was already said
people now have access to equipment like
this waterproof camera and this that and
the other access to the internet to know
exactly which ship it is as fishing and
people that go out in their canoes and
take pictures and then report that so
this is one of the interesting things
that technology
can be very helpful in this process and
then finally I've got a talk quite a bit
this evening about the Arctic changing
environment and development pressures
these are some photos I wish I had been
in the nice position to be able to think
that he's taken by Department of
Fisheries and Oceans staff but NAR
whales and belugas coming up in the
little areas that are open in the Arctic
well we know there's going to be lots
more areas open in the future but we
don't know what the fate of these
animals will be now I did this diagram
to try and understand the overall
governance of ocean use and I know a lot
about that mainly because I worked with
some very interesting lawyers and others
people involved with fisheries
management and ocean management and
don't worry about all the details I I
did this diagram but the year 2000
hasn't really changed much except that
now there's not just the 1992 Rio but as
was pointed out we're up to 2012 Rio +20
and the important point here is that
whatever we do with the oceans now
doesn't just involve Canada doesn't just
involve a province in Canada it involves
international management the use of
global consensus documents like the law
of the sea it involves trade and
investment activities of various sorts
and I'm going to talk about some of
these national and local interests which
are often very vested interest and not
in the best interest of the ocean but
sometimes they are and are not listened
to
and the generation of knowledge which
comes not just as knowledge from
scientists but it comes from people that
have a flame in their belly like we
heard in their last talk and people that
are in Native communities First Nations
community groups and many had many other
interests so knowledge now is drawn from
many places how do we put that knowledge
together and so we have things like very
very very good thing called the global
Oshin for him I don't have time to go
into the but I suggest you take a look
at it and this has become kind of a
pressure group at the international
level and you can see don't worry about
all of them but there's a lot of
different areas and all these areas
relate back to the fundamentals of
aquatic resource management fisheries
there's also a new yet another I hasten
to add and I don't know what they're
going to be able to do global ocean
commission that's been established
launched just a few weeks ago with a
focus on the high seas those areas of
the deep blue that Jordan correctly
pointed out are not necessarily all the
productive areas but they do play a
major role still in our use of the
oceans and one of the big questions is
what who should how should
high seas marine protected areas be set
up and how should they be managed
because all those neat things like open
tuna that go in a big circle around from
the Gulf of Mexico up to the east coast
of Canada across the West Africa and
then across it here and they face a
gauntlet of Fisheries boats a tremendous
number each of those fish is worth fifty
thousand dollars one or two of those
fish means the difference for a Canadian
fisherman between a good year and a bad
year and so the incentive to keep fit to
have sustainability of the harvest but
there's also Japanese and the high seas
and there's people in the Mediterranean
side etc and there's a lot of some
illegal fishing
so anyways Paul Martin's a Canadian
member of this and I wish him luck but
we frankly have had lots of very good
advice from global ocean commissions and
we haven't seen the uptake of that
advice nearly as strongly as we should
and that's a troubling matter so I've
entitled the talk not just for the
taking and and I really mean that the
oceans are not just there for us to take
we have to give we have to give a lot we
have to give our best to make the uses
of the ocean sustainable we have to
understand that other creatures on this
planet have
a strong rationale for being included in
the list of voters of the ocean the
people the creatures that have some take
on that massive set of resources out
there so but for us we at least can talk
back and forth as humans to each other
and we have to devise what I'd call a
responsible care approach for Canada's
okay and so I'm going to go through some
of what I consider the elements of that
to be including some of the things that
directly relate to fisheries first
question this comes from John Fraser who
I think a lot of former Minister of
Fisheries and Oceans Canada lives in the
west coast and he talks as a person who
is totally and absolutely committed to
the health and the well-being of the
oceans and says who speaks for the
oceans and what are they doing about it
and I think that for your group fin you
should ask that question you should be
one of the group's that's speaking for
the oceans but what are you going to do
about it what is it that you can do to
make a difference and that question
should be first and foremost in your
mind here's a couple of Canadian authors
to add to the very good list and that
was a short list by the way that Jordan
mentioned there's lots of others but the
book seasick written by Alana Mitchell
former a global male writer she put a
couple of years of her life into writing
this book and it's very very good
and it's been highly acclaimed in fact
and it's based on science but she's not
a scientist be the first to say that
she's a journalist trying to explain
things about the oceans and you can see
from her title of what her conclusion is
Farley Mowat
who is often a controversial figure but
his book sea of slaughter will go into
more detail about the things that Jordan
was talking about about this an ending
slaughter of creatures from the ocean
over the last 500 years in Canada I once
showed a film about CEO slaughter at
Dalhousie University and the graduate
students that asked me to stop it in the
middle and they said we can't take any
more if this is what the situation is
why are you spending your time on this
why don't you just give up and drive do
something simpler that's not the way I'm
constructed I guess but but the point is
it's not pleasant reading but it's a
reality check about what we have done in
the past and I'd also like to pay
tribute to some people who you know
Canada as a nation has produced some of
the best Fisheries and ocean scientists
in the world at one point in time we
were probably with along with a few
European countries having the best
scientific journals and so forth and
paying the most attention in terms of
free access to information and and good
research codes of ethics and funding in
in the ocean sciences and and I've only
put three names up here of people who
are involved as in ocean studies or
ocean science people that have
regrettably passed away I if they were
still alive and there's many many of my
colleagues that I could put up here I'd
be hard-pressed to choose which ones but
let me just give you this very brief
profile of these people Ron Rapp Myers
rents and Myers work for the government
and left the government wanted to be
more independent became a leading
professor at Dalhousie University and
Magritte following from the world's
press because he told it like it was
using his accurate scientific approaches
as best he could about the state of
Fisheries in various parts of the world
and including those in the east coast of
Canada
Elizabeth man Borghese who
many people worship around the world she
is the daughter of Thomas Mann the great
author and a wonderful person who gave
herself over completely to the oceans
also at Dalhousie University but headed
the international oceans Institute and
trained and got the money to train by
hounding people like Pierre Trudeau and
others in Canada saying please give me
money and then using that money to get
more money and so thousands of people
now have been trained in understanding
the complexities of oceans because of
her work she was also a great author on
the oceans as well and the third person
who died recently and whom I had the
good fortune to work with was a
psychologist so not all is lost for you
in this field he sorted out how to
reduce the damage from the interaction
between fishermen and whales in
Newfoundland that was his first claim to
fame of many more things since then but
he learned how using basic behavioral
things that involve both the behavior of
the whales and the behavior of the
fisherman so that when whales got which
is very frequent which when whales got
caught in the fishermen's traps for cod
traps they and these are big whales
really big whales and everybody got
upset the whales got upset enough and
died fishermen put themselves in danger
but lost a great deal of money and who
wants to kill a whale so anyways he
worked that out and had teams that could
actually go ahead and do it so but he
did many more things and and these are
people who made a substantial
contribution in their lifetimes and
serve as an inspiration for me and for
many others getting down and again I'm
just suggesting maybe if you're serious
about wanting to understand what we
should be asking his research questions
here's what some of the radiation
scientists in Canada are talking about
and they bring it they bring in these
four areas yes brain and prove the
fundamental scientific understanding but
we've got to have the
information about monitoring and how you
use that information and you have to
look at really understanding the impacts
of human activities and then you got to
bring this information back into
governance and management so it isn't
just about managing a specific fish
stock we've gone beyond that now because
when you try and do it we find often
it's almost impossible because there's
big questions that that are ignored in
that approach this is a rather
interesting new document that's just
come out but it gets to that what I'm
going to try and say in some of the
things today there's other people that
so there's this the scientific community
speaks for sure
then there's all these folks sea paws
Canadian parks and wilderness Society
the Vancouver Aquarium is a great place
ecology Action Center Nova Scotia the
living ocean Society in the west coast
WWF have major programs that relate back
to this and and I would really really
strongly underline First Nations and all
three coasts of Canada four coasts if we
include the Maritimes we include the
Great Lakes they have an incredibly
important role because they have
constitutional rights that relate back
to the oceans so we have this
opportunity we've got the longest
coastline in the world and our maritime
estate people don't often recognize is
about depending on how you counted but
it could be as high as 70% of the land
area so that's that's an important
figure to remember and then we have this
purple exclusive economic zone which
from 1977 onwards has been the
opportunity side for Canada's been
perceived as if we only had our hands on
the management of that and now
have to have it for since 1977 we could
do much better much more value from our
use of the ocean we could make it much
more sustainable reality is sometimes
been a little different now if you'll
allow me a little bit of West Coast
nubbins from coast to coast to coast to
coast so we start in Vancouver but the
what I like here is just near my home in
the bay Victoria Boxing Day and you
think of Boxing Day sales while the
people in in Oak Bay think of sailing in
a different sort of way of Boxing Day
and they are out and they water in their
wetsuits and their boats with mud Baker
in the background but here's another
amazing thing the Western Arctic that
ice highway goes 40 kilometres and comes
up from Inuvik
you've traveled all along the Mackenzie
River and then you go to the little
hamlet of Tuktoyaktuk which is important
strategically for a number of reasons
and the last 40 kilometers you're
actually traveling on the Arctic Ocean
the frozen ocean so they've just
announced this week that they are going
to put in an all season road which will
be 300 million dollars and of course one
of the reasons for that is simply that
they won't be able to use ice highways
up there much longer
this becomes a season becomes too short
and tenuous and this is one of person I
did a lot of mentoring with Janelle
Kennedy on the eastern Arctic where of
course this is a prime area for what's
going to happen in the future with
icebergs and so forth but also one of
the most interesting areas because we
don't know very much about the
continental shelf in that area some
people say it's better known on the
surface of the Moon than it is
in that area people are already looking
at it though for oil and gas
exploitation for shipping purposes and
they're also looking for fisheries
surprising how many things are happening
in the Arctic right now where people
want to go up and test fish on the East
Coast it's for things like cod and the
West Coast is already salmon moving
around into all of this Pacific salmon
are now found in in some Arctic rivers
to the other coast I Gandharan that I
was in a very small airplane with John
lean the person the will man Gander and
Fogo Island all covered in ice at that
point and then to a place where I really
enjoy being which is Lunenburg Nova
Scotia one of the great shipping wooden
shipbuilding and so forth places and
happened to be there the day they were
relaunching the Bluenose to almost and
it's kind of interesting if you look
along that shoreline there's the sea
shepherd I would know the sea Shepherd
Paul Watson's boat which has been
impounded by Canada for reasons that I
won't explain right now and then you can
see these other large boats and you can
see the Dartmouth ferry and a small
naval vessel to drydock there as well it
really is an active little spot but
don't forget that the oceans influence
extends to Ontario not only directly
through the region and particularly
therefore Quebec but also the water
comes out of Ontario the quality of the
water and so forth creatures from the
ocean come up into the Great Lakes
including those L wives and some other
little things that are really nasty and
cost us billions of dollars and manage
these species but it's also officially
considered in Canada that these are
inland seas that deserve to fall under
the purview of Fisheries and Oceans for
some things and then we think of the
Gulf of st. Lawrence now it's a very
interesting body of water there but what
I'd like you to look at is those little
circles and then I'm going to show you
some more circles one of the most
interesting things for me of trying to
simplify my understanding a very complex
oceanography is to look at the things
that go round and round and gyres and
circles one sort of another the simple
example is when you go sea kayaking and
you're out there straining against the
current and so forth maybe the tides
against in there's a strong current
maybe a wind blowing against it so you
go into shore and then you find a
counter-current and then you're just
swept along because that counter current
is going this way while the main
currents go in that way so you get a
free ride instead of being outed so lots
of other things get free ride so if you
look at what's called the Haida Eddie
here you see these little swirls out and
they going out into the ocean they're
well they're driven by the fresh water
which is all that red stuff coming down
from the rivers like the skeino River
and some others and and those swirls are
driven by the current patterns of the
ocean and they go out and they transport
all the larvae from the inshore and the
nutrients out to the offshore so you
talked Jordan about the sea moans and
one of these now boy ciment is just out
there near the top end of it and that's
how it gets all the fish that that are
out there that make it very special and
why it's a high productivity area
another one is in the Beaufort gyre up
in the Arctic and that's a collection
point for the whales in the Arctic and
some of
the fish species as well because of the
high productivity same in the Gulf
Stream and here's a good example of how
little we understand for a long time the
oceanographers didn't understand that
there were these gyres in in that area
of the Gulf Stream
so the Gulf Stream is going off coming
up the coast of the United States and
heading off to Europe then there's all
these counter cards that are swirling
around just like the ones I'd be looking
for on a kayak and their warm water
they're getting warm water in off the
ocean so if these counter currents
happen to be in place just at the time
that the scallops which are down on the
Georges Bank shelf are spawning then the
little creatures coming up gets swept
away by the warm water because they're
cold water creatures and and you don't
get a good spawn that year so if you're
going to try and understand the
management of things you have to
understand phenomena like the the gyres
and the eddies in the oceans and and
this is my first introduction here
thanks ecological physically geological
phenomena that that won't come out
through an examination of studying
fishing pressure because they're
environmental and focus and there's lots
of those kinds of things in the oceans
so this has led to great tough you can't
believe there's just like among
economists they know what's the saying
that if you get three economists in the
room you'll get four opinions you know
or something like that and was famous
true with fisheries biologists I've
actually sat in the office of an
ecological ocean scientist in British
Columbia I just happened to be there
when he was this is after the cod
disaster and he had just published an
article with some others in science
magazine very highly respected journal
saying that the fisheries management
people basically didn't understand what
they were doing which I agree with him
by the way we were talking about that
the phone rings just at that moment from
a fishery scientist who I won't give the
name of in Eastern Canada but
for government and who is threatening to
sue him for defamation of character
because they had there at odds
they were analyzing the same problem
from entirely different points of view
and particularly when I lived in Nova
Scotia I could give you endless stories
of this and and they they were in one
case there was a whole very large
ecosystem group and they were shut down
they were shut down by the higher-ups
because they were producing data that
were at odds with what the population
dynamics people were producing I'm
giving a simplified version of things
but so the point is and I used to say
this to students when I was teaching
fisheries things and in Nova Scotia
don't trust the experts you know form
your own opinions the experts are often
very wrong and they wear blinders just
like everybody else in society and one
of the biggest ones is about fisheries
management the same could be said at
times in the past for forest management
but fisheries management is inherently
even more complex at least trees stand
in line and can be counted rarely is
that the case with fish because of what
occurs among other things so here's
here's just a little collection of books
and I could triple that collection about
these different points of view and I
won't go into details now this is a sad
story here this is in Lunenburg Nova
Scotia and how many have ever been to
Lunenburg how many ever been to Nova
Scotia great great well to go down to
Lunenburg you'll see it it's very moving
very very moving instead of what would
you call these obelisks maybe I guess
and and they list as much as possible
the names of people who were killed at
sea in some cases there might be they
don't have all the names because it
would be 50 or 100 people who were
killed in 1927 and again and while we
were living there there was a
incident but these are just people from
Lunenburg area because this was the
Grand Banks fisheries and and it's very
moving to see it but the point is we
remember a lot about erosion past and we
even tend to glorify it or feel sad
about it or whatever but what have we
actually learned you know and there's
just for a little window-dressing there
it's a couple of postage stamps to
remind us about the glorious past and
that's the fellow on the right Angus
Walters was a very famous captain of the
fastest of the day ships the Bluenose
Newfoundland
that's that abundant Cod population but
the interesting thing is the men that
told us early on stuff that is still
being quoted is Harold Ennis from the
University of Toronto who was an
economist who dealt with this idea of
Heartland and hinterland in Canada and
the fact is that we were heroes of wood
drawers of water fur traders but also we
dipped into the ocean and he wrote this
what happens when you get a really truly
abundant resource like the cod fishery
said so that's his book written in 1940
very prescient and basically he's saying
is an abundant tradable resource can
fuel an economy but it also traps you in
many ways and and that is what has
happened in Canada in a sense we've
we've relied on super abundant natural
resources not just fish but but it
allows us I've thought a lot about this
over the years trying to understand why
would behave towards the resources we do
like for example with a card when we
lived in Nova Scotia you know we can go
in and buy this fish that was awful in
the stores you couldn't get good caught
in the stores and the reason it wasn't
good it was because it was mishandled
right from the time it was it was nice
it wasn't bled so you'd have a nice open
flesh and it was treated as if it was
going after the car house to be treated
as salted cod you know low value
commodity some other people Iceland
Norwegians and some others didn't do
that they treated the fish property they
got a very good value at it and they
started respecting the resorts base even
more so that's the important thing for
those with an economic bent to recognize
is that you can one of the one of the
ways in which we can actually get more
out of our resource get is to add value
to it handle it carefully respect each
fish that we catch which gets again into
why is it that we can go in and use
trawlers and you know take a small
fraction of the fish but anyways a lot
of the stuff goes back to Harold Ennis
and now the other thing is and I hear I
differ a bit from what what was said
about the empty oceans yes the oceans
are empty because we've we've knocked
out a lot of the food chain but there
still can be in abundance and as you
correctly pointed out Jordan if you like
eating jellyfish which I actually I do
there but I keep asking my Chinese
colleagues well why is it that you eat
you know chicken feet or certain other
things look a bit assemble that certain
other things well it isn't for the taste
particularly it's for the crunch crunch
better and and jellyfish is one of those
things and the same with Indonesian sand
others they like the crunch and they're
delicious
now they're dried in Newfoundland
Newfoundland couldn't believe it's good
luck when they discovered them they're
actually people in the world that wanted
to eat jellyfish but they so they start
drying them and exporting them into
these little flat patties you know but
and there's certain other things that I
could mention as well and squid of
course it's one of them and so what you
find is an ocean that gets very abundant
in those creatures that can be low on
the food chain often and what we call
detritus food change you know the stuff
that rains down into the water column
and so lots of fishermen are now happy
to see no Cod and Nova in well I don't
know about Nova Scotia so much but
certainly whoops everything shut up
I guess if you got up there still oh
yeah can I have some technical help up
here like I've got nothing on my screen
and you like to see my screen oh okay
okay Justin okay and then how do I get
it to go back you're just okay so so we
now have very very valuable snow crowd
and northern shrimp and basically the
ecosystem has changed don't expect the
car to come back unless something
catastrophic happens to these guys
because these are per place basically
replaced the card will see card for sure
we'll see some other ground fish we
probably won't see them in the abundance
because these guys are eating that in
the food chain now so but that's not
necessarily a bad thing that there's
fewer card if you ask the fisherman a
lot of them that have made it a lot of
money off these new species will say hey
we're making more money that they're
better bullets etc the question is and I
tried to look at this question with some
people in the Auditor General's Office
some years ago and we concluded that
there was no knowledge base to support
the hypothesis that these actually were
being sustainably harvested the new ones
in other words we might end up with the
same problem but let's go back again to
what another thing that was mentioned
earlier and that is electronic gear and
so forth well it's it's not exactly new
but it's in this period from about 1970
on and this man got an honorary
Doctorate from I think the University of
New Brunswick and this oddly enough was
one of his boats which I happen to see
in the drydock in lüneburg and and
captain Medford Matthews was a real
innovator with gear and he brought
inside this wasn't the first trawler
that came by any means into the region
but it's it's kind of like the early
brand of the the trawlers that are of a
modern type and well equipped with all
the gear that can take a lot of fish
sonar things and other equipment well
here's what they look like no here's
another one
a couple of kayakers for scale and these
things are essentially the bulldozers of
the sea they they do so much damage to
the bottom they rip things up and I
think eventually probably will see these
things phased out for other types of
gear that's my hypothesis but in the
interim these are deadly machines for
from the point of view of what they can
haul for fish it doesn't mean that they
can't be made to be useful contributors
towards sustainability if they're held
in check but particular when you get in
these big vessels and then you get
facilities on them or factory boats that
can accompany them that can take an
immense amount and stay at sea for long
periods of time because they can
devastate a whole region of the ocean
very quickly now then we move to what
happens to fish after it gets caught if
you look at this plant at the top
national seafoods is the world's one of
the world's major fishing companies and
one of the largest ones in Canada this
plant located in Lunenburg was the
world's largest fish plant in the 1980s
now my daughter Laura will quite well
remember when we used to go down to a
cottage some days we were downwind of
this this boat this plant and it was
just a bad smell they were taking all
the remains and make cooking it to make
it into a fish meal and selling it but
what this national Seif would do now
white-fleshed fish such as cod haddock
and Pollock and a bunch of others are
kind of what some people in the banking
business would call fungible ie they're
all you can exchange them
interchangeably they're white flesh you
can make them into fish and chips you
can even take something like tilapia
which is a freshwater fish in
call it Cod and that happens sometimes
illegally but it happens so in today's
market supply chain because China has
become the most efficient processor they
get all this fish go into China and it
goes through big ports like Rotterdam
where it gets all muddled up it could
come from West Africa it could come from
South North America or whatever gets
turned into chunks of fish that are
partially processed there then it comes
back to companies like the one in
lüneburg where people squirt some nice
things on top of it and maybe make it a
little fancy or make it into a frozen
dinner or something like that
then it gets stuff made in Canada and
then sent to the United States are
consumed in Canada or maybe in Europe
even so that's that's a reality so if
you were listening to the radio in the
last few weeks there's been a release of
a report that estimates that something
like 30% of this fish is actually
mislabeled because once it gets to
Rotterdam or wherever you don't know
whether it's a cod or what whatever it
happens to be so a market supply chains
go through this complex thing and it
makes it very difficult for us to know
eight whether we're really eating what
we think is caught or whatever else it
might be be whether it was caught
sustainably or even whether it went
through some mishap and it's in its
process that lowered the quality of the
fish this has become a major major
problem in ocean management and in
management of a seafood chains the sort
of thing that you're talking about if
you want to be a good citizen and only
eat sustainably produced fish
fortunately there are solutions but just
to give you another example of this and
this is an area where Australia was
furious with us see these this large
fish the Patagonian toothfish which some
of you may have eaten this show how many
people and I shouldn't ask the question
but if you want to raise your hand have
you ever eaten Chilean sea bass okay
well Chilean sea bass is one of those
fancy names that's given for something
that's actually a fish coming from
Antarctica and for the most part
unsustainably produced and at one point
in time this is
been cleaned up quite a bit now but it
was going from Antarctica I'm pretty
much an unregulated fishery even though
the Australians were really making a
pitch for it and and then he would go to
China it would be handled there then it
would come to Canada and then it'd be
transshipped in the United States as
Canadian fish Australians weren't very
happy about that I can tell you but but
again this just illustrates things so
one of the ways to get around this is
through all these various choices that
you can make and people that help you to
make good choices it started with the
Monterey Bay Aquarium another lion
cougar aquarium is in their seafood
watch the most critical thing is
something started by WWF and some others
in the private sector on what's called
the Marine Stewardship Council which is
now certifying some some species of fish
and interestingly many chefs now in the
world will refuse even in countries in
places like Hong Kong and some of the
big hotels they will refuse to handle
fish that are not certified and this is
a real step forward and I could tell you
some interesting stories but I better
move on so just go to fish choice calm
and take a look at some of the things
that are on there or any of these
individual websites this is the future
this is a future that responsible
seafood companies like national sea see
us what they would be faced with always
and countries like China are now
starting to recognize that they will
have to become involved then there's
some of the really nasty things like
charts Minh I took this picture in a
Chinese restaurant but the interesting
thing there is yelling the guy was so so
tall and he reaches to this guy
basketball player from China and
respected highly respected within China
and a person who doesn't just play
basketball but he's very interested in
public policy issues and and he came out
and said I will not have my wife-to-be
and I will not have shark fin soup
served as is traditionally done there
weddings and I'm going to encourage all
my fellow basketball players and sports
figures and so forth to do the same he's
probably had more impact than any other
single thing of the scientists and
others who bring their hands because
China is a primary place now for shark
fin soup and where all those 70 million
or more shark fins are going now
little-known facts I think the facts but
it's always interested me in Nova Scotia
that there's been a sword fishery and if
you go back far enough there was there
was all sorts of books written by people
I think the same gray type of books very
rich people used to go to Nova Scotia
and catch them off as a sport fishery
but in the 1940s still even there was a
harpoon sword fishery in Glace Bay up in
Cape Breton Island hundreds and hundreds
of boats this is just one picture from
the from the era and they had these
canoes that they went out in and men
would go out there with harpoon waiting
to catch up 400 or more pound swordfish
the interesting point about it is it
still exists and one of the points right
now is that the Marine Stewardship
Council has been asked to certify
harpoon fisheries in the United States
and in Canada and then also the pelagic
longline now you've got introduced to
the longline and and some people wrap
their hands to put their hands for their
heart and say the longline is the way to
go because it's not involving those
trawlers but what the longline does is
catches turtles sharks and all sorts of
other things that are not the wanted
species at the same time as they're
catching swordfish but controversy Leigh
the Marine Stewardship Council has
awarded the Northwest Atlantic Canadians
sword fishery which amongst about ten
million dollars a year certification
that they were doing it properly I'm not
so sure I don't know on this one but the
interesting thing is that already
awarded the spear fishery for the sari
of these yes the spear fishery for the
sword
three they're still getting Spears out
there and if you go if you google
something along those lines you can
actually see little things for sportsmen
in the United States for example going
out on boats and throwing their harpoons
but you can see what happens in the that
the government in the late 90s really
put a clamp on things because you could
see the decline on the on the swordfish
going down there and went below what is
considered a maximum sustainable yield
biomass and and you can see as a
consequence of stopping that fishery and
how it's built up to the point now where
they feel that they can reinstitute a
limited sword fishery so these are the
sorts of things this is this is an
oddball little example it's not one of
the great fisheries but there's dozens
even hundreds of these other kinds of
fisheries out there that don't get the
same kind of presses to the cod fishery
the big ones the biggest single thing we
have going for us now is the lobster and
then havoc is a ground fish that is
still retaining some place that made and
the scale of things a very nice fish to
eat but these are the things that
sustain the small communities and the
social order of Nova Scotia Bay of Fundy
and so forth but the point here is that
the havoc went down and it went down
maybe because of what were fishing but
it wasn't on the scale of overfishing of
the card and almost certainly water
temperature has played a role in it so
again what's cause and effect between
fishing pressure and fish abundance
sometimes that's very clear here's
another one this just a friend of mine
took this picture last weekend or
weekend before one day fishery and you
get all these collections of boats going
out and and they kill immensely if they
take huge schools of herring and then
the gulls and other birds are there
Eagles etc and the point here though is
that the abundance of herring is at the
greatest level in the last 30 to 40
years responsible fishery scientists
would say we have no idea of why they
may claim credit to it
because of our careful management but
it's been up and down and up and down
this I don't have time there's an awful
lot of interesting stories about this
fishery and about the way the native
people the first nations along the coast
perceive how it should be managed where
they wouldn't have any of these bullets
out there they would be because it's
mainly managed for herring rolling of a
eggs and and they go to Japan and places
like that but they would manage by
lifting the things out of kelp where
they've been spawned by the official
results and get rid of the bullets
period so there's differing points of
view of what you can do and some of
those things I think are going to be the
things for the future salmon I have
spent a lot of my life looking at
reading about trying to understand
salmon I'll be the first to say it's
really difficult not the only person to
say that there's Aboriginal interests
which are strongly constitutionally
supported commercial interests which
often are on the decline sports
fisheries interests which claim to
produce about 5 to 16 times the value
per fish landed because fishermen spent
a lot of money and then there's
aquaculture and anybody anybody here
from BC great well you know that this is
not exactly an easy subject in British
Columbia I mean everybody has an opinion
on it and it's really difficult but look
at this this is a plot several years ago
of watersheds in Canada because you have
to involve the freshwater watersheds in
in British Columbia I should say for
sockeye Salmons in decline so the yellow
and red watersheds huge watersheds under
threat that's likely to increase because
of global warming and the streams are
warming up and other things happening in
the watersheds the pine bark beetle
killing all the trees trees go water
runs off isn't there for the spawning
season so the salmon is truly in trouble
no matter what aquaculture if you look
at a net like this this is a fairly well
run
agriculture setting in quad see no Sun
each of those netted areas holds about
50,000 fish this size if you've ever
seen anything like that close-up it's
quite amazing so this is just fish
packed in place the fish aren't
discontented and this varying points of
view about it but some of you may know
that our Prime Minister appointed
justice from British Columbia was called
the Cohen Commission to look at the
future of the Fraser River salmon the
biggest bear running and and don't read
all of this but the basic point is that
Cohen said if if people were expecting
that I'd find a smoking gun one
causality to it no no way and I think I
certainly felt that would be what he
would come up with at the end that
there's all sorts of factors but read
what he says Fraser River sockeye faced
an uncertain future shrinking resources
which may result in delays and
implementing reforms and research
shrinking and shrinking resources being
less money around
DFO has been cut badly meaning that the
stressors to which sockeye are exposed
will continue and the deterioration of
sockeye habitats will get worse the
waters constituting Fraser River sockeye
habitat are warming and then pointing
out that basically because the
government had taken a bunch of
amendments before receiving as to the
Fisheries Act that in fact the future of
management of the Fraser rivers is
unknown and that's putting it in the
most positive terms and and so these are
guarded comments the whole report the
summary of that if you want to get a
sense of that particular very important
resource and why it's difficult to
manage read that report so my my concern
see we have these various things that we
can do in Canada
for the oceans and two big things what
is the Fisheries Act which is in is in a
very old one of the first pieces of
legislation we had encountered and I
won't give you a boring and dull
description of all the parts of it but
it sets the basis for conservation of
fish for Pollution Control and a number
of other things related to habitat etc
and also sovereignty over our resource
and sovereignty between the federal
government and provincial governments
and its management it's a very important
piece of legislation it's been changed
quite dramatically in the last year
placing less emphasis on the habitat
aspect in particular but we also have
the oceans Act in Canada and this was a
new piece of legislation that came out
in the 1990s and and essentially set a
new basis of management around
ecosystems sustainable development and
in other words balancing between the
various kinds of uses of the ocean and
specified the need for attention to mat
and marine protected areas and also what
was called law of eventually became
called Wilma's large ocean management
areas to take big chunks of the ocean
and try and develop plans for them I'm
just going to give you a very brief
overview of a few of these and you can
this talk will be available to anybody
that wants it and you can see in more
detail but but the lomas represent move
towards the ecosystem based approach and
and one that's based on consultation
among the various users whether they're
First Nations whether they're oil and
gas fisheries and so forth it's building
relationships and dialogue among the
various users and the idea is to plan
for surprises plan for management
strategies that you could actually
implement and get that information in
advance of development so one that I'm
very familiar with is isom east coast
Scotian shell and they produce good work
and so
or they won't talk about it anymore one
that's citizen led scientists led and
led by both Canada in the United States
is the area of the Gulf of Maine
particularly Georges Bank as part of
that and then happened to the Bay of
Fundy
and here the federal government has a
limited it has taken a limited rule and
it's been the States and the province is
working together that's really done some
very innovative work won't have time to
go into it but I wanted to say just one
thing if you take this is the boundary
line between the two countries painful
they worked out and I could tell you
interesting stories about that because
it was had some role and some of that it
was very interesting but if you look up
towards the Bay of Fundy and intent
towards New Brunswick which is Wales and
ships collide up there because that's
where it's a natural one of these areas
with lots of occurrence flowing and
gyres and so forth and and it's
incredibly productive the whales come up
there to feed in the summer some of the
scarcest with humpbacks are there but
some of the other whales and and they
glide with the ships so you get these
ships going up into particularly for an
oil refinery located up there and they
find a whale draped over this they have
a kind of a bulbous front on them and
there's a whale dead whale there and and
so the right whales particularly there's
only about 300 of them left I think and
they were being knocked out right now
intended in that area so there was a
simple solution it was a very simple
solution and one that's worked
remarkably well they just changed the
shipping lane slightly and they put in
place a kind of a spotting mechanism
because you can see the whales and so
people would know where the whales
tended to be clustered on a given day so
there's some leeway and where the ships
go and problem not completely solved but
let's say 80% solved so this there's the
really are win-win situations out there
and the charge for that was led by you
can see how Nova Scotia goes down to
kind of a little point nothing up the
big part of Nova Scotia but this a
little kind of peninsula beautiful place
the school teacher was living out there
and she took it upon herself to be part
of the solution and organized local
groups to actually spot and be able to
say where the whales would be and
demonstrate it to the scientist who
didn't really believe in this I don't
think very strongly that that it could
actually be a solution so it started
from a citizen and I have a lot of
respect for what I see as citizen
science in the oceans throughout this
country and give you many other examples
in the West Coast and in the Arctic and
so forth another one that I think
involves a heavy degree of citizen input
is the same Gulf of st. Lawrence action
plan which is being implemented
primarily through Environment Canada and
here there's something called zip you
don't need to go into the details but
civic committees exist throughout the
Gulf and around particularly around
Quebec it's always all about the bag and
the the neat thing about it is that it
brings the stakeholders together and
they come to real solutions about local
problems that affect their part of the
Gulf of st. Lawrence and the government
and others provide a broader input into
overall what the st. Lawrence action
plan would look like so there's some
degree of coherence throughout the whole
region now these are good things that
are happening and they they they've been
developed by people working together
painstakingly working
for more than a decade of interaction
overcoming all sorts of obstacles of
differing points of view narrow points
of view etc so these are some of the
good things that are happening in Canada
one that I helped to get underway in
terms of some of local into all sorts of
stories about it for time reasons but
terrible name Fenn SEMA Pacific North
Coast integrated management area and
this includes when I hate the word also
world class the phrase world class but
the oceans in this area are stunning in
terms of the diversity of life and also
the intactness of the ecosystems in this
whole area
in the northern part of Vancouver Island
up to Prince Rupert there's only 15 or
20,000 people living in that whole area
and that's an area that's probably about
as long as the coast of much of the
coast of Norway for example actually
find intact ecosystems you can fly and
reasonably low levels and see gigantic
sunfish floating on their side into the
way a thousand pounds are born you can
see whales you can see if you're in a
boat where the sea birds go and then
there's important Fisheries and
activities in that as well
there's a wonderful atlas of it if you
want to look at it online and you can
download that but there's all sorts of
other activities that this is drawn from
that Atlas just showing who's got oil
and gas exploratory wells and tenures in
the area you know all sorts of people a
stake that territory there's another one
that shows all sorts of different
Fisheries interests well interspersed
with those I don't know if I've got the
know I don't I took it out for time
reasons if I if I could show you where
the corals are and where there's the
thing called glass sponges which we
thought were creatures that had gone
extinct they were studied as fossils in
Germany and that was where they found
them around the area's I think that are
fossilized now in Germany and suddenly
about 15 years ago somebody discovered
that there was huge beds of these things
around this area that primarily in the
area is kind of a pale orange so what
are you gonna do about it these were
areas that were just beginning to be
used heavily by trawlers the trawlers
were starting to plow right through
these ancient beds because these some of
these are thousands of years old
and a stop was put to it and now they're
all plotted we know where they are
there was an exclusion zones for the
corals for the fisheries and the same
Iran up till about 2000 there was an
official almost denial that there was
these soft corals that were found on the
East Coast and the fishermen had been
complaining about particularly long
liners that that the trawlers were going
through and bringing up these things and
I went to a Fisher fishery associations
Museum and Southwest Nova Scotia and
they had all these big corals and if you
went on the west coast to to some of the
command not commercial but sports
fishing shops and bullit places they'd
have them on the wall the same thing on
the west coast well officially they
didn't exist and finally they did exist
and now there's all sorts of exclusion
Ares for the red corals as well so
progress but it's slow and it's painful
the Northern Gateway I'm not going to
even touch tonight if you want to ask me
questions about it but but this is the
prime example now of why we need
something like fin SEMA to generate the
kind of data that would be helpful to
know how much what is their actual risk
unfortunately for whatever reason the
government has decided to more or less
not totally but more or less got the
cooperation that had been established to
open SEMA and and that mechanism that
seems to be lost though another one in
the north is the Beaufort Sea
Partnership which is a complicated thing
and you can see the vision of it is
basically ecosystem health and
supporting sustainable communities and
economies for future generations as well
as the present the problem with the
Beaufort Sea partnership is there's a
lot of things that relate to land claims
and and northern
local people's up there that have made
it very difficult and I'm not blaming
them but it's just there's a lot of
obstacles in the way still to make this
move as fast as it should another one
where another mechanism is in place now
we're starting to get in places
Lancaster Sound Lancaster sound there
was one of the first places where they
were CEOs planning in Canada and at that
time those in the 1980s people were kind
of looking at as a bit of a curiosity
now this is a very important part of the
Northwest Passage that will become one
of the area's used for shipping
eventually there's a large part of that
is now proposed as a National
Conservation Area and this will be very
interesting to see what this will
actually mean in reality now I want to
point out the the National Marine
Conservation Area because we actually
have legislation saying that all the
representative areas in Canada there's
26 or 27 of them something like that
each of those kinds of habitats should
have representative areas where you
could actually pinpoint and say AHA this
is this area is protected within that
and it will tell us about the area it
could be of use for fisheries management
and so forth helping to replenish those
stocks
we're far from there just to highlight
again what Jordan was saying look at the
small percentage of protected areas and
the oceans in Canada compared to the
last year most people would say in the
land areas it's not enough so I don't
look at the detail of this but these
shows all these different types of areas
know that you can look at Hudson Bay for
example or the north and south part of
West Coast Pacific coast there's a lot
of areas but particularly in the Arctic
we need a lot more effort and one of the
things that sea pause which has been a
prime contributor to this they have a
whole list of thing that they feel are
urgent priorities for marine protected
areas and they're not all being acted on
at this point in time so we do have a
document and talked
talk is very cheap called the national
network of MBAs do we have a national
network of MPAs in Canada well here's
one point of view from a person who I
respect a lot through the Pew foundation
daniel pauly from UBC fishery centre is
one of the people that really
understands the oceans and fisheries
very well in Canada and around the world
and he's been running something a
database called MPA global looking at
marine protected areas all around the
world if you go and look at the Canadian
entries there's five hundred and seventy
four of them including provincial
coastal parks and ecological reserves
and so forth I can go out in my kayak
and go run around the ecological
reserves two kilometers offshore from
where I live
for birds for example marine parks and
British Columbia there's dozens of them
but they're mainly for they've been
chosen not for their ecological value
and although sometimes there is
ecological value but it's nice safe
shelters for boats that go up and down
the coast you know a small pleasure
boats are big pleasure boats so this is
a kind of overstates the case but it's
not Daniel Pollock's fault this is
following certain criteria we're
starting to see this now emerge as
networks within the regions so for
example there's whale sanctuaries coral
sanctuaries and a place called the gully
where a lot of the really interesting
whales that are offshore from Nova
Scotia collect now and then there's a
lot of actually land-based ones so that
you're primarily for birds and
protection of wetlands the problem with
this is can you really call it a network
what are the criteria what how will it
relate how will all of this relate that
I've got on this diagram
how will it relate to sustainable
fisheries management because that's the
kind of question that we should be
asking I don't think we're asking that
question very well in Canada now but I
would urge thin to be thinking about
that when you're thinking about
sustainability of seafood and so forth
how does it relate back to the other
things in the ocean
system and how can we use those tools
better pen Seba this diagram shows the
all these different places that I
mentioned the corals and other areas
that deserve some sort of protection of
one sort or another from here and now
management issues things like the
trawlers and other activities allowing
gas in some cases now here is the
makings of at least a west coast north
west coast network here's what I'd like
to see if you look at pin seam and I've
taken it out to the 200-mile zone
because I feel we should be going out to
the 200 miles out of this but if you had
I call it buoy to Brooks Brooks
Peninsula is a really I should have put
a picture of it and it's so interesting
to see it from the air and it's it's a
finger of land that goes out to the sea
an interesting place because during the
Second World War when we were patrolling
all on the coast for ships coming across
from Asia a lot of ship a lot of
airplanes were lost in the Bowie ever in
the Brooks Peninsula because right at
that point there's a change in the
currents and you get all that so there's
a north and the south current coming and
they change seasonally and right at that
point you can get talked to a pilot
about this when I was flying over it
with him and he was saying that he had
actually seen what looked like Niagara
Falls coming up because the currents are
clashing you get this water coming up
rising out of the ocean and and he said
it was just like this wall of water
coming up and then crashing down the
other side in the atmosphere so these
are the things that only pilots see I
guess but he said an exceedingly
dangerous area but it's it's again a
very important area separating the north
and the south and the kinds of animal
migrations whales and so forth and
seabirds and then if you look at the top
end there's the Boise mode and there's
sea mounts these mountains that rise up
almost of the ocean top of the ocean but
in the case of Boise Mount it comes
within 75 feet of the sir
as now I have talked to people that have
gone out there and there sell boats big
sail boats and scuba dived on that
seemed odd it's filled with life it's
absolutely filled with life and and so
we have a whole series of these this is
the only one that currently gets any
protection whatsoever
from fishing as far as I can tell
there's other things in the scotland's
and rarity is very important
looking estuaries another one of they
strange little fish things that won't go
into these sponge reefs and so forth so
this is not just a big blend body of
light blue or anything like that when
you start looking at what's on the
bottom it needs protection the sea
otters coming back and and they're part
of the ecosystem now some First Nations
hate them because they're taking oysters
they're taking all sorts of creatures
that they want to harvest the coral
reefs I mentioned gray hannes which is
land co-managed between Parks Canada and
now a marine conservation under area
under the Marine Conservation Act and
the height of people one of the most
innovative systems of co-management
anywhere in the world I mean this is
fabulous and this is going to mean a
whole different approach towards
fisheries management in the area towards
how the height of people perceive their
responsibilities and how the Government
of Canada and the province of Canada
actually it's all done in a
co-management basis this is one of the
most exciting things that you can
possibly imagine and this is what the
southern end can see down that yellow
tip the southern end which happens to be
where the highest recorded winds were
ever recorded it was off test
they're in the 1970s I think it was 200
kilometers an hour or something like
that so this is the kind of habitat
that's up there and you can see the
animals that are living there the sea
lions the beautiful areas oops see bone
above that rock fish those fish
many of them are 70 years old and some
of my colleagues that want to protect
them say would you eat your grandparents
because they're delicious they're served
on many menus and not very sustainably
harvested and in fact before Boise Mont
well it was still out of consideration
that's just a plot of the depth contours
and these currents that circulate around
when they boys seem odd but fishermen
were being told to go out there and fish
while they still could so even in the
this is safe seven or eight years ago
and when it was actively known that
Boise is going to be handled there was
boats going out there so now that
problem is solved but there's all these
other problems along the coast should
you allow boats to go out to other
seaman's
Triangle island a most amazing place
the day I went out there that pilot said
you were lucky you get one to two days a
year when it looks like this is not
covered in rain and fog you can see the
little blip on the top of it there was a
lighthouse they put the lighthouse up in
the in the cloud level so no the
lighthouse keepers could never see it
the weather is so bad there that
lighthouse keepers often would get no
food for two or three months at a time
sadly some of the lighthouse keepers
went crazy out there as well and and
there's only the base of the lighthouse
left hurricane blew the lighthouse
itself away and sadly also one of the
leading scientists that studied it's a
great place one of the great nesting
areas for certain important seabirds and
sadly one of the scientists fell off the
cliff and she died there's a wonderful
book though that's been written about
triangle Island with a lot of water
colors and so forth by an artist that
went out at a later time it's it's a
very interesting spot now what do you
think those things are innovation with
ocean technology and sovereignty issues
such as signing on to the law of the sea
we never ratified the law of the sea for
example I think it's time to revisit and
strengthen our commitment to the oceans
I think we've made a start with the
oceans action plan but I think it's got
some good points and it's faltering in
some key areas and not enough resources
or even attention is being given to it
ask when the last time this was reviewed
in Parliament for example the fisheries
as far as I can see if the committee
that deals with fisheries and oceans
murders in the current Parliament is we
pretty much dysfunctional certainly not
dealing with the kinds of questions that
we're talking
tonight it will probably receive the
report of the Commission on Environment
and sustainable development and MPAs say
thank you we probably won't be needing
any serious discussion of this long-term
discussion of this thank you very much
for your hard work and that's what
things have degraded to it various times
now we need much more than that so in
the work of fin and with I hope your
other colleagues around the country that
you will join the voices of those who do
speak I think responsibly and sensibly
about the oh and for the about and for
the oceans but that you will take these
kinds of broader perspectives and keep
those in mind even as you focus very
strongly on the need for going after the
individual species and looking at the
problems where they did to all of the
fish that are out in the ocean because
it's clear we're going to be eating more
varieties of them and we're going to
find some of them very scarce still in
the future so thank you very much for
your attention this evening
so we've had your attention for a long
time tonight and but so but you're
welcome to ask some questions if you'd
like to do that if you ask the question
then I'll repeat it because then we can
capture it on video and you'd be more
than pleased to take questions so if
anyone has one idea of a progress drop
so like our ancestors killing two
minutes let's say over one is a good
idea that's progress
but once they could drive 200 off a
cliff and kill an entire herd and then
like kill more herds until they all our
ancestors in those areas would starve to
death because they kill over minutes
essentially that would be progress drop
if that applies if that's like an over
simplistic generalization or this so the
question is whether the idea of progress
drop is relevant to this issue when a
progress drop is the expansion of
technology to harvest beyond sustainable
limits I guess sure sure well it's part
of a larger problem of traps and
progress traps is certainly one and we
get caught in those traps because
something works well for us for at the
time interest and certainly a was true
in the fisheries case and then when it
doesn't work well we're still adhering
to that approach so one of the things
and this is one of the reasons why I
bring out the ecosystem work and so
forth we we have to open our mind to
alternative possibilities and also
there's another little phrase that used
called option or closure you know for
example if you lay out all the different
uses in the ocean and everybody's
scrambling for space in the ocean you
know the fishermen don't want
aquaculture because they can't park
their boats or their your nets are in
the way whatever it happens to be the
oil people want one thing the
aquaculture is don't want to out there
so you gotta have some rational case for
making choices but option for closure if
you do it well and zoning is one of the
ways to do that allows for more to go on
but at a lower risk and what we're doing
now I think is moving back towards a
sectoral approach where it happens right
now that the sector happens to be oil
and gas it could equally be some other
sector in the could be deep ocean mining
for example are shallow ocean running
and and so we have to have a more
rational basis and just following
whatever we think at the moment is the
best you know so that's that's really
dealing with the progress trap I think
there's also like kind of and maybe it
accompanies it but a kind of a
conceptual trap sometimes as well you
know we we adhere to ideas and therefore
world open our minds up and then
something comes along it could be some
terrible accident the classic cases the
Exxon Valdez or something like that and
suddenly bang you're in a whole new
environment of thinking and you're not
prepared for it you don't have the
solutions you don't have haven't thought
your way through the kind of knowledge
bases you need and and so that's another
kind of trap that we have to face
because that's why I say think about
accidents many of the changes in our
society are the result of accidents and
something so awful happens that we have
to think of a new way of doing things
and so a lot of what I think the
scientific community is dealing with in
the oceans right now is to say we've got
to prepare ourselves for a future that's
very uncertain and therefore we need to
have a lot of knowledge and we have to
ask a lot of what-ifs so that we are
prepared to make Direction shifts as
necessary in the future
from climate change or some horrible
accident or just changing priorities in
society one of those priorities for sure
is that all those certification programs
are going to become the way we do
business and those people who are not
engaged in that in the fisheries are
going to learn the hard way that's my
prediction for five to ten years
question is the negative potential
negative consequences of zoning yeah
it's a good question really good
question well to start with it is if you
impose zoning it's almost certainly
going to have a lot of negative
consequences one of which is people
simply won't accept it and therefore
illegal activities will take place so
the first thing about zoning is it's got
to be done on a consultative and
collegial and some collegial is the
wrong word collaborative way and
bringing stakeholders together that's
essential otherwise there's all sorts of
ways around owning the second thing
about zoning is if there are economic
trade-offs one has to look at that
carefully because there may be ways to
avoid them and if you don't look at the
economics carefully then you can do
really dumb things with economic zone
the third thing is if you're going to
make an assertion like we have both made
tonight that we think MPAs which is a
type of zoning can be helpful in the
overall issue of fisheries management
eventually maybe we can get away with
saying that for a number of years maybe
even decades eventually we've got to
show the results so there needs to be a
lot of monitoring and so forth as well
otherwise it's your word against my word
so to speak and so so those are some of
the consequences on the positive side if
you do things right with zoning you can
actually get added value you can have
I'll give you an example
there's full-page ad in the paper
in in British Columbia I think it's
probably in a number of the papers by a
group of people engaged in marine
tourism on the discovery some area which
is up the coast of little ways and the
point was in this case that they feared
a bunch of clear-cutting that was going
to totally destroy or largely destroy
the potential for tourism
so you zone that you don't let that
happen or do you just let it happen well
they've got the rights to their cutting
and the people are saying well we're
gonna lose our livelihoods people aren't
going to want to come up and see clear
cuts so those are things that if you do
get together you have this probably a
good solution and everybody gives at the
end of the day but there's probably a
solution it's the same as that example
between that I gave of the whales going
and avoiding that ship collisions for
years there was resistance again you
know there's gonna be ships crashing
into each other and all sorts of things
or it won't work work perfectly so so
and that was the zoning one so so look
for the positive side of it and
anticipate if there are negative things
can they be addressed yeah just from the
point of view of an organization like
fin I think I read that the I you use
also engaged in a lot of odious
behaviors that aren't necessarily
related to what you talked about tonight
ie you know human trafficking yeah drugs
now that sort of thing and this morning
in order to help give the issue more
political prominence is there do you see
linkage as impossible or possibly
between this issue and others that
people that other groups or other people
make you know sort of considered to be
sort of trigger ideas if you understand
the question yeah so so the question is
given that there are illegal fishing
activities and that those illegal
activities spill into other domains of
illegality like perhaps drug trafficking
and
and trafficking are there ways of making
political capital of those connections
and it's interesting that the I you you
and I think that's relatively new that
people have been trying to make those
linkages even though we've known that
there are linkages I think the answer in
quick answer is yes but it has to be
done very carefully and it has to be
done on them it has to be evidence-based
and it has to be done not just at a kind
of a global thinking level or won't lead
anywhere it has to be got down to very
serious things to give you one example
in the 1980s the fisheries industry in
the south of Thailand woody went into
decline and it was fish stocks had been
over fishing and all they could catch
for jellyfish and squid so and there was
a thousands of boats so many of them
turned into predatory action against the
Vietnamese refugees coming out of
Vietnam and it was a terrible situation
really awful well one of the things that
happened was that Thailand which was
very concerned and the rest of the world
was as well
but I decided that they would take on
the function of turning the this past
industry into a processing industry for
the world's tuna and successfully
managed to build a whole new industrial
basis around taking frozen tuna from
everywhere in the world so if you look
at all your canned tuna if you have to
eat tuna or they that you'll find most
of its but not Camden and Thailand ever
since so it created a new industry that
at least picked up some of the jobs and
got out of a lot of the illegal other
activities and and including a lot of
the illegal fisheries activities because
the Thais were also going off into it
waters and elsewhere and just savaging
this fish dogs their insurance dogs and
so forth so there can be solutions to
that
I think the on this I you you think it's
a huge issue FAO has been very useful on
it and a lot of countries are now buying
in very in a very good way including
many developing nations I think we're
making progress on it but is a long way
to go still and so anything that can
link it to the other illegal activities
some of which are very odious to
countries that would be helpful the
question is whether aggressive action
like that of the sea shepherd can be
productive or whether overall that's
counterproductive well I have a personal
view on this
my personal view which is I think agreed
upon by at least some of my colleagues
not everybody is that we need a number
of different it is a war that's being
fought and sea Shepherd is is fighting
actively on some fronts where others
fear to go but we need people who are on
the Front's whether it's Greenpeace
whether its Sea Shepherd whether it's
people who are milder in their actions
but still for example in the case of
Sierra Club know taking harder stance
and decided which might include some
actions going on ramming ships or
whatever the sea shepherd has been
accused of I think that there's a a wide
spectrum how things are needed some of
which are in that far end and and I'm
not I don't want people to be injured in
the process but they're making a point
in a dramatic way that that
you know and others cannot make then
there are the people that that go out
and there's lots of them go out and make
movies they go out and do active
research with money that's raised for
their cause and the many of the NGOs
fallenness and so they're not going that
far but they're still they're still
activists highly activists and they're
going out and they're looking at the
problems locally and internationally and
so forth and and they're valuable
there's people like myself that have
chosen to work closer to government but
I mean I'd like to believe that I
understand some things about science and
I want to see that translated into
public policy if I ever went out and did
something like Sea Shepherd's I
certainly wouldn't be welcome in some of
the circles that I travel in with with
government people or whatever so you
make choices and then there are
scientists that often want to remain
very close to their science whatever it
happens to be and would prefer to bring
that information freely and well out to
the public and so forth but not be the
front liners themselves and and so and
then there's others as well I also
believe in the power of one you know
individuals like the schoolteacher and
the whales in Nova Scotia that was just
an ordinary school teacher in a small
rural school district who did something
that was really very very valuable at
the time and and we can find many other
examples I could tell you dozens of
stories there's people there's an
organization that deals with fisheries
management I'm a collective sort of
basis in the west coast of Vancouver
Island and they stick their necks out
they work collectively between First
Nations and with governments federal
provincial is supported from a variety
of different source and they manage a
lot of species that are not the big
flashy of salmon or so forth but other
things and they're making progress in
setting the basis for a new form of
fisheries
management and and it's tough let me
tell you how tough of this oh yeah
because I've looked at this organization
quite closely and and so we need people
that are activists in different ways we
need people that are educators we need
researchers the whole range so I I do
think I must admit that I have a higher
degree of respect for Paul Watson then
many people might have I think he's he's
shown us he's Sean a lot of light into
some very very dark corners how we could
reduce this because you know quality is
an important aspect so you can I guess
you could take an individual to a farm
shown the process of what choice is but
how do you show something as this
connection the first try I know you're a
person who deals with behavioral
psychology sorts of things I think which
of this is all about psychology and
behaviour well the question is
consumerism what can be you know what
can be done to link these issues to
behavior at a at a local level you know
that something project that you have
because this is an intellectual talk
I'll say and I can't really voice this
information
well the only the only real effective
means of changing individual behavior
that I think would actually work is for
people to write their MPs and members of
the cabinet because believe it or not
politicians actually pay attention to
letters and so a lot of what we've
talked about tonight especially the
marine protected areas issue isn't going
to be moved forward unless the
politicians sense that there's actual
public demand like the frameworks
already there right they've signed the
treaties and so on but the way they're
reading the population is it's perfectly
okay to ignore that and the only way to
change that as far as I can tell is to
indicate that it's actually not okay to
ignore it because right now it is okay
and and that's not good our political
system actually does work it's much more
permeable than people really think
because in some ways it's left to its
own devices you know most people don't
really participate in the political
system so it leaves it in the hands of
the very small minority who do but it's
surprisingly permeable if you're
interested in permeating it in so well
that's that's why I take at least out
the political that's one let let me give
you four or five things that I think are
really useful one is if you have the
trust in them these seafood guides are
very helpful and so you can use those in
your own personal life if you go into a
restaurant ask them Hess's and if you
happen to enjoy fish ask them tell me
about this fish what is the species
where was it captured from what is it
certified fish that you're serving ask
the chef to come out and talk to you
I've done that and and and go in if you
use an iPad or an iPhone and challenge
them on some things when they say they
don't know they do is no information and
then I did this once in a very
respectable restaurant in Vancouver and
I warned them I said look I'm bringing a
group of people who are leaders in this
whole seafood process they're gonna have
all sorts of questions so I brought my
iPad
those days and disco up six months
before and and we sat down half an hour
uh-huh by the time the the poor chefs
were sweating a little tired but they
answered all the questions correctly we
got all the information and we got past
all these fancy names and so forth so
that's what another way in dealing with
the food industry do it at a supermarket
if you're not getting good answers write
to the president of the company and say
you know I was in whatever change
happened to be local or national and and
I could not get any answer above whether
the crab that you're serving was
sustainably produced can you tell me and
if they can't go after them and say
please I really want to know an honest
answer but I'll bet you're the answer
and you'll make your decisions and a
third way is as you say go to the
politicians and keep going to the
politicians find out who the politicians
locally are that really have an interest
in the subject because there are little
clusters of people that don't get very
much support in both the Senate and in
the house that really are interested and
they cross party lines and some of these
things as well and that's another way of
doing it but gorgeous I think that
unsustainable development in general we
have to go to the city's political
system right now how much this would
come up to the dog but I know certainly
in the West Coast and I think in a lot
of places in the East Coast it's very
central people will talk about it to you
and they are the places where action is
taking taking on interesting approaches
the next one is to figure out and you
can only do this yourself by looking at
different organizations decide which
organizations you're going to support
and support them in ways that just may
be giving them some money from time to
time but ask how you can help because it
just to give you a couple examples World
Wildlife Fund Canadian parks and
wilderness Society both have excellent
excellent people that need support you
know and not just money but they need
people behind them in various ways and
in this very sensitive and I guess
finally if you have children will
children or whatever work with kids kids
genuinely want to do things better they
understand kids well I was a bit
insulted about that fish that you're
chosen but I thought its kind of cute
myself but but the important point is
that kids love whales our little
granddaughter was eight years old she
proudly announces oh I'm doing a
research project on the Pacific dolphin
and by the time she finished that thing
she knew a lot about Pacific dolphins
help people that way you know get at
young people young people who really
want to because they they are upset by
these things they see it there's a lot
of stuff on television that and so forth
the internet and they're getting done
that there's a problem and they happen
to love these things they love dolphins
they love seals and they miss out on the
other so many whales and and they can't
understand why these things are in
trouble or the fish so those are some
concrete ways that you can actually
address this and keep that and their
list in mind as you move ahead with spin
as well because I think it's a really
important question we I'm talking and we
all are talking that may be a bit
abstractly here but in each case you can
bring these things down to to real life
another one on the west coast just to
give you now stop and this but if you go
to any school around Victoria Greater
Victoria you'll see salmon images that
the kids have individually made and
painted and and they're on the school
fences it's in front of them about
sustained in some communities spray
painting around sorry it spray painting
around gutters and saying you know this
water leads to a salmon stream yeah so
awareness all right so I think we've had
your attention long enough thank you
very much for coming
that's much appreciated and thanks to
dr. Hansen thank you