please join me in welcoming our first
speaker of the day jumper Becky
thank you everyone and it's always a
great pleasure to be here this is such a
fun conference it's it's it's it's it's
interesting mixture I it's really
academically interesting but I find it
the most playful conference I get to
attend there's a lot more engagement and
interest and exploration so it's just a
lot of fun and I need more fun so it's
good to be here all right
so I want to also give credit where
credit is due
I'm gonna be talking about work a lot of
ideas and a lot of those ideas were done
in work that I did with Leo Ferraro also
with Richard Wu and and Anderson Todd
who of course is here today so what do I
want to talk about I want to talk I want
to try and first start by exploring the
idea of why do you altered states of
consciousness often have so much
significance and effect associated with
them and why do we pursue them why do we
induce them what's going on there and I
think in some sense we find altered
states of consciousness rewarding and
then typically when things are rewarding
for us kind of universally rewarding
then there must be their natural to us
in some way and they are functional in
some way they have some adaptive
function and I want to try and get into
the functionality of altered states of
consciousness we tend to talk a lot
about the phenomenology and I'll talk a
bit about that but I want to get more
into the functionality of them and in
order to do that I think we have to
start talking about the functionality of
consciousness which is like oh my god
because this is one of the hard problems
like one of the hardest problems in
cognitive science I mean it's amazing to
you a what what would you give up for
your consciousness if I told you you can
have like a billion dollars and all the
sexual experiences you want and wealth
and power you just don't get to be
conscious of it would you take that deal
but if I ask you what does your
consciousness do what does it do because
most of your behavior most of your
behavior is being run unconsciously so
what does your consciousness do I mean
it looks like it's just hanging around
waiting for work well what I want to try
and do is talk a little bit about that
and I'm gonna try and talk about the
function of consciousness and not that
much about the nature of consciousness
which is called the heart problem
because it's hard called the hard
problem because it's hard and I don't
think we have time to tackle it and I
want to concentrate on some of the
current most important theories of the
function of consciousness
neuroscientific
and cognitive scientific and
psychological theories of the function
of consciousness not because I think
they're comprehensively right but I'm
intrigued by the fact that they seem to
be converging on a consensus as to at
least one of the central functions of
consciousness so the first of those
theories of consciousness is called the
global work space theory it's advocated
by people like bars or shanahan and bars
and the main idea is that your
consciousness functions like the desktop
on your computer most of the files right
aren't on your desktop and that
corresponds to most of your processing
is going unconscious going on
unconsciously and what happens in
consciousness is those files are
accessed like they're accessed by your
desktop and you can access files and
hold them together and manipulate them
and do interesting things with them and
this seems to have some overlap with
some psychological work and Bars has
admitted this that's done in psychology
on working memory working memory is that
that aspect of your memory where you can
activate information hold it in mind and
manipulative etc now what's interesting
is what they what functionality borrows
attributes to this and in an article
with shanahan and then a later article
in the handbook unconsciousness bars and
shanahan and bars argue that the main
function of consciousness why it's
structured this way is to solve the
frame problem or as Shanahan rightly
argues because he is considered to be an
authority on the frame problem the
relevance problem the issue of how we
zero in on
relevant information and many of you
know this is an ongoing obsession of
mine what is it how do we do this how do
we zero in on relevant information of
all the information available to us in
the environment all the information
available to in our minds how do we
rapidly and effectively zero in on the
relative relevant information we need
make connections in that information
that we find relevant and then act
appropriately on the basis of that
information very very central process
and I'll come back to that repeatedly
and the main idea is what happens is all
of these processes that are going on
consciously they all compete for access
to the workspace and that's how
relevance realization occurs I have a
lot of criticisms of that and I'm not
going to go into that but what I find
intriguing is this idea that with a core
function of consciousness is relevance
realization now there is a theory that
is more about the nature of
consciousness this is the integrated
information theory of Tononi and others
and the basic idea here is a system is
conscious the more its information is
integrated and what that means is how
pieces of information Kylie they Co vary
with each other it gets very complex and
mathematical but interestingly when toni
has proposed a test for how you see if a
system is conscious what he proposes is
it whether or not the systems can make
judgments of relevancy and
appropriateness he proposes that for
example what you do if you're testing a
system for consciousness is you show it
a picture of a potted plant in front of
a computer or a bicycle in the sky and
if the computer can figure out that the
information is right that ill relevee
PSA's of information have not been put
together in a relevant or appropriate
manner and those are the terms he uses
by the way then that's how you judge
that it's not conscious and in a more
recent publication with car she's even
argued that conscious seems to be
functioning to do this relevance
realization function so once again this
sort of insight this idea that that
what's what's consciousness is for
there's a developmental theory of
consciousness by clear means called the
radical plasticity hypothesis it has a
very intriguing idea behind it that we
actual
to learn to be conscious and many
philosophers would be sort of earthed by
that I suppose but again not to go into
the details
what clear means makes clear sorry for
that pun is that this learning process
involves right parts of the brain
learning to care about the information
they're processing and he puts a lot of
those that's the term he uses it's the
ability of a system to care about the
information that is processing that
seems to be central to consciousness and
and this he echoes the neuroscientist
Montague has who has also argued that
what distinguishes us from computers is
that we care about the information that
we're processing we find certain
information important relevant salient
to us and our processing is governed by
those judgments of relevance and
salience so once again consciousness is
functioning in terms of relevance
realization finally the frontal parietal
Theory of people like Bohr and Seth that
say the consciousness has to do a lot
with the functioning of the frontal
cortex again has to do with and they
talk about judgments of zeroing in on
relevant information chunking it
managing it and they again point to
consciousness having to deal with this
ability to realize relevance so the idea
here is and this is often how it's put
in many of these authors so there's a
lot of convergence on this is that this
ability of relevance realization is
central to consciousness because
consciousness evolved in order to deal
with complexity in the environment
novelty ill-defined situations because
in those situations it becomes paramount
that we zero in on relevant information
we connect it appropriately we size up
the situation so that we can act
appropriately within it and I'm not
going to argue this before because I
argued at previous mindmatters
conference the Ute ISM conference
publications I talked about it in my
sleep right
relevance realization is central to your
cognitive agency you need to be able to
do relevance realization to do
problem-solving to categorize to
communicate to engage in basic actions
that's Dennett's famous example of the
robot and in that sense
eleven serialization is central to your
intelligence it's just central to your
intelligence and philosophers like
Christopher chair niak have argued this
and when he talks about the finitary
predicament we have very finite
resources a very finite time and yet we
have to deal with that overwhelming
amount of information and he emphasizes
relevance realization the psychologist
he Stanovich has argued a similarly he
does some of the most important recent
work on intelligence and its
relationship to rationality and he has
argued that the core of intelligence is
to do what he calls our ability deal
with computational limitations our
brains are computationally limited they
have to deal with overwhelming amounts
of information and intelligence is that
ability to zero in on relevant
information work that I did with Leo Leo
Ferraro in 2013 we argued that you can
see a lot of psychometric tests for
intelligence categorization tests and
pattern completion etc etc as tests of
relevance realization finally there are
important connections between
intelligence measures of intelligence
and working memory and I've already
pointed out to you a lavars
that there's a lot of connection between
working memory and consciousness there's
a lot of connections between measures of
intelligence and measures of working
memory and some of you know that Lin
hasher for example has done quite a bit
of work arguing that working memory
isn't just a container but is a higher
order relevance filter so we're seeing
connections between intelligence
consciousness and relevance realization
as many of you know I think there's
important connections between relevance
realization and insight insight is that
phenomena when you have framed a problem
in a particular way you've made
judgments as to what is salient or
relevant and then that affects how you
try to solve the problem my perennial
favorite example is the nine dot problem
in you knew I would talk about it okay
in which you have to join all nine dots
with four straight lines the problem is
people try to make a square or a box and
then that prevents them from solving the
problem and you have to break outside of
the box you have to break that framing I
have to alter you have to significantly
restructure your judgments as to what
you find relevant and salient in
order to solve the problem and that
tells us that the relevance realization
is recursive
it is self-organizing it is self
corrected it is self-interested it is
interested in itself if I can put it
that way what's also important about
insight right is if we use this language
and it sits it's telling right we talked
about a flash of insight because in
insight in that restructuring in that re
realizing of relevance there's a
phenomenological alteration in
consciousness right people experience it
something like a flash there's super
salience the salience landscape is
changed people talk about it right as a
significant alteration of consciousness
it's so much so by the way that if you
give people insight problems and come in
and turn a lamp on around them and
create a flash of light that will
actually improve their ability to solve
insight problems alterations of states
of consciousness and insight are deeply
linked together and I'm going to return
to that so relevance realization right
in in insight we can see it we can see
intelligence intersecting sorry
intelligence intersecting with an
altered state of consciousness that's
what's going on in insight we can see
the intelligence aspects of relevance
realization and consciousness
intersecting in that flash of insight so
the fact that relevance realization is a
recursive its self-organizing its
layered it can go through spontaneous
restructuring that has an impact on
consciousness this helps tell us
something about what consciousness is
doing and I'm borrowing a term here now
from Ramachandran that links this
phenomenology and the functionality
together what consciousness is doing for
us it's is projecting a salience
landscape right what's happening is
certain things are standing out for you
now as more salient I hope I am right
and other things are right much have
much less of a salience profile for you
like perhaps the walls and the seat
until I mentioned them of course your
left toe left big toe is probably not
very salient to you and now it is of
course right and so your salience
landscape is constantly being projected
and it's constantly shifting and flowing
and what's really intriguing is the
relationship within consciousness
between your salience landscape
and attention because your salience
landscape draws your attention you're
drawn to what's salient to you your
attention goes there but at this on the
other hand you can direct your attention
like I just did with your left big toe
and that alter a alters its salience so
what's happening in consciousness is the
salience landscape and attention are in
this self-organizing relationship where
the salience landscape is shaping
attention and attention is shaping the
salience landscape and as I've argued
that affords both intelligence and
insight I think it affords something
else it's really important it affords
perspectival knowing another kind of
knowing we're very familiar with
propositional knowing propositional
knowing is that we've you know we so
we're all the children of descartes
right and we come to think that that's
the epitome of knowing propositional
knowing is knowing that something is the
case knowing that Australia is both a
country and a continent that's
propositional knowing it there's also
procedural knowing procedural knowing is
knowing how to do something knowing how
to catch a baseball and it's different
from knowing the facts about a baseball
the baseball is round and white knowing
how to catch it is different but in
addition to that there's perspectival
knowing this is knowing what it is like
to be someone what it is like to take a
particular role it's knowing how to do
the following immerse yourself in a
particular landscape to project that
salience landscape and immerse yourself
in it right now I know what it's like to
be a speaker at a conference right and
notice how you can do this you can do
all three I can ask you tell me some
facts about a baseball do you know how
to catch a baseball but you can do this
third thing imagine what it's like to be
a baseball to take the salience
landscape of a you know of a baseball
arcing after it's been hit and come off
the bat you can do that and that
perspectival knowing is really important
you know propositional knowledge gives
us rule-following and procedural
knowledge gives us routines that we
follow
but perspectival no knowledge gives us
role following it gives us ha it gives
us our fundamental roles and how we
interact with the world and how we carve
out some of our basic cognitive
and agency so what I'm suggesting to you
and I do not mean this to be exhaustive
I do not mean this to be exhaustive but
consciousness is an active affordance
and that and so I'm gonna abbreviate
that with the metaphorical term field
consciousness is an active affordance a
field of intelligent insight and
perspective taking and in which that
intelligence machinery the insight
machinery and the perspective or
machinery are all mutually supporting
and mutually developing together so
given that rather rapid - through the
functionality of consciousness which is
like you know I'm gonna explain God to
you in five minutes or something like
that right well I want to talk about
altered states of consciousness the ones
that David alluded to right and their
functionality so think about first let's
go back to the flash of insight and
there is something happening there let's
let's think about something that's
related to that and can be extended oh
right and this is the flow experience
talked about by chicks MRI so think
about the flow experience a typical
situation that engenders at rock
climbing you're trying to climb up a
rock right and you impasse you don't
know how to go forward and you really
have to restructure you're saying it's
landscape right and it's perspectival
knowing and then you shift and you get
to another situation you impasse and and
then you either get it you get another
insight and you break out and then what
starts to happen is those insights start
to cascade so instead of impasses
potential impasses are just experiences
challenges
you're constantly overcoming in your
skills and your challenges are
ratcheting each other like this and you
get into the zone right and you and you
feel this this paradoxical state in
which you're simultaneously exerting a
lot of effort and it seems effortless
you seem at one with the environment
there's a significant distortion of time
you lose that nattering Nannie
egocentric narrative consciousness you
know that that thing in your head that's
how do I look how am i doing how do I
look how am i doing that goes away that
goes away right and you feel like you
feel resonant with your environment and
there's this
super salience everything is glowing and
vibrant and it's deeply meaningful it's
deeply meaningful such that people tend
to evaluate the goodness of their life
in terms of how often they flow within
it but so this is definitely an altered
state of consciousness it has a lot of
features that we find in altered states
of consciousness and it's natural and
it's universal that's one of the points
that Csikszentmihalyi has made in his
work and what I've tried to argue and
this is some of the current work that's
in publication with Leo is that flow is
a highly adaptive process there's a
reason why evolution makes it so
rewarding to us it's optimal I mean it
is such a rewarding experience how else
do you explain rock climbing it's absurd
behavior right what am I gonna do I'm
gonna climb up this rock oh it's
exerting and horrible and I'm gonna hurt
myself and when I get to the top I'm
gonna come back down it sounds like a
Greek torment right you roll up the rock
you rock climb right it's because it
induces flow and flow is optimal it's
not only that we enjoy it so much it's
not the same thing as pleasure by the
way that's very clear in the research we
enjoy it so much because it's so
rewarded it's optimal in the second
sense it is highly functioning training
that insight cascade in connection with
the causal and interaction with the
environment is deeply adaptive that's
gonna really improve your cognitive
agency so I now want to I've stretched
insight into a very natural and
spontaneous and significant altered
state of consciousness the flow state I
want to try and build on that analogy I
want to suggest this to you that altered
states of consciousness are analogous to
insight but they're about at a higher
order and what do I mean by that insight
is a restructuring within the field of
consciousness I'm going to suggest you
that altered states of consciousness are
a restructuring of the field of
consciousness insight is a
transformation in our performance how we
trying to do a particular thing solve a
particular problem altered states of
consciousness
transformation in our competence not
just what we're doing but what we're
capable of doing it's a much more
fundamental transformation a qualitative
change a developmental change is
available to us ok let's try and gather
this back together
the main functional role of
consciousness right I'm trying to argue
is a higher-order dynamically recursive
relevance realization that is for
dealing with complexity novelty
ill-defined Innis what I'm suggesting to
you is that consciousness makes a
salient landscape that flows over the
contours of a changing environment and
if you'll allow me a metaphor you know
you should occasionally write in altered
states of consciousness this fluidity is
altered of the viscosity of
consciousness changes that's what I'm
trying to get out with the change in the
competence it just it's not the
consciousness is flowing slightly
differently that its capacity for
flowing is significantly altered and
like trying to suggest you this affords
a change in competence it affords the
possibility of a higher-order
self-correction insight is a moment of
self correction the very machinery that
helps you solve a problem is what has to
be corrected it's the very thing that is
biasing you or misleading you so you
can't solve you have to break outside of
the box and the nine dot problem what
I'm proposing to you is that altered
states of consciousness have the
capacity to give us much higher order of
self correction and of course we
fundamentally need self correction
because again the relevance realization
processes that are so adaptive so
central to our adaptivity are the very
ones that also box us in in the nine dot
problem that biases and the wrong way
and that that's why we have to tap into
the fact that relevance realization is
inherently self-correcting now if we're
talking about self correction at this
more fundamental level I think I've
tried to give that
has the potential to overcome a more
fundamental kind of self-deception I
think I've given you a way of
appropriating or understanding the term
self transcendence in self transcendence
were getting a much more fundamental
competence level self correction in our
fundamental processing of relevance
realization how we frame problems how we
how we create our cognitive agency in an
altered state of consciousness you're
not reframing a problem your trance
framing that's a neologism on my part
trying to integrate notions of reframing
and transcendence you are transforming
your problem-solving ability it's not a
restructuring of this or that problem
but a fundamental restructuring of the
competence of our cognitive agency we're
modifying we're modifying not a problem
or trying to achieve a particular goal
we're modifying the machinery of our
intelligence our insight and our
perspective generation not is a
tremendous power and we've got
increasing evidence about this kind of
fundamental level change so there's a
lot of work coming out of the Griffiths
lab right now that is really important
about this they're obtaining work for
example that if you induce a powerful
altered state of consciousness
usually with psychotropic drugs that you
can get right effective treatment and
alleviation for treatment-resistant
depression and treatment resistant
addiction one of the most interesting
set of experiment experiences coming out
of the Griffiths lab has to do with
inducing mystical experiences these
kinds of experiences and with self
transcendence is a fundamental feature
of the altered state of consciousness
what you do is you give people
psilocybin you've tutored them ahead of
time about what a mystical experience is
and you find the sub population that has
a mystical experience and two things
have come out of this people even 5
years after the experiment rate those
mists
experiences as some of the most
significant that they've ever had as rep
they they subjected li experience as a
fundamental change of course our
subjectivity can just be misleading
is there anything objective that
correlates with this and the answer is
yes what they have evidence for is a
long-standing potentially permanent
increase in the psychological factor of
openness one of the big five that's a
fundamental change at your cognitive
agency and of course openness Jordan was
more of an expert than I am on this but
you know openness is really well
correlated with you know your insight
abilities creativity things like that so
this represents a fundamental change not
just in personality but in your
cognitive agency that's what I'm trying
to suggest to you this is what altered
states of consciousness can do for us
this is the power they have for us now I
want to talk a little bit more about
this powerful self transcendence what's
going on in it and here I want to turn
to the work of John Wright and the work
he's done based on the really seminal
work of Iris Murdoch especially in her I
mean a little gem of a book it's one of
these little books right I'd be coming
as I'm getting older I guess death is
approaching or something I'm getting
more and more impressed by little books
it used to be no you read Hegel and my
god right now it's these little thin
books that like are like they're like
these swords that go through right oh
right I highly recommend the sovereignty
of the good to you your life will be
more valuable to you if you've read it
that was a joke okay now Murdoch does a
lot in there and she talks a lot about a
particular situation and let me let me
go the situation then right there's a
lot of work on it and so Murdoch talks
about this situation which you have a
mother-in-law and she has a
daughter-in-law and she thinks of the
daughter-in-laws sort of like coarse and
crude and loud so yeah my son married
beneath himself all right but then one
day and a spontaneous fashion she has
this insight
that you know her daughter really isn't
course she's really sort of grounded and
she isn't crude right she's really
direct and sincere and she isn't loud
she's boisterous and vivacious so it's
this restructuring now it was just that
we would call it an insight but Murdoch
takes it farther she says well what
happens is the mother doesn't just
realize something different about the
daughter-in-law the insight if I can put
it this way is bi-directional it's not
only an insight into the daughter-in-law
right the mother-in-law has an insight
into her very competence the
mother-in-law realizes that the way she
frames all situations needs to be
transforms needs to be called into
question right see what's going on all
the time in perspective annoying is this
by directionality the process of Co
identification and the Stoics talked a
lot about this and I imagine you could
find stuff in the Buddhist that talked a
lot about this we'd have to ask Shawn
because Shawn is the person that will
correct any mistakes I make about
Buddhist psychopath philosophy or
psychology right but this idea is when
when when you're in the salience
landscape and you're projecting it and
also immersing yourself in it and it's
this binding and projecting process
right you're always assigning and
assuming identities that's what it is to
take a role I'm assigning identities to
you and I'm assuming an identity I'm
doing it with objects right this is this
is a tool that I'm using and I have a
particular identity we're always
assigning and assuming identities within
this perspective all knowing and there's
a possibility of insights that because
they go to the core the fundamental you
know machinery of this perspective of
knowing that they have the capacity to
generate this bi-directional insight
it's not just that we're changing a
particular frame we're changing
fundamentally our framing we're changing
our existential mode we're changing how
we project and right interject how we
assign and assumed identities and that
whole process that fundamental change in
how we identify and take up our
cognitive agency right
it's called by John Wright sensibility
transcendence
it's a sensibility transcendence you're
coming or you're overcoming ego centrism
you you're getting object more objective
not in the epistemic sense right of a
better abstract theory but what's
happening is that the mother-in-law is
getting is a more virtuous interaction
with the daughter-in-law a more just
giving of attention a more appropriate
responsiveness to her daughter-in-law
so that sensibility transcendence
already and this is the point made in
the sovereignty of good bye Murdock it
has a normative aspect to us it starts
to teach us how better to direct our
attention how better to assign and
assumed identities how better to act
appropriately in our environment so
that's a significant developmental
change right it's a significant
developmental change so we know from the
work of Carol Dweck and others that how
you appropriate how you identify with
your cognitive machinery has a
significant impact on your cognitive
performance your cognitive abilities if
I get you to believe that your
intelligence is a fixed trait that's a
fixed thing you will tend to avoid
challenging problems you will tend to go
into image management you will tend to
avoid error because if intelligence is a
fixed trait error means that there's a
part of you a fixed part of you that is
defective and I can do that I can do
that I can prime that in you this is
what the work show just by how I praise
you if I tell you you're really smart it
tends to make you identify with your
intelligence in a fixed manner and then
your cognitive performance radically
change radically changes but I've I
convinced you that your intelligence is
a malleable trait then you will do the
opposite you will pursue learning
experiences error doesn't mean you're
defective error just means you have to
change your strategy
you have to acquire more skills you will
pursue harder problems rather than
seeking out easier problems because you
don't identify with success right as the
main marker of your cognitive agency the
main marker of your intelligence you
identify learning as the main marker of
your cognitive agency the main marker of
your intelligence
so this identification process is
fundamental and profound and so ACC's
eight altered states of consciousness I
should say have the have this capacity
to radically transform that they have
the ability they can function to
accelerate and to optimize the
development of our intelligence our
insight and transform our perspective
taking in to sensibility transcendence
they have that capacity enhancing
insight enhancing intelligence
transforming perspective taking into
Sensibility transcendence put those all
together they're mutually right being
integrated together in one functional
state of consciousness that's in short
to say that altered states of
consciousness have the capacity to
promote the development of wisdom like
wisdom isn't the same thing as knowledge
in the sense of I know this or that it's
not the possession of a theory it's
having perspective all knowing that it's
capable of self transcendence capable of
that radical self correction that
enhances our insight enhances our
intelligence we get better at zeroing in
on what really matters and acting really
appropriately towards it that's the key
of wisdom but of course and this is the
way reality is organized right because
altered states of consciousness have
such promise they bring with them
tremendous peril because as I've argued
the very processes that make you so
adaptive are the very same ones that
make you subject it
deception it's the relevant realization
machinery that makes you so intelligence
that also box you in in the nine dot
problem and altered states of
consciousness bring a greater risk with
them because of that
I mean in the all in altered states of
consciousness at times you're uncoupling
that salience landscape from the
rational pursuit of the truth now come
back to what I mean by that in a couple
minutes but what I wanted zero in on is
a very important phenomena that has been
discussed now famously so by Harry
Frankfurt I'm sorry I have to use this
word the essay was entitled on
and I think this is one of the most
important philosophical works in the
last twenty years
ok it's again by the way a little book
okay so Frankfurt is really interested
in figuring out what is because
we seem to be accruing more and more of
it and what he does is he distinguishes
between and bullshitting and
lying now I think bullshitting and lying
are on a continuum and he presents them
as a little bit more Dakota miss then
they are but talking about the polls is
a good way of understanding a continuum
so I'm gonna I I won't get into a
critique of him there I'll just follow
up and what Frankfort argues is that the
 artist it's an interesting term
a artist
why is it a carpenter anyways
ok so right it's different from the liar
because the lawyer is trying to
manipulate your behavior by relying on
your commitment to the truth that the
fact that the truth can change your
behavior the liar tries to get you to
believe something is true and that is
how your behavior will change because
you one of the things that changes your
behavior is your belief that something
is true is a cognitive norm for people
in contrast the artist doesn't
do that
the artist relies on something
else that's cognitively important for
your behavior something I've been
mentioning throughout this talk how
salient you find information to be which
is different from how true it is right
what the artist does is
uncouple the salience machinery from the
truth commitment machinery so my
favorite example of this and I've used
it before is from an episode of The
Simpsons back when I watched it I don't
does anybody still I mean it's on TV but
nobody claims to watch it anymore it's a
very mysterious cultural phenomenon but
back there was a there's a there's a and
this has become somewhat famous as an
example of is there's a alien
giving a speech cang and he's running
for political office in the United
States
and right and and he gives the following
speech he says my fellow Americans when
I was young I dreamt of being a baseball
but now we must move forward not
backwards upwards not forward twirling
twirling towards freedom and like you
get that sort of rush and all this
salient stuff that you and you get this
like it's it's a cascade right it's it's
like it's a pseudo insight cascade you
get one moment of salience priming the
next in you and nothing has been sad
right nothing has been sad we have the
tremendous capacity to do that because
like salience is directly affected by
your attack attention and you have
control over your attention you can
alter salience about how you direct
attention you don't have the same direct
control over your beliefs you don't make
a belief you'd like to have that
everybody loves you believe it do it now
you could imagine it but belief doesn't
work that way but because salience is
wrapped up with attention and what you
can do is you can direct your attention
and change your salience which then
calls your attention more that way which
direction and that can become a
self-reinforcing process now why does
this why is it so important why am I
going on about this because I think and
this isn't something Frankfort said this
is something I think what was implying
but he didn't pick up on right
self-deception we try to understand we
we use metaphors of lying to yourself to
explain self-deception he's lying to
himself she's lying you can't lie to
yourself it doesn't make any sense you
know I'm not I'm gonna tell John
something he doesn't believe
but and that's because belief is not a
direct action but you can
yourself at the heart what I'm arguing
is what what's at the heart of
self-deception is your capacity for
bullshitting yourself the way in which
attention and salience are in that
self-organizing process the very thing
that makes them so adaptive makes you
susceptible to that salience rush that
we find in bullshitting that
self-fulfilling prophecy they can take
on a life of its own and suck life from
you damage your cognitive agency
undermine it in powerful ways in
bullshitting we're not tapping into our
commitment to the truth we're
acquiescing in a salience rush that
means altered states of consciousness
are particularly dangerous because of
their super salience because of the
salience Rush found within them and and
and it sounds like a contradiction but I
tried to make an argument all the way
through the very features that make
altered states of consciousness the
affordance of wisdom make them also
potentially the engine of folly self
destructive self-deceptive patterns of
behavior the two sides of the same coin
the adaptive dynamical self-organization
of the salience landscape is also what
makes us susceptible self-deceptive
self-destructive patterns of behavior so
altered states of consciousness carry
with them both great promise and great
peril in an inseparable fashion and
where there is great promise and great
peril we should take great care
okay what I'm suggesting to you is that
altered states of consciousness should
be pursued in a way that increases the
reward and minimizes the risk factors
they should be pursued in a way that
justifies the risk of altering our state
of consciousness and that gives us the
cognitive ability to cut through
 and what I want to suggest to
you is of course the wisdom gives us all
three of those wisdom is about trying to
alter your behavior so that you increase
reward and reduce risk and what better
justifies risk than wisdom what else
most contributes to how meaningful your
life is then wisdom who doesn't want to
reduce foolishness and finally of course
the best antidote to and one
way of defining what wisdom is is wisdom
wisdom is the ability to cut through
 it is the ability to overcome
self-deception wisdom isn't like
knowledge knowledge is about overcoming
ignorance wisdom is about overcoming
foolishness and that's a different thing
right that's a different thing so we
should bring good judgment to bear on
the altered states of consciousness we
pursue I want to say something right now
and it's a digression so if I could I'd
stand to the side okay because this is
one thing I might you might say think
I'm implying that I'm not I do not think
the government should be prohibiting
substances we have overwhelming research
that that does nothing billions of
dollars are wasted and it just shovels
money into organized crime I am NOT
talking about that
but that doesn't mean that we should not
deeply and philosophically discuss the
normative structures in which we are
pursuing altered states of consciousness
the fact that it shouldn't be part of
the legal domain does not remove it in
fact it makes it more paramount that we
put it back into the ethical domain so
we should judge altered states of
consciousness in terms of their ethical
epistemic and existential fruits we
should bring them under the Canon of
rationality and rationality is
ultimately about reliability what is a
reliable technique for achieving the
goal you want rationality isn't just
logic reliable is if I have this goal
what is the most reliable method for
achieving it
that's what rationality is we should be
judging our altered states right is an
altered state of consciousness reliable
for how helping to deal with the fact
that I can have perspective on
narrowness I can be egocentric there's
an altered state of consciousness do
what Murdoch argued does it help me
break out of that ego centrism does it
help afford the inculcation of
sensibility transcendence does an
altered state of consciousness help
existentially what's the problem with
respectable knowing in an existential
sense the problem with their perspective
of knowing is perspective and I Jordan I
talked about this in a recent mine
matters masters right our perspective
knowing our perspectives can be it clash
with each other they can be incoherent I
mean sometimes you can step back and
think about the cosmic perspective and
it makes you or the perspective of your
own life seem insignificant or absurd
but there are altered states of
consciousness that can alleviate that
absurdity but knows it talks about it he
talks about C and C Intuit IVA an
altered state of consciousness produced
by the way through intense rational
reasoning in this cancion scan see
Intuit IVA you see the hole in each part
and you see the part in each hole and
that alleviates the absurdity generated
by the perspective of clash
there should be judging altered states
of consciousness in terms of their
epistemic reliability do they reliably
alleviate or help to ameliorate the way
in which our perspectival knowing can be
self-destructive self-defeating do they
help us to overcome self-deception
and/or the altered states of
consciousness bringing those about in a
mutually supporting fashion are the
ethical epistemic and existential fruits
mutually supporting each other this is
what we should be asking so I mean and
Dennis is gonna talk a lot more about
this I imagine but I've been reading
people like Winckelmann and Lois
Williams and Matt Rossano I got to meet
Matt Rossano at the Ute ISM last 2015 or
2014 on the cognitive science of
religion and they're basically making
very similar arguments that a crucial
point and cognitive evolution was
afforded by the appropriation of induced
altered states of consciousness so Matt
Rossano argues for this and so does
Lewis Williams and forget Winkle means
first name I'm sorry
and what's this period we're talking
about we're talking about the Upper
Paleolithic transition around 40,000 BCE
where you see you get this sort of
significant increase in human cognitive
agency and functionality and it doesn't
seem to being driven by a biological
change because the main sort of
anatomically stable for 150,000 years
and what what's going on in the Upper
Paleolithic transition you get explosion
in different tool types that are being
made and and different material bone is
being used instead of instead of instead
of stone and you get the first
significant projectile weapons and the
use of a de la tools and things like
that you get the first calendar is being
made you have musical instruments being
made you have the first representational
art right there's some earlier stuff
that's non representation but you have
representational art you have sculpture
you have the famous cave paintings and
all of this is going on and what Lewis
Williams and Winckelmann and Rossano
argue is what was driving that
was shamanic practices the ability to
induce an altered state of consciousness
that affords a terrific advancement in
human cognitive evolution Winckelmann
argues that when you're in the shamanic
and he's done a lot of work in existing
shamanic shop he's an anthropologist
right he sort of wrote the book on
shamanism in some sense and what do you
argues happens is when you alter that
state of consciousness what happens is
you get what he calls cross modular
integration parts of the brain that
previously didn't talk to each other can
talk to each other it's like go back to
bars you alter your desktop and files
that normally don't talk or integrate
can be can talk and integrate to each
other and what does that give you that
gives you an explosion in how
metaphorical you can think how
analogously you can think and that
affords a tremendous increase in your
problem-solving capacity not Rossano
argues that the shamanic trance in you
know it's he argues that it's an early
form of mindfulness practice he's got
this really nice article entitled in
meditating make us human and I recommend
his book it's a thin book called
supernatural selection right and right
and the argument is there that these
kinds of practices the kinds of stuff
that's going on in shamanism right seems
to you know and we seem to have some
that can alter working memory capacity
that relevance realization machinery i'm
nelson in a book called the spiritual
doorway in the brain don't take that
read that title the wrong way he's
pretty much a hard neuroscientist right
but he argues that in the shamanic state
you get a CO activation of two networks
the task-focused network the default
network you get something very analogous
to lucid dreaming and we have evidence
that if you lucid dream more you will be
a better insight problem solver so the
idea is that right there was a sappy
ntral alignment of an altered state of
consciousness in shamanic practices they
were basically being appropriated
precisely because of the huge increase
in our cognitive agency that was being
afforded and that's what was helping to
drive there's other things driving it
but that's what was helping to draw
the cognitive evolution we see happening
in the upper paleolithic transition so
early on you see that context that I'm
advocating for and how fundamental it
was not even for individual development
but for our development as a species so
what does that what am I sort of
recommending what am I trying to put
together I'm trying to say we need to
shift attention from the
phenomenological weirdness of altered
states of consciousness which it
standard to be what we're focusing on I
think we need to shift attention to the
functionality of altered states of
consciousness and the attendant
normativity that goes with functionality
because whenever you talk about function
you're invoking a norm we need to shift
from the salience of those States to
their sapiens we have to give up I think
on romantic projects of trying to
construct alternative metaphysics I
think that is a Mis framing of the
wisdom available in altered states of
consciousness as a kind of pseudo
knowledge which i think is a mistake
it's a category mistake I don't believe
in the shamanic metaphysics that came
out of the Upper Paleolithic transition
I don't believe in the three-tiered
world an underworld emitter world and
overwolf
and we have some representations going
back about 15,000 years that's a really
old world I don't think it's true I
don't think it's scientifically true but
the wisdom that was afforded in the
shamanic process is apparent from the
cognitive evolution that occurred now
what does that mean what we're talking
about right this normative structure
this Sapientia Lineman what does that
mean well I think it puts us into a
horrible problem sorry what I'm saying
is we need committed communities to
safeguard that we're getting the good
ethical existential and epistemic fruits
now typically
that's been done by religion that's been
done by religion the problem for most of
us is that we are post religious I would
identify myself in post although I have
a strong interaction with Buddhism I
would identify myself as post religious
the problem is right
we've tried secular alternatives and I
talked about this in the mind masters
discussion I had with them we talked
we've tried secular alternatives to
religion the twentieth century is
drenched in the blood of those secular
alternatives but of course without
committed communities we tend to pursue
alternative states of consciousness and
a fragmented fruitless and frivolous
fashion in which the risks away the
rewards and wisdom is not being
cultivated see well this is a hard
problem I mean like this this is what
Nietzsche was on about with the madman
running into the marketplace
he wasn't arguing with religious
believers he was arguing with atheists
when he talked about the death of God he
said you don't understand the deep
functionality of religion you don't
understand how to replace it that's what
the death of God means it doesn't mean
that Richard Dawkins is correct it means
that Richard Dawkins hasn't got it he
doesn't get the problem
this problem that I'm putting my finger
on this is what I talk about and what
like this is the meaning crisis of
modernity and we shouldn't be using
altered states of consciousness as an
escape from that meaning crisis we
should be resolutely confronting the
meaning crisis so that we can come up
with normative frameworks committed
communities that allow us to reclaim the
functionality of altered states of
consciousness to redeem their power the
capacity for bringing wisdom and meaning
into our lives thank you very much for
your time