hey everybody you are back it is the
Jack Murphy live podcast I am Jack
Murphy you can find me on Twitter at
Jack Murphy live the website Jack Murphy
live.com anywhere on the internet
actually Jack Murphy live I planned it
that way also come down check out the
liminal order it's our international
men's organization that's a liminal -
porter calm which actually came about in
response to a number of the things we're
going to talk about today with my guests
that I have been dying to talk to I'm
very excited to have this gentleman on
the show he has written not only an
amazing book but also a ton of other
studies and interesting things to
contribute to the discourse his name is
James Lindsay and his latest book is
called cynical theories co-authored with
Helen flock roasts and his latest
project is called new discourses calm
you can find him there at new discourses
calm and on Twitter at conceptual James
Sir James Lindsay welcome to the show
how are you doing today I am really good
today thank you how are you I am
wonderful I am excited to have you here
you have put into words and into a very
formal and official format a long-form
academic book discussing many of the
issues that we find ourselves facing
today as it relates to post-modernism
intersectionality critical theory and
all these things that you have lumped
together into this thing with called
theory with a capital T which we're
gonna get to but to give my listeners
and myself honestly some context I would
like to know a little bit about you
personally and what led you to this
point here sir where you're putting out
a book that I think is going to bring
you both accolades and arrows right in
your back so how did you get to this
point
mr. James Lindsay well man the arrows
will probably be in my forehead so they
don't have that good of aims so I don't
think though that my eye though but no I
don't I don't know the story of how I
got here depends on where we want to
start none of my story makes any sense
like at all okay I do this dangerous
thing of thinking for myself and kind of
choosing my own path
and that often means your story doesn't
make a lot of sense mm-hmm but I mean
the short answer is ultimately that I
got involved very enthusiastically in
the early 2010's with the the new
atheist movement as it was going and
then I watched essentially what we would
now call critical social justice mostly
of the feminist variety take it over and
kind of destroy it I'd say it was even
dead by two thousand thirteen or
fourteen the thing was just dead in the
water by 2015 there wasn't really
anything happening anymore my particular
interest within studying I'm a nerd so
I'm a particular interest for the
Atheist movement was studying something
and so the studying that I did I first I
got all into what a lot of people were
doing which is religious philosophy and
then I didn't I just hated it and so I
actually switched and started studying
religious psychology which as far as I
could tell very few people were doing
and the books that they were writing or
the articles are writing or the most
persuasive as far as I was concerned so
I tried to understand that the
psychology of kind of groups I guess if
you will that become something like
religions or religious because I saw
this woek thing happening we didn't call
it woke back then but this woke thing
happening in the atheist movement I was
like man the religious people who are
calling this thing a religion are kind
of touching something that makes sense
so I wanted to understand both religion
and this thing that was happening within
the atheist movement as a you know
social movement and cultural movement
and kind of similar terms so I started
studying psychology of religion I
started studying moral psychology a
little more deeply I started getting
into in particular with the psychology
of religion I got very interested in
conversion the psychology of conversion
what leads people to become religious or
in other cases what leads them to stop
being religious on a psychological level
so I was studying all of this and I was
was writing about that and I wrote a
book in 2015 about that it was called
everybody's wrong about God and I
figured that that was the last thing I
was really going to do with atheism
because I figured
just over with and it wasn't really
interesting anymore once you kind of
pull the pull the the you know the
curtain back in you're like oh it's
human psychology the the bigger picture
of being it my background actually is
being a mathematician mathematicians
always want to generalize I want to get
the most general expression that they
can and then look at specific details in
that context so it's like once you see
the general phenomenon of like certain
sociological group psychology going on
it's like that's more interesting than
say any specific religion Christianity
Islam whatever you want there are all
manifestations of the same kind of thing
so I started really looking into that
aspect with the kind of social justice
stuff that was coming up I remember
writing a article very early on I don't
know if you or your listeners know who
sam Harris is but he's he's quite famous
um the first interaction I ever had with
Sam Harris like where he actually talked
back to me on Twitter was discussing
whether or not left-wing authoritarian
and authoritarianism exists and I was
saying that it clearly does and now I
understand a lot more of why nobody
thought left-wing authoritarianism
existed than I did at the time but he of
course was skeptical that left-wing
authoritarianism could exist where it's
like kind of really obviously happening
all around us and to him so it's kind of
mystifying and that got me you know I
was very curious in the way that that
was happening and then my colleague
Peter Bogosian had this idea in late
2016 that we should try to write a hoax
paper to expose that the gender studies
literature academic literature in
specific doesn't have the slightest idea
what it's talking about so we were gonna
follow in the footsteps of his friend
Alan Sokol and write a hoax paper so we
did it was bad he got taken up by a
journal that I think it's far out far
enough out now I can get away with
saying it's probably predatory I wasn't
supposed to say that in case I got sued
for defamation so it was a really murky
story but we spiked the football hard in
the early to spring 2017 yeah
three years ago now and that blew up it
got a lot of attention and it led to us
deciding to do a it was originally
supposed to be a hoaxing paper project
that evolved into something a little
more sophisticated and complicated as we
went that is now known as the grievance
studies affair or more famously known as
SoCal squared so this is this got
massive world's attention I'm sure most
of your listeners will know what that is
but it we wrote 20 definitely fake
academic papers seven of them were
accepted for publication including a
rewrite of mine Kampf something about
dog humping won an award for excellence
in feminist scholarship you know the
whole thing this got a lot of attention
front page in New York Times we end up
on Joe Rogan all kinds of you know
attention happens around this so
suddenly what happened is I found myself
and the very uncomfortable position of
being somewhat informed about something
that I was now like a global level
spokesperson about it was like oh I
better actually learn this meanwhile
Helen and I had decided that writing
this book cynical theories that you
mentioned before the we had this goal of
helping people understand that the
social justice movement has
overwhelmingly strong postmodern
elements mostly because when we tried to
tell people this before nobody believed
us they said post-modernism is dead and
we were like no really it's not dead and
then we thought well let's do a proper
bit of research for building off of the
project the papers that we wrote as kind
of a basis let's do a proper bit of
research to really understand where
these theories came from how they've
developed and in fact why they're
postmodern and orientation not just
critical that they're critical is
obvious they say it in the name you know
critical theories of different things
but that they're postmodern is non
obvious so we wanted to to do that and
so that really deepened our knowledge
led me to wanting to help people
understand the problem much more clearly
and it led me to creating new discourses
which that's the goal of its to get
people to understand this problem in
particular but also similar problems
that make it so that it's difficult
to have open and honest discourse or
dialogue about things right right we're
gonna get into all that and those are
very important issues and I want to ask
a couple of questions about what you
just said I mean first of all I think I
first discovered you while you were
preparing these papers I think the first
thing I noticed you say was that nobody
pays attention to phenomenas feminist
scholarship and you and I had an
exchange back and forth on that actually
a few years ago and I was insisting that
lots of people pay attention to feminist
scholarship look at the tyranny of the
minority and how it's impacting
everything and you made the distinction
that it wasn't just that yes it was
impactful but very few people were
actually paying any attention to it so
that was one of the first moments that I
was aware of your work but I wanted to
just double back to your your comment
about Sam Harris Sam Harris has blinders
on or did at least about leftist
authoritarianism and a lot of people
have blinders on about that why do you
think that is what is it about this
particular phenomenon that causes people
to just like not see it as if they were
in Westworld in there and like a Android
and they're shown a drawing of the
Android they just can't even see
anything on the piece of paper right
like well what it would is it about this
particular problem which we will define
later but what is it about that that
causes people to just short-circuit and
not be able to see it there are two
things actually and one of them was what
Sam was pointing at at the time on
Twitter which is that authoritarianism
even even with and I have to say is even
with the great communist greats the
wrong word but great and sense of big
communist regimes that ravaged the
twentieth century and one of which still
is ravaging the 21st century you know a
lot of people see authoritarian moral
impulses as fundamentally right-wing and
if you look at the origins of left-wing
versus right wing liberal versus
conservative within the French
Revolution that you see that the people
who wanted to maintain the authority of
the monarchy and the authority of the
state versus people who wanted to have
very decentralized order or you know
that were the right right side and the D
central EFT and so the idea that left
which was supposedly anti-authoritarian
from its beginning anti-monarchical in
fact the idea that there can be in
Thorat Arianism that's genuinely
left-wing just kind of doesn't compute
for a lot of people who understand that
history and so when they see something
like these communist regimes they try to
describe them in terms of fascism
instead and if you actually have read
you know some of the stuff about fascism
I remember when I first started learning
about fascism you know 20 years ago or
whatever one of the characteristics was
that it was neither left nor right or
that it was left-wing stuff that had
taken up a lot of right-wing politics
and it's like hmm
so it it gets a bit murky but ultimately
the reason it turns out as far as I can
tell is because almost nearly all of the
scholarship I've only learned this in
the past year or so almost all of the
scholarship about authoritarianism came
out of the critical theory Frankfurt
School almost all of it they defined the
authoritarian personality as right-wing
and it's like you know psychologists
like Erich Fromm and so on and all of
the literature about authoritarianism
just assumed that it's a right-wing
phenomenon and that leftists are like
these cats who just you can't hurt them
they spread out in every directions they
don't they don't agree on anything and
so the idea that a Thorat Arianism which
requires central you know bowing to a
central authority and all of this it
could exist on the left made no sense
before a lot of these people hence the
whole idea that fascism was left ISM
that had taken on certain right-wing
authoritarian traits but I'm content
even with this with with the critical
social justice to say whether there's a
central authority doesn't really matter
as to whether or not there's a
authoritarian impulse going on so I was
trying to broaden the understanding of
the authoritarian impulse to be actually
in service to any ideology at the time
and that was our discussion but I don't
think people see it because what they
associate with because all of the
literature ever about this plus the the
kind of like first
zeroth-order memes about left and right
say that authoritarianism is a
right-wing trait so it makes it very
difficult they see the things that are
that are horrifying and clearly
totalitarian on the left but cannot see
it in a authoritarian kind of mindset
because they've the definitions have
been concocted such that that's not how
we understand those things so it's
really very interesting that it's all
it's almost verify some of the things
that post modernists were saying and the
critical theorists were saying about
like the dominance of ideas and
ideologies but it's theirs they have
taken the the dominance and made it
impossible to see what's plainly
happening yeah we're gonna get to that
that's a central theme in the book which
is going from postmodern rejection of
objective reality to ossifying their own
perspective of objective reality as
being the only one that one can consider
I had the good fortune I think to pick
up Jonah Goldberg's liberal fascism many
years ago so I had I had an insight into
the fact that authoritarianism could be
found everywhere and in college I
studied comparative economic systems at
George Mason so I did have some sense of
what was happening there and that all
sort of prepared me to encounter all
this postmodern critical
intersectionality stuff what some people
call multiculturalism I think is what
they're calling it at the Claremont
Institute it Paul identity politics die
I like that one diversity inclusion
equity
I like that acronym way better than Dei
I like I'm both is Dei like they've
they've turned it into a god but oh
that's very true too and you know I
don't know to the extent you know
anything about my backstory but I'm a
I'm a product of and a victim of this
entire process
I was doxxed by an Tifa and kicked out
of my job which was running charter
schools in the Washington DC area
executive director I was a champion for
our most disadvantaged and underserved
minority children in the District of
Columbia and yet by virtue of
association and questioning things like
you know
are are you know sanctuary cities a
smart thing to do or questioning the dog
dogmatic elements of feminism I got
branded and Nazi and they fired me from
my job in a very public way and stripped
away everything that I had worked for my
whole life and that I antiva even
contacted my my little league board and
got me banned from coaching Little
League and spending time with my son and
stuff and so I'm a product of I've been
in this I've experienced it I've written
a book Democrat to deplorable which
actually addresses a number of the
issues that you brought up in your book
but from a layman's perspective and
through personal narrative and story
what it's like to be on the other end of
these ideologies and how they're growing
and so I want to have that is sort of a
back backdrop to this conversation
because you have put into a very formal
document the things that I've been
grappling with personally since about
2014-2015 and that's one of the reasons
why I'm very excited to talk to you
because you sir are not you're not a
Margit rumpus you're not a rightist
you're not you know card-carrying GOP
but yet to me you've correctly
identified an existential stress an
existential threat to Western
civilization in your words as well which
is really of setting to me the
fundamental tone of our politics moving
forward so let's get into it the book is
called cynical theories and you know I'm
gonna tee it up but I'd like to talk
about the principles and the themes that
you pulled out of it but first can we
just sort of give a general overview of
what you mean by post-modernism here and
then let's go yeah I know it's not that
easy but you know I'm let's just assume
that most people are generally familiar
with the terms and that they're gonna
read your book and they know who you are
because you do have quite a Twitter
presence and you have been in the news
so you know let's let's just talk
generally about post-modernism and then
what you mean by capital T theory and
then let's get into the principles cool
so post-modernism is a very complicated
thing so it's hard to talk about because
it actually takes place in a variety of
different domains and
it's taking place over over a large
number of decades like the first parts
of post-modernism were really about art
and architecture and they took place in
the you know 1940s maybe and then the
post-modernism that we're talking about
is like a political philosophy that
evolved in like that and more than
political it's also got its roots deep
in like knowledge systems and how we
speak and how language works and that
evolved in the 1960s primarily and
developed through the 70s was prominent
through the 80s and kind of started to
Peter out in the 90s and its formal
sense so you know it spans a lot of time
it covers a lot of things I will
actually tell you there's in my opinion
like all art there's good art and bad
art I think there is very bad postmodern
art for example these episodes where
somebody like maybe just takes a dump or
something and calls it an art piece
because it's like you know so
transgressing of the boundaries of what
art is supposed to be but then there's
also very good art I'm actually a huge
fan of this YouTube channel the
postmodern jukebox which redoes songs
contemporary like pop or even R&B or hip
hop songs and will redo them like in 40
style jazz so it's like changing the
rules and I actually like quite a bit of
postmodern art and postmodern music some
even but not all postmodern architecture
it's certainly better than the ultra
modernist Brutalism that for example
it's much more interesting so that you
know these kind of weird architectural
buildings you see like in Belgium or
whatever they look like they're made out
of like children's blocks that don't
look like they're held up by magic or
something you know there's something
about it it's kind of fun so in general
in drop for just one second it is very
interesting how political movements
oftentimes have their genesis in
artistic movements yes yeah and and I've
actually spent a number of days at the
local Hirshhorn Art Gallery here in
Washington DC and they had an exhibit
called manifesto and it looked at a
number of different time periods and
started off with the sort of written
manifestos of the art movement
and then track how those art manifestos
and art movements developed into
political movements and it's it's very
clear that the postmodern original art
movement about deconstructing the
formalities of language and art and
structure and color and time-space and
line on pattern it's very clear that
that was a an intellectual concept that
that was able to gain a foothold in
modern consciousness through art and
then that aesthetic began to shape the
way people think and we see now folks
especially on the right guys like
courtesy arvind calling for a new
conservative or dissident as artists
thetic as a way to change culture
whether they're right or wrong in their
aims but the process does seem to be
right so it's fascinating that another
confirmation here that this art movement
turned into a political movement which
is now turned into some element of a
fascist movement that's that's actually
kind of crazy thing to think about it's
opposite of what it had intended to do
in the first place now yeah the the
original intention so we can speak about
it from the art and get to the politics
and like for example there are you know
classical rules before say music or art
and so post-modernism typically wanted
to show that the rules were arbitrary
and unnecessary so rather than going
full Jackson Pollock and just flinging
paint at a canvas or whatever and just
being totally abstract that doesn't
actually show you that the rules are you
know able to be called into question
what they would often do is choose
different rules they would so for an
example of a real a couple of books they
were in the postmodern genre that you
know intentionally wrote a book without
using the letter e so you just set some
arbitrary rule and write around it and
another one is so then the rule is
arbitrary but art can still be made
another book that if I recall correctly
was actually published as a postmodern
art project was that they took our I
think it was the nouns so they went
through and some book that exists and
they took every noun and replaced it
with the next noun in the dictionary of
some you know standard chosen
and so they you know and then you try to
read the new text for meaning where all
the nouns have been shifted by one in
the dictionary it's an arbitrary rule it
doesn't do anything but then what
meaning comes out of that when you read
the the resulting text and so you have
this kind of idea that you can
deconstruct the rules whether it's of
language or of power or whatever of
society when you get to the political
movement by tweaking them a little bit
and showing how they contain absurdities
but ultimately what postmodern
philosophy started like the kind of core
principle is that they wanted to break
away from the idea that rules constrain
us at all but that even includes that
reality constrains us is I have to tell
people you know there's no law for
example that tells me I'm not allowed to
jump up onto my roof but reality
constrains me I can't jump that high and
I don't think if I practiced further my
whole life I'll ever be able to jump
high enough to get on my roof I don't
think that they were fools and thought
that you could actually change reality
by by changing your beliefs in some
naive way but Michel Foucault for
example was extremely concerned with the
way that the things that are considered
to be true whether they're actually true
or not he said missed the point but the
way that things that are considered to
be true constrain how how people can be
he grew up of course gay and not
accepted for that he grew up wanting to
be a philosopher where his father wanted
him to be a doctor not accepted for that
so there was like all this constraint on
him and he wanted to be able to break
free of constraint so it's the most kind
of generous basic level postmodern
philosophy is about breaking free of the
constraints of that which is true so it
actually goes as I said Foucault
believes that it misses the point to
talk about whether something that is
true actually reflects reality what what
the point is is that people believe
things that they think are true and so
that the power of belief is its self
generating the constraints whether
they're true or not doesn't actually
matter all that much so this is a step
away from seeing truth is something that
corresponds to reality and instead
seeing it as
something that corresponds to the
political power to assert that something
is true or legitimize it is true or get
the public to accept that it's true and
so now truth is no longer about
correspondence to reality it's about the
assertion of political power and his
fucose trick was to do historical
analyses that he called or that were his
historiography is not history where he
showed through history how we had
different views about what was
scientifically true say about insanity
say about gay people throughout history
it's a mortal sin referred to be gay and
then it was a psychological disorder
then it became something else and it
became something else and so on and so
on and these all had the backing of the
best you know knowledge authority
whether it's the church whether it's
science or psychology or whatever of the
day and he said well that just means
that we can't actually know what's true
truths is just an assertion of political
power so that's the first principle of
post-modernism is that truth is an
assertion of political power and then
the second is that you have to be able
you have to deikun's cause in justices
that you have to deconstruct those
systems in order to liberate or
emancipate people from those in justices
so in a sense there's like this
liberation from truth but it's naive to
say like oh well if I just pretend I can
jump on my roof I could jump on my roof
it's not like that it's what society
generally accepts your believes is true
because the authorities like the
scientist for example or the politicians
or the priests what they say is true is
what we all have to live by is true and
we all accept is true and that
constrains people so that gay people
have to live in the closet or they have
to be you know lobotomized or
electro-shocked or whatever happens to
be crazy people aren't allowed to voice
their opinions because they're did you
know crazy so then people who are
politically dissident and just going
against the status quo will be branded
crazy or insane and institutionalized
and not listened to so you can never
have a radical politic this was the
general idea was that it you want to
expand our thinking about what it means
for something to be true and to realize
that
that which is true is ultimately a
cultural and political project that's
contingent on the people that believe it
and then that creates oppression that
there's a mandate to liberate us from
then it used specific methods like
deconstruction to do that
that's a healthy isn't it it is it is a
hell of a summary and and I can't help
but think that I'm hearing Jordan
Peterson in the back of my mind I'm
hearing people talk about going this
sounds to me like going from order to
chaos when everyone seems to want to go
from chaos to order yes it's it's very
contradictory towards my understanding
of like a very Orthodox Christianity
about us being needing to bring order to
chaos and light to dark it does feel
like it's going in the other direction
it is to me it strikes me as having a
bit of evil in it even though I'm not
particularly a religious person it does
strike me moving towards chaos that that
just makes like the hair on the back of
my neck stand up that's like it alert
alert right right so the perspective
there if you want to talk about like
light in darkness and moving away or
whatever what they would the the
argument would be is that there are
certain authorities who get to shine the
light and they choose the direction that
the light gets shined in and so there's
some parts that are lit up and other
parts that are in shadow and so but that
but they're ultimately there are
authorities that decide which way the
light gets shined and so what you need
to do is shatter that realize it's the
authority showing you what they want you
to see and then have basically
everybody's light but nobody can trust
anybody's light because the light is the
knowledge system which is really
complicated and so what it is is a
retreat from this idea that there's a
shared experience of reality and into
one's as it's now phrased lived
experience which is considered to be the
like your subjective experience becomes
the only thing that's considered to be
real so it's this retreat from the
objective world where we all have to
live by whatever people are saying is
true or whatever happens to be true and
now you get to you know have your own
narrower understanding of truth that's
your truth you see that for instance in
the other postmodern philosopher Jean
Francois Lyotard talks about
the skepticism he says the postmodern
condition is the skepticism of
meta-narratives simplifying in the
extreme he says it's the skepticism of
meta-narratives so meta-narratives like
these big sweeping they're basically
mythologies is what they are they're big
sweeping explanations or stories about
stories so the thing the stories are
embedded in and he said that we need to
get rid of those Christianity is one
Marxism is one even the Enlightenment
rationalism which they would call
positivism is one then leotard
misidentified that was science which is
not one it's actually a methodological
tool but you know there's all this kind
of idea that these big sweeping stories
that you know say colonialism we have
the right to because we have the the
ability we can go civilize the world we
can make everybody democratic you know
these are these are meta-narratives and
Liat Hart said that we should be
skeptical of those and replace them with
local and mini narratives and so
essentially that's what that which is
true for us and you know Foucault is
more interested in and talking about the
way that the existing power structure
NIP Y elated the way that we talk about
things and legitimize ideas to constrain
and shine the light if you will in just
one direction that illuminates certain
things and so there's this belief that
you know you should be able to look with
your own little light instead of some
big light of reality and see whatever it
is that you can see and then be accepted
that what you're describing about
reality is actually reality is the right
description of it
yeah I'm struck here I feel a little bit
of a conflict because as a writer and
author a creator I believe in the power
of narrative I believe in the power of
personal narrative I believe that if I
I've done it myself
right I got doxxed by aunt Eva they
called me a Nazi and a racist but
instead of allowing that narrative to
stand I took it upon myself to put forth
you know my narrative and my reality and
because I stayed with it and because I
think it rang true it became sort of the
new story of my life rather than the one
where I
as a disgraced you know Nazi who got
fired from his job right and and then I
also I'm thinking about Hariri book
sapiens where we talks about how humans
organized around imagined orders and
that this is an evolutionary advantage
that we have that led to where we are
today and part how do I square the power
of narrative the power of imagined
orders and then you know me not feeling
like I'm a post modernist alright like
me believing that there's actually a
truth out there as well see that that's
the the real difficulty it's very
seductive that's actually why post
modernism occurred the the over-reliance
on our narrative is true in other
narratives are naive and false or are
meta-narrative if you want is really
what left fertile ground for
post-modernism to erupt I don't think
that post-modernism teaches us anything
particularly new postmodern you know
advocates would say that they did I
would just say that it kind of turned
the volume way up on something that we
were all dimly aware of or becoming more
aware of I think it ultimately comes
down to to for myself because I feel the
same struggle is that remembering that
remembering the power of narrative
remembering the power of intuition and
fitting in with one social group is
there and yet it's almost beyond any
question like literally very very very
beyond any question that there is some
shared reality out there that we all
have this you know access to and in many
regards similar experiences with if I
walk headlong into a tree I walk
headlong into a tree and I have an
experience and if somebody of a
different culture walks headlong into
the tree they still hit the tree they
still have a similar experience but
maybe they interpret it you know so
there's the thing and there's the
interpretation and you actually can
separate those and say well it doesn't
mean that the tree didn't exist and
they're running into it didn't cause
certain you know receptors in my nervous
system to react and you know
bruises or whatever else so it there is
a shared reality there is this idea that
there I mean that there are different
Spector's is absolutely it's it's so
blatantly obvious that it's ridiculous
to deny it but this doesn't justify a
radical skepticism of reality like with
your story an tyfa and i had this
experience too so let me just tell you
when you spend a couple of years doing a
project and you emphatically write this
is not hoaxes and you explain it to the
world and you say we tried to do hoaxing
and hosting failed so this is not hoaxes
this is something else then you write in
the press kit that you send out
please journalists do not call this
hoaxes it was something else and then
every journalist calls it hoaxes and
then for the rest of your life you wrote
those hoax papers I understand the idea
of of a narrative that gets away from
you and you can't do anything about it
but the thing is is that there actually
with your story with my story there is a
truth right yeah there is if we look at
the the the New York Times 16:19 project
I should say New York Times Magazine I
don't want to pin it on the the paper
when it was although that got
complicated when it was really the
magazine but there there is an actual
historical truth that happened in the US
history there is a historical truth that
happened to you with your views and then
with the way anti-shah spun a narrative
around you same with with my my project
with Peter and Helen and there are
methods that you know maybe we can't
ever perfectly get the story and we
can't always agree on all the
interpretations of the story but there
is still a truth there that can be
appealed to and argued for rather
convincingly and if you are willing to
accept methods that we've carefully
devised over long periods of time that
are more rigorous we consider them more
more rigorous because they actually do
get closer and closer to reflecting the
genuine whole truth of the story rather
than some partial truth attached to a
narrative so what I would say is that
you avoid being a postmodernist by
saying yeah I recognize that but I also
believe there is a whole truth and
something considerable about that whole
truth can be known and so it is not
justified to live intentionally in a
partial truth that suits our own
politics or that is critical of somebody
else's politics that's not sufficient so
when when you you get there you avoid
becoming Poe
modern in your orientation while
recognizing that narrative ISM is
actually a thing that happens and it's
very powerful and it actually does shape
the way people think and as sort of it's
just part of life and you're stuck with
it
and sort of you can you can resist it as
well but the belief that there's a whole
truth and that we should strive to get
to the whole truth and use that to
inform us is anti postmodern the belief
that we should lean into partial truths
that fit one's politics is postmodern
and so that's the way you avoid I think
it's actually quite clear it's actually
once you draw the line it's a pretty
bright line between the two yeah so you
made the distinction between
meta-narratives and a system a system
for revealing truth you would argue I
mean that you argue everyone argues as a
liberal liberal process a scientific
method you know the Enlightenment ideals
these have created a system that gets us
to a truth rather than a meta-narrative
that that brings the truth down upon us
correct ish I would actually tell you
that liberal systems don't get you to a
truth they get you away from the false
which is different it makes you rather
than making you right over time it makes
you less wrong which I like to phrase it
this way is like a very contemporary
understanding of truth wouldn't be this
thing that's you know absolute and
ontological II you know unassailable or
whatever like the philosophers and the
religious people like to worry about
perfectly illusions like to worry about
a truth is simply a statement about
reality that if we wanted to make a bet
on it we were pretty likely to win
that's kind of a very contemporary way
to view truth and the reason that we're
very likely to win is because we have a
reason to believe that that belief was
determined by methods that are highly
reflective of the objective external
reality so science proceeds liberal
methods proceed what they actually are
nobody nobody hardly at all understands
this I didn't make this up I'm not the
genius that came up with this Jonathan
Roush writing in his book kindly
inquisitors in 1992 way ahead of the
curve wrote this
down and I was just struck me is the
most blatantly important and obvious
thing that I had never thought my entire
life when I read it because science and
liberalism are methods of conflict
management so you have an opinion about
say reality I have an opinion about
reality these are sister aren't systems
that tell us what is and is not true or
even just how to figure out what isn't
isn't true like what form of experiment
we need to run or anything what they are
is methods where you and I can set aside
our disagreement and find some standard
that we can both agree upon so it's an
external standard to ourselves that we
can agree upon and that standard we will
use to try to settle our conflict so if
you have one belief and I have one
belief we say let's go devise an
experiment let's look at the reality
let's look at the evidence let's have a
rational argument let's appeal to a
reasonable person standard if it's law
and you know all of these different
processes let's have a vote if it's
something in a Dem that makes sense in a
democratic process you don't vote on
truth but you vote on policy and let's
figure out what's going on and then
we'll agree to defer to the results of
that process and so this is a system of
conflict management with science what it
is you have an opinion I have an opinion
somebody else has an opinion and what we
are agreeing to do is to use methods
where we're going to you put forward
your idea that's your hypothesis I put
forward my idea that's my hypothesis
somebody else has their hypothesis and
what we're actually gonna do is various
tests that try to show that the idea not
that the idea is right but how the idea
might be wrong and we accept as
provisionally true that which has
survived a lot of those attempts to
falsify or disconfirm or defeat it
depending on what regime you're working
in whether it's science or philosophy or
something else and so this this is why
those statements become something we can
bet upon with a high degree of
confidence because the ones that have a
lower degree of confidence got knocked
out by losing a bet somewhere along the
line and we change tack and used a
different one that hasn't been knocked
down yet and the goal is to knock them
down as hard as you can
I'm Stein his famous because he knocked
Newton down it wasn't because he came
along and said Newton was absolutely
right yeah yeah yeah cheer cheers for
Isaac Newton it was because he said
Isaac Newton fundamentally misconstrued
the nature of reality and he was close
but you can't even understand things the
way he understands it you have to
understand reality in a completely
different way and here's how newton's
laws fall out in a special case it's a
completely different you know he knocked
down literally probably the greatest
genius in science anyway in history and
that's why Einstein is now pretty much
considered to be the greatest genius in
science by knocking something else down
right so the system that you're
referring to the one that we try to and
endeavor to live in most of us is a
system of reconciliation and conflict
management and a way to falsify claims
so that we can get closer and closer to
an understanding of the truth that has
fewer and fewer you know possibilities
for being wrong right and as a problem
though it's cold it doesn't give a rat's
ass how much you care about your idea
it doesn't care who you are it doesn't
care how hard you work oh no but that's
a virtue of it that's not a problem well
I mean it has a problem in terms of
people being satisfied with it correct
it is a virtue of it it's why it works
right because it doesn't care in
particular about any human vanity
whatsoever and so the issue then is that
it creates a lot of losers that have
their cherished idea that doesn't hold
up and those losers sometimes get
envious and sometimes they decide it's
time to tear the whole system down and
that all knowledge is fake and they're
very angry historiography is about how
science got everything wrong so why
should we believe it anymore Michele
Foucault right so let's put up I hate
saying this phrase but let's put a pin
in that notion there no I have to do it
all time it's great because that that is
a very important concept I want to come
back to as we work through just a couple
more of these others or background
issues because think about what people
will find and what I certainly found in
the book is that the the post modernists
and the theorists acid your rules
we're not going to play with this system
in fact we're going to design a whole
new system that expressly prohibits
anyone from questioning us challenging
us asserting their control or their
dominance
and we can now exclude everything that
you have to say but we've got a few more
steps to get to that and it's political
salience today you mentioned already
there were two principal postmodern
theories the first one is that truth is
political and the second one is that
these assertions of truth of truth make
cause injustice is correct currency and
then there are four other principles
that you pulled out and these all run
through the entire book and when you get
into the practical examples but what
were what are the four principles of
what you've called a theory with a
capital T and then we'll talk about what
what actually construes that okay so do
you know who Rick Perry is do you
remember Rick Perry is he's not governor
of Texas anymore but he was so I might
pull a rick perry on you here rick perry
is very infamous now for having been in
a presidential debate
some years ago and saying he was gonna
cancel three departments then he could
only name two of the three couldn't
remember the third one i have them
written down to worry
good cuz i tend to always be able to
remember three of them and forget the
fourth and it's never consistent which
ones i remember so let's see if i can do
it will quiz me and you can bust me if i
forgot in my own my own work
it's totally rigged blurring of
boundaries of the service yeah blurring
of boundaries is the one I almost never
forget power of language is another one
after list of mauler I'm gonna be dead
in the water
cultural relativism yes well you're just
gonna name them for me and I don't have
to lose and the loss of the individual
correct and loss of the individual and
denial of the universal yeah yeah so
blurring of boundaries is actually very
much one of the things that we see is
throughout the contemporary act ISM it's
very central to two queer theory the
idea queer theory in particular but I
meant to say post-modernism there the
idea there is that when you create a
boundary or a category or you put some
put a put a line around something and
categorize it say a science would say
that you say that madness or
homosexuality is a mental disorder once
you draw a line around something you
then constrain it and people who fall
outside of that line are not being
treated fairly there's an injustice
there so rather
then trying to like draw the boundary
more accurately and be more fair and
more genuinely inclusive of things the
the imperative is just delete the
boundary entirely when you believe that
there's no access to truth to objective
reality you can start to blur together
different methods you know like well
maybe reason wasn't so good maybe reason
always has emotion in it maybe reason
and emotion are the same thing and so
you start to see that kind of a blurring
of the boundaries between between
rational thought and emotional thought
or if you wanted to in a kind of more
Daniel Kahneman kind of way thinking
fast and thinking slow intuitive thought
versus you know methodological thought
you know they're really the same thing
or if you want to go full Michelle
Foucault you know there's the famous
expression knowledge is power that
Michele Foucault took further and said
like quite literally knowledge and power
are the same thing
power knowledge and so the boundaries
between you know the way that power
might apply knowledge to or claims to
knowledge to do certain things he said
no no they're exactly the same thing the
boundaries between power and knowledge
are completely erased so you see this
willingness to blur boundaries and queer
theory it's much more obvious you know
man and woman don't really mean anything
there's 57 genders you know sex and sex
sexuality and gender are all on
spectrums now everything's a
rainbow there are no boundaries between
anything the truth and truth and false
those are irrelevant let's blur the
boundaries between those rigorous
methods and play or jokes or satire all
basically the same thing you see that
really prominently there and that is a
very very very postmodern thing to do it
also is in their proactivity and their
actions that's something they do but
then they also rely on that to say oh
that thing that you did which was just
sarcasm or irony or performance or an
act or just something to be provocative
that's actually your reality your power
truth your standpoint whatever it is
yeah it's like there's no place for play
there's no place for exploration
everything becomes
Kanon at that point which i think is
like underlying current and all this
canceled culture call a culture all the
 you see on twitter things that
happened to me things that happen to you
things happen to a lot of people where
you say one thing and it's totally taken
out of context and it doesn't it was
meant to be playful and now all of a
sudden it's what you know you should be
on your tombstone and what's good
they're gonna say is the reason that
they sentence you to death
right I mean so your case is perfect
right you blur the boundary between
relatively progressive guy who
questioned some particulars of
progressive dogma and you no longer are
you progressive no longer are you
liberal no longer are you Center no
longer are you conservative no longer
are you far-right you're not see the
boundaries between all of those
categories are just completely blurred
and they do it as you pointed out in a
very strategic way that suits them and
puts their opponents on the backfoot
every time it so they get to choose how
the boundaries get blurred and they get
to choose when the boundaries have to be
the new boundaries have to be very
strictly enforced now pure
post-modernism by the way wouldn't have
necessarily done that pure
post-modernism really would have just
try to erase them all into a atomic soup
of nothing that makes any sense but what
we're dealing with now is is you know an
adaptation of post-modernism for
politics so it's a little bit different
right and I guess I didn't say this
explicitly but our firt the first part
of our discussion is mirroring the the
format of the book where we talked about
the origins of postmodern philosophy and
then the book turns into or transitions
into what you call applied
post-modernism and that's a part of
where some of these principles and the
themes are being extrapolated or at
least you highlight how they have been
applied right and on the long the same
lines as blurring blurring of boundaries
would be the loss of the individual and
the universal right correct if you can't
draw any boundaries around any
categories how can you draw one around
yourself and then you get subsumed by
the group right right yeah so it's
really interesting because there's sort
of three levels upon which Humanity has
relevance the the individual is kind of
the atomic one the universal is
everything and everybody and that's
those two are what liberalism focuses on
you know we look
universal human values universal ideas
of human rights
you know that's controversial right-wing
circles to talk about human rights at
all anymore but we have this idea that
there's something in common between all
of humanity that's universalism we have
this idea that each individual is the
container and arbiter of his own
thoughts that that's individualism is
able to make decisions that are idea you
know he's the best decider for his own
interests he's not necessarily gonna be
right but he's the one who's the most
qualified to make decisions and his own
interest but then there's a third level
in between that's the group and I think
that liberalism is not totally ignorant
of the group thing but it does not pay
enough attention to it on its own but
this is left room to focus on what I
would frankly say stupid groups I mean
the demographic identity groups are
which they categorize not via an
essentialism like all black people are
like this all white people are like this
even though that sometimes comes up they
actually claim that all white people
have the same general experience in a
white dominated culture all black people
have the same general experience in a
white dominated culture and so on and so
forth and so that that experience
becomes essential eyes but the people
themselves aren't essentialized and so
they are actually claiming that
different identity groups because they
have different experiences in
relationship to the power of society
become the something you can draw
boundaries around it and say ah well
people who are black have a certain
experience in a white dominant society
so you can draw a boundary around that
but it erases the boundaries between the
actual individual minds of any
particular black people or even in fact
different populations or different
groups of black people some I mean some
black communities are extremely you know
well-educated and and really trying to
push you know the you know black
advancement and all of this stuff where
other ones are very not that they can be
very you know kind of angry at society
even sometimes and so you have these
almost different cultures but nope
they've all got to be lumped into one
essential experience of being
lack and so the ones that are advocating
say you know I am stumbling around
because I actually want to use Bill
Cosby as the example but you can't use
Bill Cosby as examples anymore but Bill
Cosby gotten a lot of trouble back
before you know he got in trouble for
the rape he got in a lot of trouble with
the black community for coming out and
saying that black people need to you
know not speak with such a heavy
vernacular English they need to pull up
their pants they need to get good jobs
they need to go to school they need to
study and and he got accused of telling
black people to act white is what he got
accused of to participate in the white
system and he's not the only one he's
just the one example that like got
burned into my memory when I was at a
formative enough age to where it's like
that's the paradigm example for me to go
to and now it's like you rape those
people or something so now I can't talk
about Bill Cosby but the point stands
that yeah that yeah they favored this
idea of the group and I think that we do
need to pay more attention to human
group ashiness I wanted to write a book
a number of years ago that I'd be much
better at writing now so maybe I'll look
forward to it at some point called the
error of the Enlightenment which sounds
very postmodern to push out but I think
that it is this really it's that we
don't pay enough attention like human
rationality did get forwarded over the
idea of something to do with group
--is-- nests and I don't think that
saying that you know demographic group
is the right group I would honestly tell
you that it's it's more subtle than that
and more more to do with our social
environments moral communities are
actually the the right object but the
error of the Enlightenment that I wanted
to name was that people and departed
kind of put in lay terms as people care
10 times as much about fitting in with
their social group as they do about
what's true and so I agree with that and
I wanted I just want to point out too
that if if you and I say you generally
to the audience if you've experienced
this I the feeling that when someone
says diversity they don't really mean it
this is exactly why and how because
they're not actually talking about
diversity of experiences or diversity of
ideas they're actually just talking
about these different groups
which as you said fit between the
individual and the universal and then
the individual has no identity in there
and then they even in these groups they
even shout down the individual
experiences of the people within the
group and they have the the the group
itself takes priority over any of the
individual experience and to anyone who
has been raised in in America or in the
West or you know fashions themselves is
a student of the Enlightenment
you know the erasure of the individual
is something that should be very
troubling it probably doesn't sit very
well with you you hear it you want to
recoil and cringe and do something about
it and there's a reason there's a reason
for that and there's a reason why your
people's experiences interacting with
these groups and they're in the real
world rings so weird and wrong and an
off-color and like they don't make any
sense it's because there's no sense in
the beginning even start with right yeah
so actually in that case with diversity
is really a good example because it's
not even when they say diversity they
mean people who have these different
group experiences right so when they say
diversity you can't putting a say if
you're going to satisfy a diversity
quota that required more black people to
be involved in whatever your
organization is you can't put any black
person in there you have to have one who
properly understands the black
experiences they've laid it out which
means that no matter what demographic
identity man woman straight gay whatever
race whatever that is they all have the
same fundamental politics which is to
understand everything in terms of the
this critical theory position that
understands that different identity
groups have different essential
experiences of politics and so they may
look different they may actually come
from different communities they spend
forty five percent or fifty percent or
ninety percent of their time saying as a
Hispanic woman bla bla bla and speaking
into that but they're always going to
have the same politics because otherwise
they don't have an authentic view of
that politics because the individual has
to be removed so the view actually
somebody wrote an essay that I published
a new discourse
earlier this week that was really
helpful for me to even understand this
is that every individual is nothing more
than kind of like a diplomatic
representative of their group so when
they can either represent their group
well or represent their group poorly and
what they represent your group well
means that you are authentically as
Theory puts it communicating the
political experience of having that
identity and your individual thought is
absolutely just some kind of phallus
consciousness or selfishness or
something like that if it if it deviates
from that theoretically prescribed so
the same politics perspective of how or
what it means to be that particular
identity so when you talk about
diversity what they are actually talking
about is quite literally the most
superficial diversity because unless
people have the correct underlying
politics which is to say this critical
politic they absolutely don't qualify as
authentic representatives of that that
identity group so that's why it doesn't
Square that's when they say we need more
diverse hiring what they what that
literally means when it's when an entity
like a school or something says we need
more diverse faculty that literally
means we need to hire more critical
theorists who don't look like each other
that's all it means
yeah yeah and if you if you're a member
of these groups and you have a divergent
opinion then you get labeled with such
things as internal misogyny or internal
racism or Haram or whatever yeah there's
lots of them and they give us a big
adecco you know it's funny I just I
stopped myself because they got the ugly
ones were starting to come out this and
bubble up ya know post-modernism
actually especially this newer variant
of it construe individualism and
universalism as myths that were
constructed by the dominant in society
to justify maintaining their own power
so white people for example said no
we're all individuals and we're going to
treat people as individuals in a very
white person once said that we're gonna
judge
the content of character rather than the
color of skin because they want to
forward this idea that benefits white
people and they want to keep black
people down that's the whole point of
that whole line of thought and the same
thing for human universalism to say
we're all the same erases the idea that
different people actually have different
experiences of power and politics that
it's the only thing they care about and
so therefore that is another myth humans
are all under the underneath the surface
the same we're all so much more in
common than we have different that's
just a myth that's been propagated by
the powerful so that people who are
oppressed won't realize that they're
being oppressed because it feeds them
like this you know it's kind of like a
narrative that calms them down and makes
them believe that you know no we're all
we're all kind of the same it's it's not
me being cheated it's really properly
disgusting when you and I sound like a
lunatic when I say this stuff and it's
like I just go read it on page after
page after pages or literature and it's
really what they think about these
things right that's that's interesting
phenomenon as a true seeker to come to I
for myself I started learning about
feminism and and intersectionality and
through gender dynamics I mean it's just
bluntly like I came up through what used
to be known the manosphere I got
interested in this stuff through dating
in the mating markets I discovered those
things were all screwed up started
pulling on one string I've been pulling
on that string for 10 years dude and now
I'm here talking to you and it's just
been one continuous string that I've
been pulling on and what struck me is
interesting what you were just saying is
that you quoted Martin Luther King there
we we have evidence of the Civil Rights
amendments and civil rights era second
wave feminism successful and gaining
equal opportunities equal rights for
women the very liberal society that
they're questioning has actually
produced the freedoms that they are
allegedly seeking is that not correct
and is there not a deep irony that the
liberal system created the benefits that
they're seeking but yet also creates
this space
for which they can come in assert that
the liberal system doesn't work and then
say that it's only their system which
does work and please take this question
and let's move into the sort of the
applied area and so if you can expand on
these ideas as it relates to the applied
area postmodern according to your book
that'd be a good way for us to keep
moving us forward yeah yeah sure so yeah
they definitely the there's definitely
an irony there it's like I couldn't
beside I am I usual metaphor that I'm
going for right now and I know these are
awful I usually go for for describing it
like a virus that exploits liberal cells
like institutions or communities or
whatever and I do that because they
actually have written a paper describing
themselves as a virus and saying that
it's an ideal model for how to think of
what they do and so I'm actually able to
not you know I'm not calling them
something that they wouldn't call
themselves I'm not being unfair to what
their their project is but there's in a
sense what you're talking about is that
this is almost like a cancer which those
are very related things of course what
you have is this like liberal ideal
that's then had some weird mutation and
now it's like Wald itself off and it's
you know growing out of control and
spreading throughout all the different
it's metastasizing through all the
different parts and it's you know
perverted the very ideals that worked
and the history of this is actually
complicated but it gets us to the
applied side is there's always I keep
finding myself saying this there are
always more than one strand of things
through history oh I was gonna say
there's always there are always two
movements going on but they're actually
in this case about 70 but we'll say
three and we talked about this in the
book most clearly in the chapter about
feminism and Gender Studies but it shows
up over and over and over again there's
pretty much always been in leftist Guler
left-wing I should say activism not
leftist activism and left-wing activism
around issues like this there's always
been the liberal branch which is always
appealing to egalitarianism the
fundamental promises of say the
Constitution liberal ideals equality and
so on
there's the Marxist branch or socialist
branch which is
obviously trying to construe things in
terms of the way that the capitalist
nature of our system is screwing people
and turning them into commodities and
and and exploiting them
then there's the radical version and the
radical version is kind of like the
models would be black power or black
nationalism radical feminism this kind
of lesbian separatism thing that was
kind of big for a while you know you
have these very radical things and those
three strands were always happening and
I'm gonna say up until the 1990s so you
had these these strands going along that
were you had the Liberals trying to
achieve this and they're always kind of
like uncomfortable bedfellows that
fought with each other but they were
kind of pointing in similar directions
they kind of had like a good cop bad cop
thing the Socialists and then the
radicals and the radicals and the
Liberals are the two really interesting
was the socialist have always kind of
ever since things aren't really bad in
some of those regimes that they've not
really had a lot of clout in the West
anyway but the radicals are the relevant
part of the story in particular because
they are the critical people they are
what came out of the Frankfurt School
they are what came out of the literal
development of critical theory in
particular one of the patron saints of
that project in terms of creating this
so-called new left activism was the
critical theorist Herbert markussi who
was at Columbia University after a left
Germany because of the war World War two
and so they trained up an entire new
generation of radical activists whose
goal was to the word liberation
so this liberation politics thing was
all very radical this warrior Black
Power movement came from this is where
the Black Panthers came from this is
where black nationalism and eventually
black Hebrew nationalism all came from
you have the same kind of thing
happening within feminism you have the
same thing happening with a queer
activist within the LGBT movement
there's this very radical element and
then there's a very liberal element that
are kind of in unholy matrimony going
forward kind of good cop/bad copying it
and the liberals are the ones usually
making the progress and
have to say that the radicals give them
a good foil most of the time to say well
we're not asking for that crazy stuff
you know so let's move the Overton
Window this is our more sane part I
understand that dynamic but these people
the radicals are the key part of the
story of how this postmodern blurring
the boundaries let's play with
everything
let's have cultural relativism you know
you can't compare one culture to another
because they all have their own systems
of knowledge and understanding and truth
the whole thing that we were just
discussing let's then focus on the group
then it has that system rather than the
universal or individual this whole thing
what happened in the 90s or late 80s
early mostly I think as a result if I'm
not mistaken there are two strands that
really did it one was in education with
with critical pedagogy is what it's
called but much more important was black
feminism black feminism by the way is a
thing it is like you know that is a
proper noun black feminism it's an
object it is it is a particular strand
of feminism that focuses on the you know
certain aspects of black women's
experiences and activism and black
feminism started to pick up postmodern
tools the queer theorists I should say
also started to pick up postmodern tools
to start to deconstruct the boundaries
blur the boundaries start thinking in
terms of its sort should say
reconstituting in terms of rather than
groups like you know whatever culture
they started saying that you know my
identity group has a culture that
identity politics radical identity
politics thing is where it changed from
let's think about like a culture or a
community and you know kind of very you
know vague group thing - specifically
black people or black women or gays or
whatever and it became those identity
groups became very kind of like cordoned
off because the radicals were doing
identity politics very specifically as
in you know feature my identity has a
special interest to achieve politics
they dramatically benefit it regard you
know almost in a zero-sum game where
it's not like let's try to raise all
ships row let's try to make good on the
of equality no its we're going to go for
black advancement now we're gonna go for
gay acceptance now with the queers oh
it's even more complicated cuz they
didn't want queer acceptance they want
queer radicalism which is did they they
were they were angry that gay marriage
was approved they thought it was a
massive win for conservatism if you
 can believe that because it
normalized marriage or normalized
gayness through marriage I actually
actually would say that the legalizing
gay marriage Oberkfell that is what
opened the door for me to vote
Republican as a matter of fact so in a
very interesting sense it was a gift to
conservatives because now that that
social aspect that social question was
off the table it allowed me to a
consider switching cuz lifelong Democrat
voted for Obama supported Clintons
whatever yeah you know it allowed me the
to say okay that's off the table along
with like you know cannabis is is
becoming decriminalized in right I saw
once that we came off the table I'm like
you know maybe there's some something
else I can look at over here so it
that's a casting that's interesting
phenomenon I want to just clarify one
thing before we get too much further
though critical critical doesn't
necessarily mean what people might think
there's nothing critical thinking right
and great it's opposite of that in this
case and stop me if I'm wrong I believe
that critical here means instead of
talking about this we got to change
it right yes it's basically the sums up
okay yeah it's that systems of power
exist systems of power create oppression
and we have to highlight the ways that
they create oppression and change them
through social activism it's not
understand why they create oppression
it's not understand why they are the way
they are it's not understand maybe why
they have to be the way that they are it
is they create a problem doesn't matter
why we need to change it rands the
problem is oppression and right
oppression oppression compression and so
there's the the matrix and you've got
straight whites is hetero whatever dudes
on one side and the women who love them
is what I
yeah and then everybody else basically
and the approach now they take
postmodern theory principles than they
apply it into their own practice and
that practice has been fused with
critical theory and then becomes an
activism right so basically instead of
it being a truth seeking mechanism it
becomes a tool for power and a tool for
politics and we see that spread as you
said into gender politics or gender
identities queer studies disability
slaves that one actually I was gonna
skip that section in the book I'm glad I
didn't because I was amazed at how how
 up up it's it's it is
where they're saying that like you know
to wanna be healthy and able-bodied is
like a internalized massage you know
equivalent of internalized misogyny or
like self hate or whatever it's actually
literally keeping people from getting
healthy it's not only disabled people
but with fat acceptance and and obesity
acceptance and so we can actually now
clearly goddamn I thought I was gonna
make it through this whole podcast
without saying we're corona but I'm
gonna it's clear that it a fat
acceptance literature if it to the
extent that it led to an increase in
obesity it then as obesity as a risk
factor for corona
as now there's a direct tie between
postmodernism fat studies perhaps
obesity numbers risk factors for
epidemics and then the closures that are
happening in the United States and the
destruction of the economy there is a
thread that you can pull all the way
through there and you know the degree to
which it's been actually a force is to
be questioned but there's no question
that there is a thread that goes from
the shut down of our economy all the way
back to like fat acceptance studies
would you would you accept that yeah
it's I mean that the fat and the
disability stuff are actually by far
they're kind of like the most wing nut
fringe that know like you said you
wanted to skip the chapter and then
they're actually like most likely to
cause death they're most directly
dangerous actually it's not about death
and dying or whatever but I actually saw
a disability studies paper yesterday
somebody sent me
that is like can you believe this and
the paper was saying that you know the
disabled sports should be banned because
it's only a very small privileged
minority of disabled people can do
privileged sports and so that makes the
rest of them all feel bad and tokenize
is you know able-bodied people celebrate
they're like oh how inspiring the guy in
the wheelchair can play basketball or
whatever and then they're like I'm
inspired but that just benefits
able-bodied people even more so disabled
sports should just be destroyed there
should be no disabled sports because
everybody can't participate in them and
they support able normativity and all
this other things like holy crap talk
about a perfect example of nobody can
have any unless everybody gets you know
the full share or whatever yeah you know
ahead you said you studied math and your
science you're a nerd this ship must be
so frustrating for you because you're
basically you you've been dropped into
like a cauldron of chaos and murk and
like you're trying to actually map it
out in a logical way and and I have
found myself frustrated in personal
relationships like this where I'm trying
to apply a lens of rationality to
irrational behavior and here you are I
can see I can feel it just in your words
and in your face and looking at you
about how you're trying to you can't
shake your objective rational logical
you can't and so you just you you're
like covered up and swallowed in all
this illogical and contradictory
and you're like fighting I can feel it
you're like fighting to find logic yes
and I'm and then you're like
increasingly frustrated that it's not
this anti logic yes actually
have you accompanied the way that it
used to but then at the same time I may
have just kind of internalized it
because my right eyelid I mean I joke
about this on Twitter where I'm not
joking my right eyelid has like more or
less perpetually been twitching for
about a year like even when I close them
it still twitches now so it's like that
just like I tried to explain to somebody
not that long ago
entire life is cognitive dissonance now
speaking of stuff people sent me the
other day somebody sent me an article I
would actually was just talking about it
on my own podcast earlier today somebody
sent me an article about something about
indigenous math and I'm like okay this
is gonna be interesting
and the whole first paragraph is like
all knowledge is cultural it's all
obtained culture you know in a culture
so there's no such thing as objective
knowledge we like to think of
mathematics as objective but it's
actually if we start thinking of
mathematics as subjective and embedded
in a culture then it opens up all these
new possibilities and it's like holy
crap
what are you talking about you know as a
mathematician you know my eye is like
going three times the normal speed of
twitch when I read that but it doesn't
like I used to like genuinely get
depressed and have despair about the
world that this exists and was making
into the academic literature and now
it's just kind of like yeah that's what
I expect but it's like I said I have
like stress disorders out my literally
out my eyes as a result of it I don't
mean to laugh at that but I can imagine
as for somebody who wants to sort the
world into categories to make logical
conclusions from assertions of a
falsifiable factus it must be extremely
frustrating for you because actually
that is the name of the game and that is
the point of the whole system is to
confuse and is to cause distress and it
is to up and all the rules that we had
you know sort of commonly accepted to be
if not the best but certainly one that
had led us towards a certain element of
like evolutionary fitness right it's
gotten us to this point so the system
can't be all that terrible now I want to
fast-forward the conversation a little
bit and just and sort of get into how
this stuff has has slithered into
practical realities okay so like I'm
gonna give you an example I worked for
the District of Columbia public charter
school board after I was executive
director of charter schools in the DC
and at that it's a regulatory body right
and in that body they hand out documents
and and I believe they're written by
some people you've cited maybe it's
the D'Angelo stuff about like what is
whiteness and like how do we eradicate
white supremacy from our organization
you know and they focused on things like
you know being punctual or a reliance on
data or wanting to be rational or you
know trying to be calm I mean like not
give in to emotion and stuff like that
and so like it and the big one was the
implicit association test they made us
all take the posted association test I I
don't know what came over me but in this
meeting with like 80 people I raised my
hand and I was like but even the authors
of that test say it's not a useful tool
and shouldn't be used for this
brainwashing purposes and stuff and so
you know we all know there's like a
multi-billion dollar industry around
brainwashing and eradicating bias out of
people so I bring all this up as just a
way of like a concrete example of how
these ideas are now in our colleges or
universities within the law within
science within our relationships within
human resources departments culture sort
of corporations in the media it's in the
government it is in our federal policies
it is in title 9 which I want to talk to
you about at some point it's everywhere
so there is a minority like these people
that write this they're a minority
very small minority very small minority
and I don't mean black or women or gay
or whatever I mean like a very small
number of people a lot of them are angry
white women well you know right that's a
whole nother conversation right but
they've been able to exert undue
influence over the system and they did
that by getting themselves into highly
leveraged places so can you can you talk
a little bit about that because this is
going to finish establishing the problem
and then yeah talk to you about what the
solution is so a lot of times you know
I've pretty publicly I'm rather actually
famous for it now having I've
characterized this thing as a Trojan
horse and so you know the Trojan horse
story you had the horse was delivered
and is brought in through the city gates
and then night came and inside the horse
were these you know kind of assassins
and they crept out and they killed the
guards and they opened the gate and then
the Warlord's could come you know the
army could come in through the gate from
the end because it was open and what I
try to tell people is it that the it is
a Trojan horse but it is not filled with
assassins or or warriors it is filled
with bureaucrats
so they actually climb out of the horse
in the middle of the night and then the
next day somehow they're like the
executive director of such-and-such or
the vice dean of this or whatever and so
what they're able to do with very small
numbers of people is show up to meetings
because they're active it would like
people ask me well why do they go to the
meetings because they're
activists it's what they do they show up
to the meetings and with a very small
number of people showing up the meetings
that are very poorly attended then they
start voting this stuff into policy they
start writing these it's like one of
them as an activist it'll take up their
initiative and they'll write like a
rules of conduct this is huge in the
tech world they'll write you know the
rules of conduct for this board and it's
like maybe everything to do with Linux
or something like that and they write
this is what the rules of conduct are
and then anybody they put it out in the
internet or whatever their system is you
know they're their group and anybody who
disagrees with it just gets jumped on is
some kind of horrible racist or bigoted
or something and gets shouted out of the
out of the conversation maybe even
driven out of their jobs James d'amour
at Google for asking a question outside
of the picture so you don't actually
need very many of these people because
what they are is busy buddies and
they're bureaucrats and they come out
and they they fill administrative roles
they show up to the faculty meetings you
don't go to they show up to the school
board meeting that you don't go to they
try to get on the school board that you
don't have time to be a part of and then
they just start administering their
worldview I mean I can't tell you how
many different meetings you know I've
seen clips of that are like social
justice in government or social justice
in the school board or social justice in
our you know faculty or whatever where
it'll be a meeting and there'll be like
nine people in the room and it turns out
it was an open invite that litter
it could have been hundreds of people
there and they're like nine and they all
agree with the social justice agenda and
then they vote and then they're like
well we all voted for it that's it you
know we had the meeting no concept of
quorum necessary to pass something or
any of this stuff or they just Jimmy the
rules so that they don't have to have
quorum quorum is a process of white
supremacy just like showing up on time
for the meeting or telling people what
time the meeting is all white supremacy
so it sounds like we're making that
up dude but we're literally not
literally not it's literally explicitly
in the literature setting a time and
expecting people to be on time is a
white supremacist notion yeah I saw a
video where there's a equity task force
that was set up for the entire state of
Washington at the legislative level that
was approved by the way it's temporarily
not funded during the the virus as it
turns out so there's some glimmer of
hope here but it was it was established
by law an equity task force and
literally in the meeting where they're
outlining that equity by definition by
their definition which they forwarded at
which they even they said this is the
definition of equity is disrupt and
dismantle the current system that's what
they put out as the frickin that you
know as their definition of equity but
in the meeting they have a guy go on and
on and on it's white supremacy coming
out of my mouth to talk about keeping to
a meeting agenda and trying to move
forward with checking things off in
boxes and getting things done and this
other lady goes on and on about how if
this was South Africa because that's a
government body to just appeal to in the
US if this was South Africa so-and-so
would come into the meeting whenever
they feel like and come in late and we
just stopped meeting and asked how the
weekend was and talked to him about
their kids for 20 30 minutes
slowly just hang out and catch him up to
whatever has been going on and then you
know maybe we'd get back to the meeting
and maybe we wouldn't and maybe we need
a little bit more of that kind of thing
going on because we got to get the white
supremacy out of the American system
that's like holy crap
that's that's a state board at the
highest level of the state of Washington
yeah that then went on to be approved is
like a fixture of their government this
stuff's really happening so many cases
where I me the famous thing with the
Evergreen State
with Brett Weinstein everybody thinks
and of course the day of absence thing
where he refused to stay off campus as a
white person on the day where they said
all white people aren't allowed to come
everybody thinks that was like the
precipitating event that caused the
activists to lose it on him but having
really dug into the story and watched it
it seems much more clear to me that what
brett weinstein did that pissed
everybody off the Evergreen so much the
activists I mean pissed him off so much
was he started going to every faculty
meeting all of them it was like he was
just there see and what would
occasionally speak up and say I don't
think that's a good idea or I can't
believe this is actually happening and
there was barely anybody in the room and
he would show up to every one of the
meetings which identified him as
somebody who was a real potential
problem who had to then be firebombed
you know I can't draw a direct causal
link but when I've seen the story it's
much more apparent to me that that's the
thing that bothered them about him then
that he had this letter of protest that
they could use as an instigating spark
it was that he was actually showing up
to all the stuff they wanted to all be
done in administrative leak Wyatt Lee
with his little resistance as possible
case after case after case of this where
people have told me you know well
there's this many people on our board
and typically basically nobody shows up
nobody wants to run for the board
everybody's busy but all these activists
have taken it over and then we have all
these policies and in some cases people
have pushed it back out by running just
one single campaign run by one person or
two or three people a small number of
people to try to get enough people to
run for the board who don't believe in
it to flip it over and then they can get
a majority voting against it in one
election it's not even like this long
drawn-out process because it's severe
minority of people who happen to show up
to everything are then implementing this
agenda at the administrative level and
then we're all stuck playing by those
rules and can't quite figure out why yes
really fascinating it's insidious - it
is insidious it is the it's - Leba
tyranny of the manure
and Evergreen has a special place in my
heart I went to Evergreen I went and
spoke there wow Mike poros professor
there he invited me
benjamin boyce actually hooked me up
with Mike and he invited me out there
and I went and spoke to his class he
started a class in response to what had
happened to Brett and it was called like
bridging the political divide or
something like that and he had me
between you know Jonathan hate came a
week after me and other people there the
week before and there I was presenting
my book and my views and I'll tell you
they were shell-shocked students were
still shell-shocked were in the class
and I'm lecturing and there's a ruckus
outside the door and there's all kinds
of furniture being moved around and it
turns out everyone first Lavery book is
like ooh and it turns out that there was
just like a class gathering to do group
projects in the hallway but the student
in the class I was at they thought that
they were being barricaded in the
classroom as a protest against me being
there like they all were like scared for
their lives because there were so
shell-shocked from what had happened on
campus there previously and I I wanted
to go to Evergreen I wanted to go right
into the into the snake pit and frankly
I actually had a wonderful time the
students that were in the class were
very engaged and I think that they had
seen some of the issues you know and
come to appreciate that they needed a
little bit of a wider perspective but it
is showing up that makes a lot of the
difference and people aren't showing up
I you know that you can go to the
diversity inclusion meetings about your
high school students and how they're
gonna be beaten over the head calling
them racist by a bunch of white parents
in a white neighborhood who moved to the
white neighborhood for the good school
quote unquote we then sit around and
tell their kids that their kids are
racist because there's not any black
kids in their school it's like the most
insane thing I've ever heard but it's it
is an example of how these small groups
of people make their way into the
bureaucracies and into positions of
power through activism and elections and
and into administration and then the big
one to me and
and this dovetails with the question I
had for you you constantly are
referencing something quote happened in
the early 2000s but I don't know that we
ever got to answer in the book and for
me my perspective and I wrote in my book
Democrats of the plural that it was the
2011 Dear Colleague letter out the title
nine Dear Colleague letter that
basically operationalized rape culture
and you know all the radical feminist
agenda and operationalized it and it
gave schools not only a headway but a
mandate to create these diversity equity
inclusion offices to create the biased
response teams all this for fear of
losing billions and billions of dollars
in federal funding so when I like have
been trying to find ground zero for why
like you know everything kind of went
haywire and you can see in the Google
searches for intersectionality and for
whatever and all like around 2011 2012
2010 it all just like it's nothing and
then right straight up to me I always
thought it was a Dear Colleague letter
title 9 do you hey what do you think
about that and be you know what were you
referencing but multiple times it was
like something changed in the early
2000s was was that this was something
else what do you think so there are a
few things so I'm gonna drop back to
1989 plus or minus a couple of years
first so it definitely is where you had
I'm just gonna touch on that
there are lots of veins happening there
but you had kimberlé crenshaw in
particular wrote her most famous paper
mapping the margins and she described at
the beginning what the margins are so is
gonna tie some threads together she says
that they're the margins of radical
feminism and the margins of black
liberation politics are black feminism
more or less so she's trying to map out
the margins of black liberation is to
male radical feminism is to white and
we're gonna go to the margins that
that's where black women exist and then
what's why we need intersectionality and
at the end of that paper so that's your
that's where the critical Theory comes
in and then at the end of that paper
that radical activism at the end of the
paper she says that the point of
intersectionality is that it's a
provisional concept that links
contemporary politics but which
means radical identity politics to
postmodern theory so something very very
radical happened there also in that
paper echoing bell hooks and other black
feminists she takes very much what this
and I didn't disability studies called
an identity first model of identity
politics which is that your identity
comes first your group identity comes
first so you're no longer a person who
happens to be black you are a black
person you are no longer a woman who
happens to be black or a person who
happens to be a black woman you are a
black woman and that identity for you're
no longer a person who happens to be
deaf or who happens not to be able to
hear you are now a deaf person and that
putting the identity first thing is a
subtle and linguistic change she says
that it carries a tremendous amount of
importance so this is where you started
to have the reification of identity
categories now so just point out that
the one of the last lines in her 1989
paper is white male power is implicit
and understood right that right that
that also gets carried forward and we're
going to talk about that still too but
that that is an essential element - that
is an essential element so then you have
another major event that happened that
was very quiet in the early 2000s I want
to say three 2003 that it's kind of like
on the scale of the Dear Colleague thing
which comes later but you know put it
put a bookmark around 1989-1990 because
that's where you know patricia Collins
wrote her book black feminist thought
which completely revolutionizes her
intersectionality becomes a new thread
that starts taking over everything and
the reason is because it turned these
these these radical you know political
projects that problematize everything
into problematizing each other which
just they had they're like this a
psychological blow out over the fact
that they were problematic themselves
and really like coltd them turn
themselves into a cult realizing their
own complicity and evil so that's like
psychologically what happened so 2003 or
so there's a Supreme Court case
Bollinger versus I can't remember but
the decision was essentially that the
question was about is affirmative action
constitutionally defensible against the
14th amendment and the answer came out
to be
but one of the dissenting opinions by
one of the justices was that if colleges
and I think it was specifically in
colleges if colleges want to advance
similar projects under the heading of
enhancing diversity or inclusion then
they or achieving equity than they are
welcome to do so but it can't be done as
affirmative action and so all of a
sudden diversity inclusion and equity
went from being something that was in
the theory but not something that was
massively focused on to becoming one of
the most important topics for all of
these activists scholars all at the same
time because you could have a diversity
equity and inclusion office that did the
same thing as in firm as affirmative
action even though you couldn't call it
affirmative action so you had this legal
work around following a dissenting
opinion from a justice God and so then
in like you said there's the Dear
Colleague letters very significant in
2011 but now I want to pause rather than
focusing on a single event to
crystallize anything I actually want to
flashback and realize that 2011 is 22
years after 1989 so you've had an entire
generation of academics a generation of
academics you know it takes about six to
eight years to get a PhD or five I
should say Ford is it four to eight
years to get a PhD for most people then
it takes about seven years to start
getting your real academic legs and get
to tenure so you're talking about that
generation of students who are starting
to get educated in their PhD programs
right when intersectionality started to
take off coming forward through the
early 2000s the shift was documented
very clearly by 2004 there are already
papers very clearly being written that
there's a new way of thinking about
everything to do with this and its
intersectionality and we're gonna go
with intersectionality now the shift has
occurred all the feminism all of this
you know so you have all these new PhDs
that are being minted coming out of the
the mid to late 90s into the early 2000s
who have all been educated on the idea
that this intersectional approach that
it fuses critical theory and postmodern
theory is the one true way to analyze
these topics and you have this thing
with the equity stuff all blossoming as
it was you know an a connected project
as a result starting in 2003 so I've had
me get to 2011
the phrase you might say is in the water
but the phrase we use in the book is
that it had to be it had just become
known knowns so the activists scholars
who are working by the around 2010 plus
or minus a few years just completely
accepted the idea that that the the what
we now call applied post-modernism or
critical social justice way of thinking
about the world is correct it has twenty
years plus of academic pedigree now
every scholar was working on these
topics as thinking about it in these
ways it's well-established literature
it's come to maturity and so now you
have this this new the change becomes
that people just start at the academic
level an activist level just start
taking it for granted that it's solid
and true it's a subtle change it's not
like some event happened of course the
Dear Colleague letter did operationalize
it no question it operationalized it
then the legal precedent for creating
diversity offices and such then spiraled
out of control very very quickly so that
was definitely a precipitating event but
it's almost like I don't know this is
the chemistry analogy so I'm going to
lose like almost everybody but it's like
the solution had already been chemically
changed and then the Dear Colleague
letter would be something like dropping
you know a little bit of metal or
something in there that causes the
precipitate to suddenly come together in
shock and sink to the bottom so it's
like the chemistry had already changed
in terms of what the academics and
activists were thinking and maybe
something like the Dear Colleague letter
or similar things I think black lives
matter was another big one in 2015 they
did this for critical race Theory
something comes along and causes all of
a sudden the solution to evolve a
precipitate that's you know if it was a
chemistry you'd have something that's
all like a clear solution the
chemistry's already happened you drop in
the the catalyst and all of a sudden the
whole thing turns cloudy white as the
precipitate forms and it obviously
changed into something different and
that something like the Dear Colleague
letter and the operation operation of
title nine certainly would have been a
huge one in terms of the university
architecture and creating these
diversity
diverse a Kratz as some people call them
this nice diversity offices and and the
bureaucratic infrastructure there and
you're right that there is an
undoubtable explosion and all of this
stuff that takes off like if you think
of it like the virus or whatever with
exponential growth it's slow and then
boom is out of a cannon that growth
happens somewhere not that far into 2012
so the precipitating event was probably
2010 11 um yeah so it's it's it's
everywhere
it's anywhere now it's everywhere it's a
corporate board it's in media it's in
everything it's all around us and as you
said it went from theory its application
to reification so it's godlike now it's
religious now it is a system that cannot
be questioned because the only tools
that we have to question it they have
ruled out they have limited the
available data to things that cannot be
falsified and now there is a whole
generation of academics with a
generation and decades worth of papers
to back them up
and they have now convinced a
significant a critical number of
bureaucrats and corporate leaders and
community leaders and whatnot that this
is the one and only truth and the only
way to go and one of the things that
we've sort of danced around and haven't
talked about too explicitly and that's
partially because I'm so sick and
 tired of talking about race and
gender and whatever I've raised in the
90s I'm a kid I'm a Gen X I was raised
to be colorblind it was all fine with me
judging on the merits of your behavior
and your character and so the fact that
I've been dragged into talking about
race and noise the out of me to no
end but it isn't it is important to
point out that kimberlé crenshaw
intersectionality all this there is the
fundamental bedrock assumption that
weight white male power is implicit and
understood
white male heterosis able-bodied
whatever me me right and not only that
I'm also tall and handsome so I've got
all that going for me to as the oppress
or and there's now a whole system of
justice
of government of academia of education
of community that has me in the
crosshairs as the problem and now I know
that the the
Archer will say that it's a system and
even if I don't participate and actively
do it I'm still a benefit of it etc etc
but these are distinctions without a
difference or whatever that phrase is
and it's nons phrase yeah and and and
for somebody like me you know iiii
investigate this stuff i write about it
i research it so i can see but if i'm a
regular dude and everywhere everything
all around me all the time is that I'm
the worst guy ever and everything that's
bad is because of me and it goes all the
way back to even the founding of America
in 1619 and all these things that we
know are just complete and total
horseshit we've already established that
our liberal system is the one that
brought freedom to the oppressed that
released the chains that ended slavery
that ended discrimination etc etc but
here we are today Hillary Clinton in
2016 becomes she's the I'm with her
she's the she's the feminist scion she's
leading the feminist armies to the
promised land to march on the capital
Joe Biden as vice president for Obama
was the one who believed in rape culture
he's the one he was the number one akka
activists in the bureaucracy behind the
title 9 2011 DCO which we've talked
about the Democratic Party has in its
coalition and its umbrella these these
people they're all exclusively Democrats
they have increasing amount of power
politically speaking what is a guy like
me to do James how do I move forward
politically in this world what do we do
to fight back against this and let's
remember please that the theorists the
critical folks they are on war footing
this is a war for them it is a moral
crusade for them we are for they are
fighting a fourth generation war against
these concepts and that operates on a
moral level on a values level and it
doesn't have to be on a military
battlefield for it to take place it's
happening all around us at all times
what is somebody you know we'd use the
word classical liberal you know a guy
like me that thinks gay people can get
married and smoke weed but don't mess
with me you
what what is a guy like me do James
comma what happens if we don't do
anything extrapolate this out a number
of years and then ask yourself and and I
want to explore this and a please don't
take this the wrong way people out there
in the world but is is more liberalism
they answer to a war that's being fought
on a liberal grounds so there's a lot
there sir are like to start digging into
these questions because this is this
that's the hour and 40 minutes that
we've got here that was the set up for
this harvest stuff man this is this is
what we need to worry about this is this
is the future this is what we need to do
but the critical into your thinking to
your philosophic work what what what do
we do at this point actually the mission
that I set out for new discourses as far
as its engagement with critical social
justice and critical theories in general
was originally articulated as expose
explain and articulate alternatives I
don't actually think despite it the fact
that it's worked into everything that
it's very very much wormed its way into
a lot of the Democratic Party
establishment and so on I don't actually
think that a lot of it's terribly
popular now there are a lot of people
who sympathize with it obviously and
until your point by the way that you
said there's adding to the difficulty
that you said that you know Crenshaw
points out the white male power is at
the center of all of this and that makes
it so that there's no options apparently
on the table because no matter what you
do to defend yourself it will just be
claimed that you're asserting your white
male power which is the specific thing
that needs to be taken down so therefore
you're just actually reasserting the
problem no matter how reasonable or fair
or civil or anything else you're being
so you we are in a particular bind and I
am trying to figure this out so one
thing that actually has to happen is
that it needs to be exposed that this is
happening I don't know why people don't
believe it's happening it's actually
driving me crazy it's probably the real
reason my eyelid is fluttering rather
than exposure to the theory is it
I get gas lit all the time like people
are like this isn't really happening
it's not really important it doesn't
really matter and it's like are you how
do you what I can't can't understand
that cognitive dissonance at all
I would rather everybody understand it
then I don't have to read this crap
anymore so we have to expose that it's
actually happening yes it's taking over
state governments yes it's happening in
Congress yes it's happening in
corporations and pretty much any
corporation big enough to make payroll
on a consistent basis probably as a
diversity initiative yes it's happening
in our culture yes is happening here and
there and so we have to be able to
expose that yeah this is here this is
there this is everywhere this is
actually what the thing is to do that
you have to be able to explain like we
have done for the last hour 40 where
we've just explained what it is we've
explained how it thinks we've explained
yeah really this is a they're playing a
different game they are at war to
overthrow our system and replace it with
their own system and so you have to be
able to you have to be able to explain
the way they think that's why I'm
writing that encyclopedia on new
discourses you have to understand how
they think and that this is a different
game that they're using the words
differently you have to understand it
and be able to explain it to people who
are like well frankly sympathetic to it
they're like well they're trying to talk
about the right goals they kind of have
a point you have to be able to explain
to them in detail that this is not what
you think it is that the I've phrased it
before in a public talk that the picture
on the box doesn't match its contents
it's like going and buying a cuddly
little mug why that's what you think
you're getting and it turns into
gremlins at night no it is really and it
is it is gremlins um it's the
ideological equivalent of grammar of
gremlins and the third thing is you have
to give them an alternative you can't
just say oh well this sucks and leave it
at that you have to give them an
alternative and I do think actually that
more liberalism but liberalism properly
articulated is what it takes the podcast
is just recording before I talk to you
you know just for myself as a solo one I
was actually talking about for example
just the principle of charity they make
an argument and I get this all the time
and people are like you can't dunk on
that they're just saying this totally
reasonable thing
and it's like it actually has a denial
of objective truth buried right it like
name buried like the first paragraph it
is not just that so you have to be
charitable to their argument a little
bit but every single time you have to
blow up their activist agenda and what I
actually advocated for in that is that
we have to see I don't know if you've
heard of the motte-and-bailey
construction where the Mott is the super
defensible thing and then the Bailey is
the real activist agenda that makes no
sense
so when they get criticized they hide in
the defensible thing oh we just want a
fairer society in a second you stop
looking it's like they're remaking
 Congress and and in terms of you
know their agenda what I said is we have
to steal their MOT we have to steal
their MOT we have to be able to convince
people who are sympathetic to it not
only that what they're doing doesn't
matter is gremlins inside of a box with
a Mogwai on the outside of it we have to
also be able to convince people that the
thing that they think that they're doing
the minority's they claim to be standing
up for uniquely and the only people are
really sending it for him that those
people are not being spoken for they're
being spoken over I talked to I you
can't even say stuff like this anywhere
it's hilarious I have black friends I
talk to my black friends today they
don't like woke they hate it they you
know they can go right down the line of
the lived experience yeah I have those
experiences yeah this is what it's like
this is how it is that's what it just
sucks and you know there's a gay hell
yeah I experienced racism you know the
whole thing they can go through the
whole thing and then at the end of the
day they hate the woke thing and what
they say is it's trade they've just had
to trade one set of masters the white
supremacists for another who tell them
how they have to think cuz they have to
think like black critical theorists or
else are not authentic black people they
even took Kanye put on a make America
great again hat and they said he's not
black anymore I mean at some point I
hate the phrase but at some point wake
up you know it's like something's so we
have to steal frankly they're victims
they operate by appealing to all these
poor victimized people a huge proportion
of which do not identify as victimized
at all and don't want to wallow in
victimhood so those people I've seen
this lesbian woman
Twitter that's kind of like blowing up
lately who's like they don't speak for
me yeah
they don't speak for me that everybody
that doesn't agree with it should be
saying that we should be turning away
from victimhood we should be encouraging
resilience and strength and strength of
character and overcoming difficulty it's
stepping away from this but we have to
steal their MOT in their argument too
you want a fairer society your society
and I'm perfectly confident to say this
with utter conviction the society that
you people critical social justice
people are advocating for is not a
fairer society we can give you a fairer
society we're gonna do it the right way
we're not going to follow this
that's patently unfair and so we have to
be willing to very very clearly steal
their amat is a castle right we have to
take their castle away from them we're
not just gonna like we're not going to
knock down their castle we're going to
take it it's going to make it our castle
and no we're gonna give you a fair
society we're gonna show you a fair
looks like fair looks like equality
equality of opportunity if you want to
talk about it if we can find that
there's actual discrimination we'll talk
about equity in response to actual
discrimination you want to talk about
something that is genuinely unfair like
being born maybe with no legs you know
what we'll give you a handicap parking
space we're already down with some
equity we already get it right but we're
not going to do it in some
manner that sees people as tokens of
identity groups that have some unique
experience according to some vague
systems of power that stopped being the
norm in 1950 we absolutely have to
reassert that the liberal process like
you said earlier the liberal process
liberal feminism in second wave the
liberal gay rights movement gay pride
the civil rights movements for
minorities Martin Luther King and all of
this that was all liberalism Martin
Luther King spoke before post-modernism
happened okay so the Civil Rights Act
was signed before post-modernism even
happened
so it wasn't postmodern that
got those things it absolutely was not
postmodern they got those
things so we're going to step away from
the post-modernism we're gonna go back
to what actually worked and you know
what if we have to learn the lesson from
post-modernism like you said earlier
then maybe we need to be a little bit
more
about how certain we are in our
narratives and we need to listen to
other narratives a little bit more or
when people are making claims we maybe
should listen a little better I'm
willing to do that but you know what
we're not going to live in a society
that's dictated by people who think that
the way that you make things more fares
by being very intentionally unfair to
people that they are claiming or being
unfair who are doing everything they can
not to be yes that is very well-said
summation of the problem folks like the
Claremont Institute they see the same
thing they claim that this is an
existential risk to Western society and
Western civilization
it sounds like an outrageous thing to
say just like it sounded like an
outrageous thing for me to say in 2011
or 12 that there was a war on
masculinity but if anything that's it
blows my mind that it's actually
confirmed by the APA at this
medicator that there literally is a war
on masculinity and it makes perfect
sense because it fits in the grander
picture which is white male oppression
the source of male power is masculine
energy and masculine power so we have to
take away the masculine power masculine
energy and that's how one way that we're
gonna solve this power of oppression so
the reason I bring this up because it's
not just this is not just a philosophy
about this it's not just about oh we
want to get more people some jobs over
here this is a completely different way
of viewing the world a completely
different way of viewing truth a
completely different way of viewing
justice
not only that it is systematically
teaching people to be mentally unhealthy
you and I both cite Jonathan hates
coddling American mind I remember a 2015
essay came out in the Atlantic
blew my mind right it was massive
seminal if there ever was a proper use
of that word and in there they very
clearly elucidate how idea is a victim
victim culture victimology these sources
of oppression all this stuff leads to
distorted cognition and mental and
mental health it's the actual opposite
of cognitive behavioral therapy which is
something that we focus on in a liminal
order FYI and so what we're doing is
we've destroying truth destroying
justice and making people mentally
unwell on top of all the other
going on and so what I would suggest to
you is your you're on the Vanguard or
you with us and with guys from the from
the old days and the darkest corners of
the internet who sounded like a bunch of
conspiracy theorists but now are being
vindicated every single day which gives
me no pleasure but it a little bit on
the vanguard and and but we're like
 thirty years late to this battle
dude and and and they have the high
ground they have all the supplies they
have all the tools they have the
infrastructure they have moral
high-ground they have values and support
they have the government and and they
and they have changed the rules of the
game so that nothing that we're none of
the tools that we have will be effective
to anyone that's part of that religion
right science
reason liberal thinking fact whatever
irrational thought logic all those tools
totally discarded and so they have drawn
us in I've been watching a lot of
Vikings and last Kingdom they've drawn
us in to fighting the battle in the
terrain that suits them using the tools
that suits them at a time at which it
suits them and so I'm wondering yes it's
essential to define what they're doing
it's essential to write and to educate
and to tear it apart but is that gonna
be enough how long will that take
what's gonna happen in the meantime dude
because you're so you're still getting
shot in the eye with arrows you said
earlier you know there's a lot were a
long long way away from everyday people
seeing some something in the media about
oppression or diversity and thinking
that is in just and right it's wrong
we're like 20 years away from that
like what's gonna happen in the meantime
what do we what we need to do more I
agree and so we actually touched on it
earlier what how are they implementing
their stuff right there they're showing
up and we're not do you want to go be on
another committee I don't nobody wants
to be on a frickin committee no wants to
show up to frickin meetings like every
other Thursday at 7 o'clock and some you
know government building
or whatever the T but what has to start
happening as people have to show up and
you can't if you can only show up as an
individual fine show up as an individual
but what's actually got to happen and
that's why the education part is so
important is you we what this is
organized action you're up against a
tank and if you go in all your weapons
are useless right it's got all this like
ideological armor on it and if you show
up throwing rocks at it it's not going
to do anything but you've actually got
to be able to do is you've got to start
talking to other people we've all not
only knew personally but yeah you
personally to me proviso we we have to
start organizing and showing up to
school board meetings in numbers
comparable or larger than the number of
activists who are showing up which are
actually not that many so it's not that
hard like I said I was the one example I
know of for sure where this was
successfully pushed back it was one
stroke they had to get 22 people to show
up that was it 22 people to show up for
something and it was able to push it
back 22 isn't that many so you need
people what they did to do it and this
is I think the model they put out a
flyer campaign among the population of
people that they were trying you know
the professional organization they're
reaching which is lawyers in this case
the those Flyers were just educational
enough to explain why it matters and how
this is actually a diversion from the
normal proceedings the liberal
proceedings and I say liberal by the way
I don't mean left-wing that's an
Americanism that's screwed up I mean
liberal in the sense that's like it can
be the classical liberals who are quite
libertarian but tend to be slightly
right-wing if you were to map out their
whole picture all the way through
progressive liberals who are very much
New Deal and all of this but they're
still they still want to play by the
rules of engagement it's the people who
agree on the rules of engagement that
have built society Western civilization
if you will that those are the ones that
we actually are trying to unite whether
they're left right or center what the
what these Flyers did anyway though were
to show that how it diverged from
liberal principles why it was important
to show up and ask for people to
volunteer
have a cogent argument you know at least
superficial level and to show up so it
was a small educational campaign tacked
on to a here's you know with you if you
learned this here's the organized thing
to do show up and it only took 22 people
and then they were able to take one of
these freaking diversity requirements
where everybody has to pledge their
fealty to diversity in writing which is
going to be a political litmus test for
hiring and later firing of course and
they were able to get that pushed out of
the system that wasn't it's no longer
considered okay and so as a matter of
showing up in voting the stuff out from
what I understand the there was a
similar uprising a decade or two ago in
some part of the rather conservative
Church that did the same thing they just
got conservative leaders together they
ran a political campaign enough to get
enough people who knew roughly what they
were talking about to show up at the
same time and started taking positions
of leadership and pushing it out so you
have to realize that there are other
people out there who think like you do
you should start trying to get in touch
with them I hate this whole idea that
there needs to be a movement around this
and maybe there doesn't but there does
need to be educated organized action the
people willing to go show up and say
something and and and take on the
responsibilities of you know leadership
or whatever it is getting on the school
board or becoming you know somehow
connected to its voting apparatus or
whatever it is so that this can show up
to those parent-teacher conference
meetings find out what it is that the
school is recommending your teachers
read like right now in the pandemic a
lot of teachers are off you know at home
teaching from home or maybe not even
teaching and I would got in contact with
some that we're talking to me that we're
like you should see the reading list
part of our job for professional
development has been these online book
clubs and it's like white fragility it's
like Patricia Collins it's like Derald
wing sue it's all these theorists it's
like the big-time craziest ones is what
they're being required to read for
professional leadership their
professional development so somebody
made that decision but the fundamental
truth is every decision that's being
made can be made in some other way if
people actually show up and start trying
to do the thing the only part of what
you said before that I'll push back on
I understand that you mean in terms of
much of the popular consciousness
because when in doubt go with social
justice and all of this that they don't
hold the moral high ground and I think
we absolutely I hear very little of that
spoken clearly and I think it's very
important that people are willing to say
that and why it's true that they don't
speak the moral high-ground that I mean
simple things we all learned as kids and
one raw you know two wrongs don't make a
right so if you have a situation where
you know there has been inequality the
way to make up for that is not by
forcing more inequality in a different
direction it's to make equality and to
free that's where we have to steal that
from them I think that's a just of
central importance but organized action
is the practical thing yeah well you
know what I meant by the moral
high-ground was that that's their claim
right their claims that they have the
moral high ground I clearly feel like I
owe her ground there's no
question about that an organized action
so this is James I really appreciate
taking the time to talk to me because
you have really put into crystallized
academic historic context all all but a
vast majority of the reasons why I
started my organization called the limo
order we are we have we've acknowledged
that we're in a period of liminality
there's change happening all around us
we're seeking to bring order to it we're
an order of men so it's a fraternity and
we have identified these problems and
we've identified that we would like to
do something about it and we have not
taken a political activist route what
we've decided to do is to form a
community that can put down dark deep
roots in the dark away from social media
and build families and communities that
appreciate the values that you and I
have spoken about and we both are
champions of and and this is what we do
and we and we focus on first building
our physical health our mental and
spiritual health and we educate
ourselves and then we form a community
around this like minded values and these
shared values and then we professionally
Network from there and we are from
social network as well too so the height
and and like a mutual aid society as
well so the whole idea is that we need
to do something to fight back against
the theorists the interest
sexuality folks the the multiculturalist
says Clermont calls it because something
must be done right there's no status quo
is a deterioration of Western
civilization it sounds so insane to say
that because it's that that's the people
would have pointed at you and laughed in
2012 and said you're just some nutso
internet freak but but it's actually
true
it's actually true it's actually
happening you have you have been working
on this you've clearly this you're this
book cynical theories is the best source
single collection of crystallizing all
these thoughts putting them in order
tying all making all the connections
showing the coherence even when it lacks
coherence their perceived coherence this
is going to be a very powerful bedrock
piece of this future canon that we have
to build in order to create literature
that will battle the existing literature
so like there has to be there's on the
ground action there's fighting back
against people like and Tifa and
whatever not publicly but just through
victory of living well as it were and
then but there's there's a political
activism but there's this essential
thing what you're doing here is well in
in the academy is there has to be a
countervailing academic literature there
and and and you know it's funny it's
like it's like all of a sudden the
entire existing box exists anymore that
got us to this point because now that
now it has to be something that's in
response right it can't just be Oh read
your you know Greek you know a political
philosophy no it's now we have to
actually synthesize it for today in
response to all these issues that you've
brought up so there's there's a certain
personal satisfaction I'm getting from
speaking to you because you're as far as
I understand you're not a trump
supporter you weren't a Republican you
come to this reluctantly I feel very
similar in
that I never wanted to to this battle
but like it came to me so now I'm
fighting back and I appreciate the
professionalism and the high level of
academic work that you put into your
book it's something I'm gonna recommend
to to absolutely everybody because I'm
innocent it's my mom because like you
know she thinks you're crazy talking
about this but no it's actually
real it's actually happening and there's
actually things that we need to do to
make changes so I'm gonna wrap this up I
know we both have time constraints here
but I want to ask you a question
where do you put this in terms of risk
assessment for our culture Eric
Weinstein very famous about this he's
like he identifies all these issues
identifies the same problems it is upset
about 99% of the same things I'm upset
about but he cannot pull the trigger on
Trump because he has a different risk
portfolio allocated to the various risk
factors that Trump would bring or brings
and and yet to me and he has said it and
you have said it it's out there this is
an existential risk to our Western Way
of life how can that not be the single
number one political priority and that
this is why I voted for Trump like all
the other in my book I'm like yeah
he's boorish he's this he's that
sometimes it's distasteful it's hard to
swallow defending him sucks sometimes
but like he is the ad that he's the
counter advocate to this and yet
also voting you can't vote for Biden you
can't vote for Hillary you can't vote
for the Democrats to have this in their
coalition because they are highly
leveraged into their coalition these
people and so if you're gonna quote do
something about on a political level I
don't see any other choice but for
voting for the candidate opposite of
these of these candidates and in this
case it was Trump what are you gonna do
and and I don't mean this flippantly I
mean it's very seriously like how we're
in your risk analysis of the world is
this is this truly existential risk or
is it more dangerous to have the nuclear
codes in the hands of Donald Trump
you know etc etc like this is the this
is the discussion that needs to happen
this is a difficult one so the truth is
that I don't actually see
Trump as distinct from these people I
see em as a is an integral dance partner
so the risk assessment for me has to
take that into account I don't think we
have good options right now I don't
think we have any had like any good
options so how how big of a risk
to Western civilization is this I don't
know it's big it's also insane so it has
every chance of burning itself out but
on the other hand it's institutionalized
itself very well on the other other hand
culture seems to be turning away from it
so it's losing its a lot of its grass
root although that's now up in the air
because of the pandemic leads people to
go more all pandemics lead people to
become more extreme and conspiratorial
and they're thinking and all of this and
so that's not good obviously they're
pushing equity health equity in
particular very very hard as a result of
the the corona pandemic since you broke
the seal I can say that word so the risk
assessment for me I mean it's grim but I
actually don't think we have I can't
even tell you I'm not a fan of voting
outside of the major parties because I
think it's typically a vote for you know
whichever candidate you're stealing vote
or the opposite of whatever candidate
you're stealing votes from that would
have voted that way
yes and I don't know that he's the right
guy he's certainly not my cup of tea in
a lot of regards but the even the fact
that Justin Amash recently came forward
and I'm not advocating for him by any
means but that he came forward and said
the he's thinking of an exploratory run
and hopefully can get the Libertarian
Party nomination or some other
nomination or something like this it's
like all of my hope lies outside of the
main basket
I want what ultimately has to happen
even if it takes another four-year cycle
regardless of who gets elected in
November and it does matter but I'm not
gonna say that it's like necessarily
life or death there needs to be
coalition building for a proper proper
candidate
that maybe at the Democratic Party can't
put it forward
maybe the Republican Party can't put it
forward maybe the Libertarian Party
Kenner cannot put it forward maybe some
other party has to come into existence I
mean the Whigs were a thing at one point
and they don't exist anymore so
political parties do come and go it does
happen we need to and again when I say
liberal I mean broadly from classical
through traditional to progressive so
we're talking left right and center but
people who adhere to the project of
modernity need their own political
representation all of these freaking
politically homeless people who are like
the Democratic Party left me or the left
left me or the right left me the
Republicans left me there's all these
politically homeless people all over the
map they need to start rallying around a
single thing and as soon as possible
somebody that's outside of that normal
I'm not an anti-establishment guy in
general but I see that both side events
funny because I see both sides that are
the establishment have taken on
anti-establishment ISM and so what we
actually need is somebody who can
articulate and argue on behalf of a
healthy establishment which nobody's
properly doing and which pretty much
everybody wants and maybe it's just
cinema I don't have a lot of hope for it
maybe it is maybe it isn't
but because I see Trump as integrally
wrapped up in the same problem that
these things are literally part of the
same orbit he's fighting on one side
it's like the proud boys versus anti
fights like I can't pick either one of
them they're like system of assholes
there is but I want you to please I'm
asking you to make space in your
analysis for somebody like me I did not
want any of this I did not have any I
have no animosity towards other people I
literally dedicated my life to bringing
out better educational outcomes for
minority kids in the district Columbia
right but yet I Here I am with the
crosshairs on me the arrows in my back
and if I vote for a Democrat I'm gonna
get more that and if I voted for
Donald Trump maybe I get a little bit
less you know what I definitely got I
got
reexamination of the 2011 Dear Colleague
letter that to me was very important
sure um but like so to say that he's not
fighting back I got pushed back about on
that a little bit but I do see the way
that he indulges it as a way to rally
votes and such but there there is some
element of counterbalancing this that is
important and there's no way that a guy
like me voted for obama proudly okay
these awards gave rights all the stuff
there's no way that i can support a
coalition that has any of these
people in it who think i am the devil
and the source of all evil in the world
and so it's it's it's it's a very tough
spot to be in but until there's another
alternative i have to actively vote
against the person or vote for the
person who i think is most likely to
defeat them and donald trump right now
is that guy and not directed at you but
i do feel like there's a lot of people
out there that are free riding on people
like me who don't want to see the
democrats in power who don't want to see
the critical theory stuff advanced but
are unwilling to take the the dirty
sewer water that comes along with
actually fighting that battle right now
and picking unsavory unsavory allies and
people are free riding off of people
like me that are willing to put my name
on it publicly and to get out there and
advocate what i see is like an
intellectual wing of this rightist
movement that is definitely in direct
opposition to everything that you've
outlined in your book i'm a foot soldier
on the ground fighting the war that
you've outlined on the terms that you've
outlined for the reasons why you've
outlined and i need to find ways to
rally people in support of that as well
and hopefully these conversations will
do that I sincerely appreciate all of
your time and energy that you put into
this James thank thank you for taking
the time to talk to me thank you for
writing this book is going to be very
important it's something you can just
 hand to people and just be like
shut up read this and then get back to
me we can't have any conversations until
you read this book it is called
cynical theories co-authored with Helen
pluck rose both James and Helen are very
active on Twitter if you guys if you
don't know get out there I love James's
persona out there
he's very fun and aggressive I enjoy it
very much you take a hell of a lot of
 almost as much as me and you
let it roll off your back and that's
very admirable trait find James at
conceptual James on Twitter
his website is new discourses calm where
he's outlining all the things we've
talked about creating an encyclopedia a
glossary defining things publishing new
works in an effort to counteract all
this and get the book guys James thank
you so much I really appreciate it
there's anything you'd like to say in
path and in closing here I'll give you
the floor for the last couple of minutes
No thank you pretty well god I mean I'm
like I said I'm very very concerned
about the place that we're in now I
think we're in a we're in a liminal
situation as you said we're also in a
risky situation and what I appreciate
you wanting to throw that book in as
many people's hands as possible because
I think it is absolutely key that people
understand fundamentally that we're
facing a game-changing situation and I
don't think that the end of the rainbow
is liberation and more fairness and more
equality but rather a at best something
that just can't hold itself together and
falls apart like a like a shambling
jalopy of a car with pieces falling off
of it and at worst its it's a it's a
boot so it's not good um well thank you
very much yeah I appreciate it and guys
get the book read it give it to
everybody that you know put it on your
bookshelf reference it it is truly the
definitive book that has summarized all
these threads and currents that have
bubbled up since 2010 and 12 well
actually you going way back but in
popular culture online culture of things
that have been bubbling up since 2010
and 12 and James again thank you so much
guys if you're interested come down
check out the liminal order that's a
liminal - order calm or we address these
issues and how to thrive in these
circumstances and what to do about it
how to support your family and your
community and hopefully in turn your
nation get my book Democrats a
deplorable which takes all these issues
that you've talked about James but tells
them through personal narrative and
using surveys that I did with people
from all across the country who
experience it on the ground I definitely
didn't do the philosophical explanations
as well as you did but I think people
can start to see the general themes
check it out Democrats a deplorable and
anyway thank you very much everybody
thank you James I look forward to
talking to you again sir have a great
day
you too Thanks
[Music]
you