hey guys this is episode number 47 of
the future thinkers podcast today we're
interviewing Jourdan Greenhalgh who's a
serial entrepreneur technologist and
complex systems thinker
he's also the CEO of neuro hacker
collective in this two-part episode
we're going to talk about whether we're
going into a global phase shift or a
collapse we're also going to talk about
the concept of sense making and
collective intelligence if you liked our
episode with Daniel 'shmock Tim burger
you'll probably like this one too
because they're actually partners in
neuro hacker to get the show notes books
mentions etc from this episode you can
go to future thinkers org slash 47 we've
mentioned qualia a few times in previous
episodes it's a smart drug stack from
neuro hacker collective which has been
getting increasingly popular in the
recent year if you'd like to try it for
yourself you can go to future thinkers
org slash brain hack all one word and
use the code future to get 10% off your
purchase so we've been really busy in
the last couple months we're working on
a new blockchain project of our own
actually called Co Syndicate it's a
platform for crypto investors for
evaluating growing and co-investing in
AI cos and seed stage blockchain
startups this year there have been many
icos and if you're an investor it can be
difficult to keep up and know which ones
are worth your time and investment so co
syndicate is meant to solve that problem
by finding and screening out the best
projects the platform will have three
types of users the investors the
blockchain startups and the service
providers in the blockchain space like
developers legal professionals
researchers and PR and media people the
idea is to bring everyone together to
help increase the success rate of ICS
and their ROI for everyone involved
if you want to check it out go to Co
syndicate IO will be doing some
traveling in the next couple months
we're gonna be in Abood bali from now
until january 3rd then we'll be in
Bangkok Chiang Mai and Saigon sometime
in January and February and then
possibly Indian February and March
message us if you want to meet up it's
always fun for us meeting our listeners
last but not least we want to thank our
recent patrons ray and Jorn ok let's get
into the show
welcome to future thinkers org a podcast
about the evolution of technology
society and consciousness I'm Mike
Gilliland and I'm UV Ivanova to get
notified of new podcasts and videos go
to future thinkers org and subscribe to
our mailing list you can also find us on
iTunes stitcher and youtube if you like
what we do and you want to help us make
more podcasts and videos give us a like
or review share it with your friends and
consider becoming a patron go to
patreon.com/crashcourse inori org slash
bap last but not least if you want to
get access to more content hidden
episodes or if you just want to chat
with us in previous guests then check
out our community at community future
thinkers org so why don't we just start
over again just give us a brief
introduction of yourself and what you're
doing I work on a whole bunch of
different kinds of projects and I think
this is going to become increasingly the
case I have skill sets in things like
strategy ranging across the board this
is a strategy military strategy
technology strategy etc I have skill
sets in different kinds of science and
particularly the edge of where science
hits technology and where technology
hits human society so the way that
technologies change cultural evolution
and I actually spent a good 15 years in
the kind of pragmatic world with
building technology companies so I also
have expertise in pragmatics and when
you where the rubber hits the road where
people can and can't do things and so
those skill sets then link up into kind
of the roles that I play in different
projects but my essential rule is we're
in a situation that is extremely
challenging it's for all the marbles
it's happening much more rapidly than we
have any ability to really deal with and
so everybody has to be as fully deployed
as they can be and so of course feeding
my dog food I'm is fully deployed as I
can be and so I touched as many projects
as are necessary and effective for me to
be involved in using and giving those
skill sets to the degree which I can
I'm currently spending a substantial
amount of time in the third wave of
watching which is showing up as directly
addressed in the problems of
decentralized governance which will
probably expand on I'm spending a lot of
time in meta strategic formulations of
what are the different paths of where
the world is going to go and what are
the risks that need to be taken into
account and addressed in the immediate
term and the midterm in the long term
and in try to work with people to
formulate what are the viable paths that
we can take so think of that as a kind
of very high theoretical level but then
what I bring is what's actually
practically doable given the theoretical
requirements
you could categorize that is something
called deep code there's a whole group
of people who are arranged around the
deep code problems most recently I just
got pulled into a project to try to
figure out how to actually actualize the
notion of wisdom in our emerging society
because a lot of the problems that we're
dealing with there problems of a
gigantic wisdom deficit that exists in
our contemporary civilization and
learning how to actually take wisdom
from being something that we gesture at
to be solutions actually practically
applied in our daily lives continuously
is a project that I'm just getting
involved in I can go on forever by the
way the list is probably several hundred
interesting so if you look into the next
five to ten years what do you think are
some of the biggest problems that we're
facing as a species on the planet
okay so I'll actually categorize it in
three distinct buckets the first bucket
is the fact that we are we're very
powerful as a species and not discipline
that we're careful enough and so the
consequences of our actions can no
longer be ignored as those consequences
are coming back to get us so we're gonna
be looking at all of the many many many
it's not one or two it's hundreds of
thousands of distinct consequences of
say for example the amount of
concentrated chemistry hormones and
heavy metals that we introduce into our
ecosystem the impact that has on the
broader ecosystem than impact it has
back on us the impact we have on our
ontological environment by shifting the
amount of time that we spend indoors
versus outdoors the effect that it has
on us obviously the various effects we
have on the constitution of our
atmosphere the impacts we have on the
constitution of our oceans the attacks
that we have in the Constitution of our
soil are those are all one gigantic
bucket
and the point is we have too much power
we have too little wisdom and that
asymmetry is going to start in an
accelerating fashion it's biting us in
the ass
second has to do with our relationship
to ourselves as humans so again for all
of human history up until the 1940s we
could kind of get away with being dicks
and being pretty poor managing ourselves
on each other and that's no longer the
case that the the whole set of human
management techniques the forms of
government and peacemaking that we have
had are inadequate to the challenge and
we're going to have to get extremely
good it should be quickly at actually
resolving conflict really truly deeply
healing the underlying theme that causes
the conflict and getting every discrete
human being into a position of what we
call sovereignty which I can talk about
if you'd like but basically learning how
to relate to humanity and then the third
category is our relationship to our own
tools and technologies and of course
that third category impacts the first
two as well
but whether this has to do with a say
for example the notion of how we empower
machines like Facebook to then come back
and manipulate our limbic system which
then makes us incapable of actually
behaving well in the world or we empower
things like say energy systems like
nuclear reactors which generate risks
that we don't really understand how to
contemplate or you know continue on it's
on the blank phones that have dopamine
jacking systems that decrease our
capacity to be adapted to the
environment all three of those are
linked but they're all three distinct
and the point is that they're they're
Union the connection between them
generates the tone threshold that we
have to get through if we can't handle
the total complexity of all three of
those simultaneously then it literally
does lead to a collapse event so you
talked a lot about sense making and how
the complexity in the world is
increasing faster than we can cope with
it how can we mitigate that what can we
do about it okay so this is actually an
extremely hard question so I'm gonna go
ahead and just throw it right down the
middle the way that we had adapt to
respond to our world actually goes
through phases of punctuated
equilibrium and so at some point in the
past I don't know when but let's call it
at least 500 years ago and probably
longer probably even as late as the
beginning of the Iron Age human beings
began to develop a neuro cognitive
psychological framework for responding
to reality a reality to changed at a
certain pace I'm going to call this the
paradigmatic mind so the paradigmatic
mind is in mind that creates a model of
reality creates identities creates
relationships
it creates heuristics and it uses that
to be able to have high-quality models
for how to respond to reality under most
circumstances so your job as a
developing human under the paradigmatic
mind is to build a paradigm learn how to
run that paradigm and then as you become
an adult run it and when the world is
changing at a slow enough pace this
works pretty well you know how to farm
you have a bunch of rituals on how to
relate to society into the world there's
a bunch of basic social contracts that
everybody implicitly accepts and there's
socially constructed set of paradigms is
adequate to the problems you're facing
and then what ends up happening is that
on some periodic basis maybe once or
twice during your life or two or three
times during a century there might be a
major paradigm shift where a big chunk
of the paradigm system doesn't work it
collapses it feels like a big social
crisis the society kind of Rico here's
around some new model and then you glue
that on to the paradigm that you move
forward and over the past thousand years
or so civilization is preceded by a
process of building and modifying
paradigms through this crisis Rico here
it's approach and that's been an
adaptive enough capacity to enable us to
get where we are which is pretty pretty
impressive the problem is is that when
the pace of change is faster than the
ability of our paradigm mind
to adapt paradigms you're going through
paradigm collapses too frequently to
ever cohere and you actually end up in a
situation of complete confusion you
literally can't make sense of your
environment anymore because the thing
that you use to make sense is know you
can't trust it because you expect that
it's gonna be breaking or collapsing in
unpredictable ways to often and that's
it that's actually a pretty good affair
Matthew what's going on in the world
right now so many things are happening
appear to be surprises that and this is
because the environment is changing
faster than the entire architecture of
the paradigmatic mind can adapt to the
environment so what that means is we
actually have to build an entirely
different model of ecology entire
different model of modeling reality and
which is just a new mind now this new
mind is going to have a very different
relationship to other humans or other
sentience and a very different
relationship to reality which I think a
lot of us certainly love the younger
generations I think intuitively get a
sense for it because it's going to be
intrinsically collective intelligence
and by that I mean there won't be a
strong sense of individuals having any
degree of responsibility really
understanding the world
there won't be an idea that I as an
individual really ever even try to
believe that I understand the world very
much my responsibility is to maintain a
really high-quality sense of how clearly
I am proceeding reality so this has to
do with this concept of sovereignty
which I'll explicate in a moment I think
it'll be important to this conversation
and then how effectively I can share
that perspective with truth and clarity
out into some kind of collective space
and some shared space of insight and
then will end up happening is is that
we'll be constantly coherent groups of
sentience and by sentence I mean both
humans and increasingly capable machines
when and as if needed around particular
problem domains sharing our distinct
perspectives beginning to form an actual
collective intelligence in the
particular occasion which collective
intelligence is adequate to the scope of
the real space whatever it might be and
then once that is resolved we will then
artifact that as effectively as possible
and then we'll decohere so you know the
three of us might gather will then
figure out how to come into coherence by
establishing various protocols for
communication and understanding how each
of us shares our perspective until we've
got enough clarity that then we're
really effectively have coherent to
collective intelligence
and then that thing has a certain
capacity which is vastly more than any
of the three of us as individuals but
then what will happen is is that will
decohere I'll go away I'll go do
something else and getting extremely
good at flowing between these coherences
and D coherences at orienting yourself
towards the place where your energy and
perspective is the most needful now and
in entering into coherence quickly and
fluidly with potentially extremely
heterogeneous sentience is going to be
in nature with this new mind looks like
yeah
so would you like me to go further on
that or do more on sovereignty yeah I'd
love to hear more on that but I'd like
to know if you have any examples of
groups of people that are already
succeeding and doing this well okay so
I'm gonna give you a very pragmatic and
prosaic example and then we'll dive
harder because it actually happens all
the time
pragmatically and prosaically and then
the challenge is having you put a whole
society on this principle and the reason
why I'm gonna start it is because it
gives us a little bit of hope because it
tells us that's a part of the basic
human toolkit so the good news is is
that human beings are obligate tribal
meaning that we're already evolved to
think in groups then in fact my friend
Brett Weinstein has proposed that we're
only truly conscious in groups that
consciousness exists for the purposes of
mediating groups so when you take a very
high-quality musical band or a very
high-quality sports team or say military
like a SEAL team these groups are
operating exactly this fashion and you
know it makes sense like you can't
imagine a single individual often being
able to create the thing that a whole
musical band can create it's just beyond
their imaginal and active scope so
that's the simple example and it's
prosaic because most of us experience
something like that entering into a
communion and a flow with a group of
people that is very collaborative
creative so the real challenge is how do
we scale that up and how do we make it
vastly more fluid because typically it
might take years of deep deep deep
collaboration to enter into that level
of communion it slow but honest that
doesn't scale so now I'll move to a
group that I know pretty well that is
almost there so this group is called the
Santa Fe Institute and they to my
knowledge for the first group of people
to be very very aware
of this kind of problem and trying to
figure out how to address it so back in
the late 80s this isn't it's a
scientific group so these are all very
well established scientists environed
Ivor's domains and they began to
recognize that there was a need for some
approach to science that was new or
different to what they don't learned and
mastered in the 20th century
so the twenty essentially developed at
the very finest level of perfection they
call disciplinary science so I'm a
physicist I'm a chemist I'm a biologist
and within that there is you know
increasingly refined disciplinary edges
that I'm part of and then there's a way
that we can glue those disciplines back
together what the Santa Fe Institute
discovered was the possibility for and
the need for transdisciplinary science
and the word trans there's a very
important suffix it's not
multidisciplinary right I think a whole
bunch of disciplines and glue them
together and they try to collaborate
that's multidisciplinary
transdisciplinary is actually trying to
figure out how people who come from
different worlds different perspectives
different paradigms and models can get
together dispense with the totality of
the artifacts of where they come from
and actually address reality directly
and if fashion was completely decoupled
from the notions of discipline and
altogether and so they named the problem
and then began trying to explore it
starting in the late 80s and they're not
very good at it but they're a heck of a
lot better than most people and it's
yielded enormous positive results
because it turns out there's just these
gigantic problems that if you look at
them from the point of view of a given
discipline like let's say you're in
economics and physics physics can't see
the problem economics can't see the
problem even though the problem spans
both economics and physics because the
disciplines don't have the
epistemological capacity to perceive it
but to get an economist and a physicist
together they go through a process of
deconstructing their disciplinary
assumptions still being able to hold the
tools that they know how to use but now
they're holding the tools more lightly
and then go back all the way to base of
responding simply to physical reality
and querying reality with their tools
but now in a collaborative framework
where each of
bringing their point of view to bear and
using the parallax of their diverse
perspectives to begin highlighting
something that exists in reality but
isn't that not obviously embodied in any
given particular domain as we understand
it and so the saint of things to choose
is an example of something that I might
call a part of a transitionary framework
where it's at scale there's thousands of
scientists who were roughly part of that
community and they've been for the past
several decades trying to figure out how
to do this sort of thing but you know
almost all of the people who are part of
that are folks who were developed they
grew up in the 20th century and so their
minds are still very much paradigmatic
minds and even their the farthest edges
of that it was just very difficult to do
this sort of thing reverse engineering I
switch all the way to the other side and
I take a look at the the youngest
effective generation I call them
generation of mega because I think they
are in fact the last human generation
but many people might refer to them to
Generation Z so the the kids who are
born probably about 1999-2000 and then
up until recently so there's gonna be 18
years or so and younger when I actually
watched them in particular when I
watched them coordinated something like
Minecraft I see the stuff that I that I
observed at the Santa Fe Institute
happening at a cognitive level it
deliberately I see it actually happening
intrinsically so something about the way
the generation of mega has simply
developed facultative has always lived
in a world where it was possible and
useful to communicate with the people
you wanted to communicate with in real
time always on always connected can you
give it a little bit more of an example
of how they're communicating when
they're playing that game yeah so my my
eldest daughter who now is well still be
15 and a week where she was in sixth
grade
we agreed that she would work on a
project of creating something in
Minecraft and so I was thinking very
much a 20th century ideas so I had the
ocean of a project plan a series of
phases where people would design and
then they would create projects and then
they would collaborate that kind of
thing we're in a very 20th century
post-world war ii operational management
mindset but I know that the tourism your
you're gonna create it's kind of an
object here's your design requirements
it's gonna have this amount of stuff but
it's going to have at least seven people
contributing and you're gonna get it
done by this date and what I noticed was
that within 48 hours she had already
brought seven people into it so first
the intuitive muscle of being able to
reach out communicate with and cohere
group of people was the first I didn't I
don't think she even had to spend a
moment thinking about it she was just
able to invoke a cohort of people who
are willing to come together and play in
this space almost instantly and this is
like a three month project they had
plenty of time to work on it so for the
better part of three months they just
played you know they just did things
that collaborative in have any structure
no sort of planning around what they
were gonna do and as I was just watching
as I was three interested to see how
this played out my expectation was that
worst-case scenario be so different
learning experience and be able to
debrief about what worked and what
didn't work so coming down to the last
couple of weeks I said hey you know
you're almost at the end of your your
timeline here it doesn't seem like
you've actually created anything do you
have a notion of how you get to go do it
and she just looked at me for a moment
that she said oh yeah and so over a
period of a week she just sent out a
signal to them said hey can we do this
they all showed up they had a
conversation and then honestly I'm in
this point where I can't actually tell
you what happened because it's outside
of my lived experience I was just
watching something that I don't actually
get but I can tell you what happened an
absolutely astounding level of
creativity and this process we're
talking about a sixth grade kid she's
sitting at her computer she has like
seven windows open simultaneously she's
typing in all the different windows she
actually has voice command she's talking
to different people and from a four
hours straight four or five days in a
row this was going on and I was actually
watching gigantic structures emerging
people being given or taking
responsibility for different kinds of
things like one person took
responsibility for doing programming and
creating various kinds of activities and
the blocks did to do stuff somebody else
again just kind of holding and outlining
the framework of what the space would
look like somebody else just decided
they were going to be doing narrative
and telling a story and they had some
capacity to simultaneously allow every
individual to take a particular piece
and run with it
while maintaining the coherence of the
whole who without any notion of like a
top-down leader or any notion of
everybody getting together instead of
deliberating on it in consensus and yet
it happened and so at the end of the
period they created something that was
absolutely astounding I mean it was
physically gorgeous there's layers and
layers of richness there was multimodal
like it wasn't just architectural there
was also really interesting
interactivity there was storytelling
there was actually different agents
different play different pieces in it
and so you know when I look at at the
end it's not clear to me that I could
have figured out anyway and you know I'm
somebody who's built complex stuff I
don't know that I could have built
anything equivalent to that in the level
of the richness and the modality given a
team of extremely competent senior
design resources and that amount of time
and they did all intuitively so that's
another example right so you've got like
these three pieces where you've got
folks who are older beginning to grasp
the necessity of operating in this
transmedia transdisciplinary environment
and beginning to experiment what that
looks like
and how to do it and then you've got the
folks that are younger who for a variety
of different reasons adaptively have a
lot of these skill sets and we can go to
great detail of why that's the case like
what does it mean to grow up in an
environment in the post wiki pedia
environment where the idea of
disciplinary expertise and canonical
knowledge just doesn't exist at all and
everything is a collaboratively
co-created fluid object that everybody
has some degree of skepticism about and
everybody has some degree of ownership
in the possibility of shaping at the
epistemological consequences of being on
the other side of that transition are
part of what I'm talking about it is so
interesting yes that's fascinating it
sounds like some sort of swarm
intelligence interestingly enough Daniel
and I and another one of our
collaborators forests have determined
that we should be very careful about
using the word swarm as the metaphor
because even though it's an easy
metaphor it kind of feels right it turns
out it's actually wrong in a very
specific set of ways and we don't want
to get people locked into the wrong
frameworks it's actually something that
has not yet existed on the surface of
the earth
metaphorically it is similar to the way
the swarming behavior operates it
actually is operating in a
transcendental modality which means that
it's doing something categorically
different than any kind of existing
swarm intelligence has ever evolved to
do so it's different from stig merging
it's well alright you ready
this is gonna be a tough one let me see
if I could do this right this is a
really really hard concept if we can do
it it's extremely powerful ok so there
guess at all familiar with the emergence
of calculus in Western civilization not
quite nope
I think I might be able to do it quickly
enough that it is useful the key insight
is that these two extraordinary geniuses
Isaac Newton and Gottfried Leibniz both
developed calculus almost at the same
time they're they're both alive at the
same time they're both working on
similar problems and so they both will
recognize the necessity of solving the
problem but the approach they took were
very very different Newton's approach to
calculus and Leibniz approaches to talk
to us if you were intimately familiar
they would seem very different and so we
might say is that there's an abstraction
called calculus and there's
instantiations of calculus the Newtonian
version in the Latin it C inversion
which are both instantiations of the
abstraction the abstraction lives in a
realm of pure abstraction meaning I
could come up with an instantiation of
calculus and as long as it was actually
an authentic instantiation of calculus
it would be compatible with what Newton
Einstein
I started Newton and Leibniz did but it
might be very different and so this this
concept of an absolute abstraction
something that is non mediated but
nonetheless is real and then the ability
to instantiate that in some medium in
Leibniz case instantiate it in the
format that he did in Newton's case
instantiating Diplomat that he did
that's a very deep fundamental concept
the ability to recognize that there are
objects in reality that are pre-mediated
trans mediated but real and then there's
a mechanism by which human beings by
hypothesis any sentient can perceive
those abstraction and then allow them to
be mediated into some kind of actuality
it's almost like you're describing
multi-dimensional
that were were somehow tapping into yeah
that's a that is actually true because
there's certain kinds of if I describe
something like a hypercube yeah which is
just a cube in higher dimensions the
beauty of that is that I can say the
phrase hypercube and you can't really
conceive of it because we don't really
have mechanisms for perceiving or
conceiving of things in say a 10
dimensional hyper cube I can say the
words and if you understand math right
you can do things with it but the beauty
of it is you can't pretend that you
actually are thinking about it whereas
if I say something like the generator
function from which stick orgy emerges
you might think you know what that is
but the key is as long as you hold it
like you would hold a 10 dimensional
hyper cube then you're in the right
space so now what I can say is there's a
generator function there's some trans
media object from which stigma G which
is to say the mechanism by which swarms
coordinate themselves emerges and the
thing that I'm talking about the thing
that is now emergent in the contemporary
environment the thing that these kids
were doing is coming from the same
generator function but it's not the same
as Sigma G because it's obviously
dealing with a mediation layer ie human
beings and human technology which is
vastly vastly different than what's
available to bees and termites does that
make any sense
totally yes absolutely awesome that is
fabulous that that happened
now some we took we were talking about
sovereignty ready right now already I'm
going to have to make sure we have a
caveat because the word sovereignty has
all kinds of weird loading and if people
are listening to this and they feel like
I think they know what that means I
apologize in advance because in some
sense we're trying to just redefine it
but it's the closest word that we have
to the thing we're trying to describe so
an individual agent a sentient agents
relationship to the world there are
three distinct functions we can actually
map to for if we want but I'm gonna map
it to three three distinct functions
that describe the capacity of a sentient
agents ability to respond to the world
the first piece is the degree to which
that sensing agent is able to perceive
reality is we might call that the the
perceptive modality and so perception
here includes everything from
say like your senses your ability to see
that if I lack eyesight I can't perceive
electromagnetic radiation if I lack oh
faction I can't perceive chemical
molecules right if I lack hearing I
can't perceive sound waves so the
modality and then it also the bandwidth
so for example if I had vision but I
can't perceive ultraviolet I can't
perceive ultraviolet and similarly if I
have vision but I'm looking at the Sun
I'll be overwhelmed I'll have too much
input to be able to process it so the
first portion of sovereignty is the
total capacity to perceive reality the
second portion combines sense making and
choice making which is we might call
meaning your capacity to take perception
and move that through into making good
choices about what to do in the world so
if I'm like a camera that I can see in
the sense that light can come in and it
can be converted into something but if
there's nothing else than just a camera
there's no sense making there's no
meaning making happening at all and the
degree to which I have the capacity to
make meaning as many ways the degree to
which I have the potential to have
agency there's lots of variables there
again there's questions have overwhelmed
like a for example to say I'm in a
situation where somebody's coming at me
and physically with a large threat of
violence I'm perceiving it but now I'm
trying to make meaning out of it which
is to say what do I do
how do I respond to this if I get
fight-or-flight if my adrenal system
kicks off and it actually kicks me into
overwhelm then I'm actually decreasing
my capacity to make good choices because
the fight-or-flight response shifts me
into a very narrow band of action or
maybe I just have bad heuristics there's
just you know I'm perceiving some
pattern in the world but I don't know
how to make sense of that pattern so the
signal is out there but I just can't do
anything with it and then the third
dimension is your capacity to actually
make effective action in the world so
perhaps I have perceived the pattern I
see that carbon dioxide and methane in
the atmosphere is generated feedback
instead of raising the amount of
temperature and the acidification of the
oceans and I perceive that that's going
to lead to catastrophic collapse of
coral reefs but I don't have any
capacity to respond to it in terms of
agency the problem is just too complex
my
effective action is too limited or my
ability you my power is too limited or
my ability to understand the
consequences of my actions is too
limited the rate-limiting on action has
to do with the scope of the problem in
relationship to your power bang for the
buck which is to say the amount of
energy that it takes for you to deliver
on some degree of effectiveness and
unintended consequences the degree to
which what you're doing generates more
change in the world than your intended
you know so if I think about like a pond
I think many of us have run into the
situation as a kid there's like a very
very smooth pond then I can see through
it it's perfectly clear and I want to
grab something at the bottom of the pond
but as I put my fingers into the water
it creates ripples and makes it
impossible for me to see
so because I'm interfering with my own
environment my agency is preventing my
ability to be effective so that's
consequences my inability to relate to
the world and when it actually respond
to the consequences of my own actions so
every discreet sentient agent is going
to have an envelope that takes all
through these aspects into consideration
and we'll call that envelope sovereignty
and so the more sovereign you are it's
like a sphere the more capacity you have
to perceive make meaning in and respond
to the reality that you're living in and
a failure in any one of these three
modalities will tend to disrupt your
sovereignty or limit it in your
environment and so what ends up
happening is this thing that we're
talking about this new frame of mind
this new kind of collective intelligence
is extremely sensitive to the actual
sovereignty of the individual agents
that compose it so then using this
concept of sovereignty imagine right now
the three of us are attempting to enter
into a form of communion meaning we're
try to form a collective intelligence
and that collective intelligence is
going to be bound by the sovereignty of
each one of us meaning for example if
the two of you have a private language
which you probably do right you're a
deep relationship you're aware of each
other's facial expressions body language
tone of voice there's a lot of things
that are going to happen at the level of
perception that I might not be able to
perceive so you'll have a sense of
what's happening that I won't have any
access to because it's outside of the
sphere of my sovereignty but let's say
for example I've done a lot of work in
practice and so I have a high degree of
discernment around those kinds of things
I could just watch and listen even
though I won't quite people to make
sense of it I'll be able to build a
vastly better sense of it than if I was
you know I'm a lower level of
discernment
well that's flip it around the say for
example that we're engaging in something
and I say something that triggers you
emotionally meaning that there's
something that happens in the verbal
domain that a series of sounds that come
out of my mouth you hear a process that
simultaneously the way that you process
things generates response in your body
which is highly emotional and that
emotional response actually pushes you
to the point where you've got an adrenal
response and 1/4 of our response which
then reduces your sovereignty so now
we've got two issues one issue is the
level of sovereignty that you had
initially wasn't adequate to the
expression that I made meaning that it
pushed you out of sovereignty and now
secondarily your sovereignty is reduced
by the state that you're in
so then what ends up happening is easy
and I would then ideally have a
perception to recognize that happened
have a set of heuristics and actions to
be able to hold and either help you
process through that and get you back
into sovereignty so our communion has
integrity or recognize that that's just
not going to happen so we would just
sort of step back and wait until you can
kind of come back into integrity as a
group and that's that's it I guess how
it's gonna work
is each discrete individual has to go
through a process of really deep work on
their own individual capacities show up
in every dimension cognitively
emotionally perceptually and exploring
possible modalities of reality that our
conventional models of reality don't
give we don't have really good names for
or we don't even think exist because we
don't know and then secondarily learning
then how to use that individual capacity
to increasingly come into faster deeper
and more coherent communion in groups
and I should mention by the way that in
the practices that we've done so far
every geometry is qualitatively
different
so dyads are different than triads and
triads of different than spores
etc interesting yeah very interesting I
wanted to rewind a little bit to what
you said at the beginning can you talk a
bit more about the global collapse that
we're going through right now and the
war that you mentioned earlier
sure so we put into a framework first
and then talk about the pragmatics so
the framework looks like this I think
everybody alive who has any degree of
self-awareness notices that you know
sometimes they're at the top of their
game and sometimes they're not you know
if you've been driving all night you had
a bad choice for dinner you haven't
slept you drink too much coffee your
likelihood of doing things that you
don't think are wise later is much
higher than if you're well resourced
right so of course that fact that that
sort of metaphor is happening broadly
all over the world every minute of every
day and everybody's interactions with
each other and with the world is
increasingly pushing us into states
where we're making worse and worse
choices you know for example I have
recently fully unplugged from social
media because social media is almost
completely toxic which is to say that
when I go into any social media
environment I find myself decreasing lis
capable of making good choices and
increasingly willing to make bad choices
because it's as that effect now this is
an interesting problem because we've got
billions of people who are now connected
on social media and by the way don't
just meet socially do you think also
broadcast media you know if I read an
article in The New York Times there's a
99% chance that I'm worse off rather
than better off books particularly old
books by the way there's things that we
can still rely on because they take so
long to write and to read they have this
cool concept called oh gosh what's the
word just my mind but the term has to do
with a differential time element so
books are slower than other things and
so they'll actually present a different
framework for sense making them things
that happen in real time this is by the
way that's a good mechanism if you're
feeling really really demoralized unplug
from real time information and plug into
a great book from say the 19th century
and that will actually help you build
back up capacity all right so that's one
so what's happening is this the
mechanism by which we collaborate right
now the tools and techniques by which
our information flows our sense-making
frameworks are really up and
they're making us emotionally less
capable of responding to reality and
they're actually breaking down our
cognitive capacity as well you just look
at the choice making decision-making
it's happening
you guys are not in the u.s. so I don't
know what's going on where you are no
but I can tell you the United States is
in the process of going insane in every
direction I mean insane almost like a
technical term meaning increasingly
incapable to actually proceed and
responded to reality and drop it in to
lower and lower levels of pragmatic
sovereignty and just like in a family
where everybody's getting tired and
cranky people start itching for a fight
and when somebody starts pushing because
they're just itching for a fight that
just pushes other people and so which is
kind of eating the seed corn of civility
yeah that's one side other side reality
is getting harder to deal with the
global financial system is now full
decade into a completely delusional
false sense of stability where every
single piece of it is becoming more and
more fragile across the board ecosystems
are now we're now deeply into the
environment where climate change the
consequences thereof are actually having
pragmatic effects decreasing crop yields
decreasing freshwater reserves at the
edges it's not yet so obviously
catastrophic that everybody is aware of
it but if you actually see what the
sensitive locations are and say like
Syria last year you can see the absolute
immediate consequences of those effects
and then that has a cascade effect
tapping into the fact that all the most
fragile nation-states the ones that have
the highest degree of fragility and
tension and lowest reserves are now
beginning to fail and they externalize
in their own instability into the
environment around them which creates
increasing in tension on the other
environment so for example the flow of
refugees out of Syria are now impacting
say France and Italy which are
themselves already going through like
three different levels of challenge
economic demographic their own internal
cultural dissonance the impact of social
media technology on underlying
frameworks like all these different
variables are playing back on each other
and so net-net where we have is
basically to district' forces that are
happening simultaneously on the one hand
our individual collective capacities to
make good choices in the world are
decreasing because the tools that we
have are actually pushing us in a
negative direction and on the other hand
the stuff we have to deal with is
getting more
more present and more and more urgent
and more and more intense so this is
going to lead us into a situation where
we're going to make extremely bad
choices because we're using bad jurist
excel give you a concrete example by the
way this is not just a purely
theoretical example the United States
right now is in a classic scenario where
good strategies from the past thousand
years would say that we're facing a
choice between significant civil unrest
which in principle could very easily
transition to some kind of civil war
although we don't know exactly what that
would look like you know things don't
ever look the same over and over again
but very significant civil unrest which
traditionally the Machiavellian response
to that is pick some sort of other
outside of adequate threat pick a fight
with them so as to generate coherence
internally we're all familiar with that
basic approach right so if I'm sitting
in charge of maintaining the integrity
of the United States and I watch it
begins to fall apart into civil unrest
and increasing the acceleration towards
something which smacks a lot like civil
war I might choose to say okay I'm gonna
pick a fight with somebody and adequate
threat I don't think North Korea is
enough that would cause the people
inside to say oh boy this is a real
we have to put our differences to the
side and rally around the flag so as to
protect ourselves from the external
threat or at least give me the ability
to impose the level of internal
discipline sometimes there's martial law
to just quash civils dissent internally
now that playbook has been played from
for thousands of years I'm not making
that up and it's not magic
lots of a lots and lots of people
understand that but intuitively and
consciously so one the fact that that
tells us that it's likely to occur - I
happen to know that that come of those
conversations are being had but then
three excuse to sneaky part that
playbook is no longer valid the set of
tools that worked even all the way up
into the late 20th century no longer
apply in our contemporary environment so
this loops us all the way back to the
failure of sense making if I'm a
strategic decision maker at the level of
nation-states I've got a sense making
model that includes the techniques that
I just mentioned that unfortunately are
obsolete but I don't know they're
obsolete which means that I'm going to
make
choices based upon an obsolete set of
models without know that they're
obsolete which means I'm making
increasingly bad choices and maybe
becoming increasingly confused as to why
they're bad choices which means then I
have a choice either I double down I
commit myself to my sense-making model
and assume that my confusion is bad
signal or I accept the fact that I don't
know what's going on and start double
checking on my sense making model now
what do human beings tend to do in that
scenario assume the world is crazy in
their thing they're right yes yes that
is correct
it is a that's not a bad choice like F
from an evolutionary perspective the
phrase always wrong are often wrong but
never in doubt is how actually a good
strategy except for when it's not and
now is what it's not alright that's it
for this episode to get the show notes
books mentions go to future thinkers dot
org slash 47 and part two of this
episode will be available at future
thinkers org slash 48 once it's live and
if you want to try qualia go to future
thinkers org slash brain hack and use
the code future to get 10% off your
purchase all right we'll talk to you in
the next episode thanks for listening to
the future thinkers podcast to get
notified of new podcasts and videos go
to future thinkers org and subscribe to
our mailing list you can also find us on
iTunes stitcher and you tube if you like
what we do and you want to help us make
more podcasts and videos give us a like
or review share it with your friends and
consider becoming a patron go to
patreon.com/crashcourse Chinnery org
slash
app last but not least if you want to
get access to more content hidden
episodes or if you just want to chat
with us in previous guests then check
out our community at community dot
future thinkers org
[Music]
you
[Music]