we live in a world where spending never
stops
but why do we buy what we buy and how is
our desire to spend manipulated every
other company on earth is trying to get
you to spend money and they're putting
all their effort into getting you to
spend your money on stuff all the time
I'm Jack paretic and in this series I'm
going to investigate the men who made us
spend and the one emotion they relied on
for decades to do it fear they found
ever more subtle ways to manipulate our
fears and reactions Cora Mars
she'll never hold a man until she does
something about your prayer they've
exploited our anxieties to sell
everything from cars to save you known
as green as you think for the secret of
eternal youth and that's good though Ted
you don't have to pay anything okay any
letter I'll be investigating how they've
used every tactic from paranoia
so reassurance to unlock up primal
anything people tell me is Wow I want
this box why are not all that's good
marketing and I'll discover how it led
to millions of it taking medication you
may not even need as it's by far the
most successful drug products ever
launched in the world
[Music]
[Applause]
on this West London back streets I've
got an appointment with a man who's
after more than my money
he's out for blood I Drake are you doing
no bad a little nervous no if no reason
sorcerer dr. Daniel sister is about to
perform his trademark Dracula therapy on
me okay please lay down here and relax
relax yes the treatment begins by
drawing a vial of my blood well until
painful doesn't feel scared out at
alignment for a mere 550 pounds he's
going to extract the clear plasma in my
blood and inject it back into my face
okay ready yeah
[Music]
growth factors in the serum are supposed
to make my skin look and feel younger so
how about is this
well that wasn't mad at all
in my mind yeah but it didn't fail it
didn't feel any different from an
ordinary injection yeah
[Music]
what do you think the motivation is for
people coming to see you people want to
stay as young as possible for as long as
possible also this may be some kind of
anxiety to want to be still young enough
to have a second life or second chance
so if people have fears you're providing
the solution and we leave the fear I
relieve the anxiety and I open the door
for them in your life better life
hopefully
[Music]
this kind of plasma therapy has also
been used for a variety of medical
conditions and sports injuries do I look
younger not yet not yet it takes about
two to three weeks and then we have the
result although it's cosmetic benefits
are yet to be clinically proven
dr. sister's success at selling it owes
a lot to a tactic that is endemic in
modern consumer culture
[Music]
the surprising thing about that was I'm
not even worried about looking old and
aging until I went and had that
treatment and now I'm starting to think
I should be fearful of it why things
down really cleverness is tapped into
that fear and has provided me with the
solution most of us like to think of
ourselves as sophisticated savvy
consumers alert when he attempts to
manipulate our emotions in order to make
us spend endear adverts like these
continue to try finding some blood when
you brush again I could be gum disease
you know and it's not going to get any
better if you ignore it's pretty clear
what buttons they're trying to press
here to get us the dick into our wallet
it was a beautiful day in the park turn
to panic and instant and everything
depended on a brick house child locator
although it seems too crude to convince
us somehow it does and I want to find
out how
so I've come to get my head examined the
electrodes in this neural net measure
brain activity have I look so accustomed
psychologist and expert in consumer
behavior gorkon amateur glue is going to
use this to help explain what happens
inside our brains when we watch adverts
with a strong fear message like this
2008 commercial for Volkswagen
have you tried now saying like every
other one maybe as pictured store next
door they're monitoring the electrical
impulses from different parts of my
brain the area that engages when I watch
the answer is the part of the brain
scientists know responds to fear
holy
people in general will be much more
motivated by the fear of losing
something than the prospect of gaining
something this is precisely the aim of
the advert it is to trigger that
particular emotion of anxiety so
consumers will feel vulnerable they will
feel that there are high consequences of
not taking an action just because my
brain responds to fear that doesn't
guarantee I'll go out and buy what
they're selling the marketers need to
know how to frame these appeals to our
subconscious and I'm off to meet the man
it's held I'm deep in the French
countryside looking for the home of an
esteemed anthropologists and
psychologists called dr. up I
plotter wrap I have spent over 30 years
advising companies as diverse as
Kellogg's General Motors and tobacco
giant Philip Morris
it looks like the setting for a Hammer
horror film but the man who lives here
has turned fear into a different kind of
business and it's a lucrative one the
Chateau is one of six properties he owns
around the world
hello how are you is God come in please
thank you for your time my pleasure
Karine thank you nice little place that
we got here
yeah I like it very much dr. Rapp I
believes that our primal desires always
dictate our conscious choices clients
getting to expose these subconscious
emotional responses through a product
people will say wow I want it and I say
why I don't know so if you can break the
subconscious code that gives you direct
access to the line that gets you to sell
things to people yes and that success
when you do that you're very successful
for over 20 years a host of car
manufacturers have benefited from that
success and doctoral PI's understanding
of fear the hammer is taking post-war
America by storm from Manhattan to
California dr. proto Roth aye is the car
psychologist who advises General Motors
it's a weapon so the message is don't
mess with me you know if you want to
bump into me I'm going to crash you and
I'm going to kill you according to
doctor replied the car that I came in an
SUV as it's very designed to fear his
advice the car makers focused on
exploiting our most powerful primal
instinct survival a car is a message
when I see the car in the rearview
mirror I want to feel no or good this
one is vegan is when it's powerful in
our little in them go so it's an
important protective barrier yet right
now it gives me superiority in up in a
very dangerous way
so perception and fear of danger
that is the absolute animating principle
when it comes to us making purchases
right if you don't provide a car that
respond to this fear you're not going to
sell it this is it justice also then you
go out of business
[Music]
rabbis techniques proved even more
potent after the shock of the 9/11
attacks by the early 2000s SUVs
accounted for over 20 percent of all
American car sales SUVs are the fastest
growing segment of the car market and
they're the motherlode of profitability
millions of car buyers were reassured by
the security SUVs offered but they were
being led by bass in motion rather than
reason because the SUVs very design made
them less safe
not more SUVs are twice as likely to
rollover as regular vehicles about 60%
of SUV accident desk in bar rollovers
[Music]
cars are the perfect product to seem to
shield us in danger tapping into a
survival instinct for fellas protection
but this notion of soothing our fears
has almost endless potential for getting
us to spend
it's an idea explored here in the highly
stylized world of madmen that fictional
1960s ad agencies Sterling Cooper these
creative Don Draper tells his clients
how to turn fear to their advantage
advertising is based on one thing
happiness and you know what happiness is
happiness it's freedom from fear it's a
billboard on the side of the road and
screams with reassurance that whatever
you're doing it's okay you are okay Don
Draper owed a debt to the real madman
advertising professionals who honed this
very philosophy but the Hollywood
version was only half the story
Jonas Sachs is an expert on the history
of storytelling and marketing and of a
system the admin have been following for
decades to get us suspend and it was
just a very simple idea that could be
taught and learned by anyone who's
creating the copy for an ad that you
create anxiety in audience tell them
something that he didn't know but it's
not good and then you introduce a magic
solution look across the Crimea
glossophobia all speech anxiety is the
fear of public speaking we all know that
storytelling engages us we lean in one
fear the story and like any good story
it's got a damsel in distress it's got a
villain and it's got a hero that's a job
we can't finish it's not another heart
rate
it's the damsel in distress is the
consumer the one who needs to consume
the magic solution to defeat the villain
the villain is any number of frightening
things happening out in the world and
the hero is the one preferring the magic
pill the thing that can save your life
and takes that damsel in distress and
whisks them away from from the fear and
the danger never give it
never never so the moral of the story is
that without your favorite product
you're in danger it's a sales technique
the root of which goes back nearly a
hundred years to this man Stan Lee
wrestle one of the pioneers of modern
advertising in 1916 wrestle took over ad
agency J Walter Thompson and set out to
professionalize the industry
his rigorous training programs was a new
wave of college-educated ad men how
psychology and human motivation were
fundamental to their work what rezar
said was that human beings were this
writhing mass of individuals who can
have come together in this sort of
jostling push for food and for safety
and that the only thing they really
would responsive was fear the first
product to benefit from these insights
was an obscure antiseptic called
Listerine in need of new customers its
owner called in two of advertisings new
professionals and they find out it has
an interesting property and they say
your product is actually great for
curing halitosis and they kind of leave
that hanging in the air because no one
really knows the time what halitosis is
and so of course the client asks what's
halitosis how does this is bad breath
and it's a epidemic in society they tell
them we're going to let people know that
this silent social killer
is there but are never announces itself
and if you have it you can't get where
you want to go in life and you're going
to be a social outcast Jane has a pretty
face men notice her lovely figure but
never linger long because Jane has one
big - on her report card halitosis bad
breath so they invent what they call a
whisper copy or advertising by fear and
they create this campaign a very story
based campaign about this woman and
she'll never be married why because she
has halitosis
but there is a magic solution to it
Listerine no one really knew that bad
breath was a problem until the ad
created that anxiety
but the basis for a campaign that would
run for decades the trouble is you could
have halitosis and never know it and
even your best friend won't tell you why
take cancer is when there's such a
pleasant extra careful precaution
Listerine mystery n--'s whisper copy
created a market for mouthwash from
nothing he he doesn't have articles
within seven years the company's
revenues rose from a hundred and fifteen
thousand dollars to more than eight
million dollars Listerine success in
making people desire a cure would be
picked up by a vast industry that had
been built on the treatment of genuine
medical conditions
Henry Gadsden the head of one of the
world's biggest pharmaceutical companies
bemoaned the fact that they could only
sell to the sick in an interview with
Fortune magazine Gadsden shared a vision
of the future where drug companies were
more like chewing gum manufacturer
Wrigley selling to everyone to do that
they would need to scare more of us into
believing we were chronically ill and in
need of the relief their drugs could
provide it was a British firm that led
the way in 1984 victus which is truck
companies like Coke paint a Manhattan
lost the marketing meant to do for them
what they've done for literary and find
them a disease Glaxo were launching a
powerful new heartburn medication that
they had a problem zantac was a
prescription only drug and most people
bought heartburn remedies
over-the-counter from their local
pharmacy they would have to be persuaded
to visit the doctor instead
I've come to meet one of the branding
experts who came up with a solution
Vince Perry then working at Saatchi and
Saatchi told me how he helped to
transform the way drugs are marketed you
want people instead of going into the
drugstore and buying Tom's or Rolaids
you want to go to a doctor's office and
get a prescription for a chronic
medication that's a vastly different
behavioral change you're asking for we
have to put a name around that and we
have to put a serious rationale around
it to justify the complexity of that
transaction in other words we're going
to go out there and make a big deal
about this therapy but no one yet knows
they need it most doctors agree it's
normal to suffer occasional heartburn
but when it doesn't go away the
diagnosis might be GERD what was
essentially heartburn became the far
more fear inducing gastro esophageal
reflux disease a name soon being heard
everywhere when it happens at least
twice each week you may have GERD or
gastroesophageal reflux disease people
are afraid of being diminished of being
less than normal of being substandard
when they hear that there's a name for
that condition they can go talk to a
doctor and maybe get a medication for it
that is that takes away the terror of
not being normal
today clinicians worldwide use the term
GERD to explain tation symptoms of
heartburn or acid reflux by the time
it's patent expired over 240 million
people worldwide had zantac
prescriptions this one drug made Glaxo
three and a half billion dollars every
year zantac success helped change the
very idea of what constitutes medicine
seen drug companies offering cures for
all manner of obscure physical
conditions and strange psychological
syndromes they think the drugs industry
given its immense power has a duty to
step back from these syndromes rather
than to giving us more medication for
more syndromes you can't underestimate
demand from
consumers people want relief and they
want quick relief so badly that it's
almost difficult not to provide it for
them
[Music]
heartburn can't kill you but heart
disease certainly can and in the late
90s a new class of drug came on stream
would give it to makers the chance to
sell as the biggest wonder cure to date
they were called stuck in now new
machines like this make it far easier to
find people with very high cholesterol
levels and once they're found there is a
new drug that is from America and only
available there which could
revolutionize their treatment statins
could be used for the treatment of heart
disease by reducing one of the risk
factors that contribute to it high
cholesterol now this drug could help
those people by reducing the livers
ability to make cholesterol in 2014
eight million people in Britain alone
take a statin everyday only around a
third of them have suffered from the
condition that statins were invented to
target heart disease but we can't get
enough of them because cholesterol has
become a national obsession
they just feel a sharp structure nothing
at specialized cardiac screening events
like this and at the GP more of us now
get checked for high cholesterol than
ever before his cholesterol something
that people worry about yes I think it
is the concern for people and what we do
actually see at the screenings each day
is that we are able to identify people
that have a maybe of a higher level of
cholesterol I think I had my cholesterol
level done in sort of October well
there's quite a lot of heart disease in
my family do you feel well in yourself
mean you look like a healthy chatter yes
I feel really missing but none of mine
feeling well you don't know what's wrong
in time I rather find out now I can go
home I'd usually about it and then not
find out high cholesterol is actually
just one of many factors that can lead
to heart disease or stroke but today
many of us act like it's the only one
that counts and the typical doctor's
recommendations are treated with statins
seems pretty sensible but is it
dr. Kyle ashe-chan is deputy chair of
the British Medical Association and a GP
with over 30 years experience his
opinion as a GP is that millions of
people have been led to feel anxious
about cholesterol and statins are being
unnecessarily overprescribed the feel
kind of mentality when comes in and the
easiest possible solution is go and ask
doctors that measure my cholesterol if
my cholesterol is high
I need something going about it so it's
the fear the fear of high cholesterol
and what that might do which is actually
propelling people to take the drug
rather than actually the actuality of
them being seriously at risk yeah
absolutely putting them on starting
tablets I think in my view is negligence
dr. Chan's view may be controversial but
one thing's certain we're obsessed with
statins and cholesterol where did that
come from to find out I'm going to meet
the man who launched the best-selling
drug of all time
in 1999 Bobby Ehrlich was in charge of
the consumer marketing campaign for a
powerful new statin called lipids or
with other statins already on the market
he needed a way to help his product
stand out from the crowd but the results
of clinical trials that he could use to
market lipitor was still years away it's
an interesting problem we had which was
we couldn't say lipitor prevents heart
attacks so we decided to focus on what
we could focus on which was were the
best at lowering cholesterol and we went
out and advertised that so what was
different about the lipitor campaign
from the other campaigns were being run
by the other comfortable the thinking
was cholesterol is one of the things
that consumers can understand react to
try to lower the more consumers know
about a condition the more educated they
are the more they're likely to take
action they caught the public's
imagination with an easy to understand
campaign that targeted their new selling
point
cholesterol consumers remember basically
one thing and one thing only you can't
tell them a lot then I won they're not
that interesting so you've got to hit
them but what's the most important thing
that they'll remember it was a simple
message the company would stick to for
years know your number and it was about
to reach a vastly wider audience the
government came out today with new and
aggressive guidelines for treating
millions of Americans at risk for heart
disease exercise weight loss and
eligibility for statin treatment in
America at the time was determined by a
committee of the National Institute of
Health this committee now lowered the
threshold at which cholesterol was
considered too high exercise and diet if
there was a motto for the new guidelines
just published today it might be
something like how low can you go
overnight the number of people
apparently at risk from high cholesterol
rose from 13 million to 36 million
the results of the drugs industry was
clear wasn't there it was catching well
if the if the numbers troubled I think
that was a decision that the health care
experts made the more people that take
statins the better off society will be
lipitor manufacturer Pfizer had
financial ties to six of the seven
committee members who made the decision
to lower the cholesterol threshold in
Europe including Britain cholesterol
guidelines were also soon being lowered
but the drugs companies needed a
different tactic to reach consumers here
direct advertising of drugs is banned so
they worked with patient groups and
charities to get their message out we
coulda managed schedule s being
broadcast in France and Canada this
hard-hitting public awareness film tells
in Reverse the tale of what could happen
if we don't get checked it was sponsored
by the lipid nurse Network and Canadian
Diabetes Association but it was paid for
by 500 entries in more than 1 in 500 of
the population has a specific genetic
defect which doubles the cholesterol
levels in the blood in Britain
cholesterol charity Heart UK offered the
public advice about high cholesterol
with a highly emotive campaign I'm one
of those 500 and I didn't realize until
it's almost too late among their various
commercial partners was Pfizer Heart UK
is passionate about preventing premature
deaths caused by high cholesterol and
also campaigned to improve the detection
and treatment of high cholesterol
GPS faced more and more patients anxious
about their cholesterol and in 2004 the
government gave them a further incentive
to prescribe statins family doctors have
voted to accept a new NHS contract at
its heart with a new set of performance
indicators that would tie surgery
budgets to resolve money the doctors a
promise of better pay and hours but of
course they have to give something in
return
still have to meet quality target GPS
were now required the screen for and
treat cholesterol but some in the
medical establishment believe that we
are too eager to prescribe statins so it
wasn't just the public who bought into
this idea that cholesterol was the scary
thing government GPS the medical
establishment everyone bought into this
idea yes a GP had to do it if you had no
choice but to bring the cholesterol down
so how do you bring the classful down
there are other than at that stage in my
view going for lifestyle changes going
for exercise easiest way found walls put
them on statins what we've done is then
we over diagnosed and over treat Pfizer
told us statins have significantly
benefited patients in public health by
helping to treat cardiovascular disease
and it is a widely held established view
within the medical community the
treating patients to target cholesterol
levels reduces the risk of
cardiovascular events when working with
patients organizations we always ensure
that they are not dependent on any
funding we provide and their
independence is not compromised Pfizer
also told us that our assumptions
misrepresent the responsible approaches
to marketing taken by the pharmaceutical
industry in England alone the NHS now
spends over a quarter of a billion
pounds every year on statins they are
the most prescribed drugs in the country
Henry Gadsden had a vision of selling to
everyone and thanks to the fear of high
cholesterol that vision was closer than
ever before but it was still a limit of
a number of people they could sell their
cures too until they realized that no
one is immune from risk the alluring
prospect of a limitless market beckoned
for industries that could capitalize on
the mere risk of getting ill all they
had to do was play on a desire to stay
well and our fear of the alternative a
whole new anxiety was about to be
pressed into service hi Jean hey y'all
smells up here often come from down
there in your coffee smells from your
dog thirty years ago we had a pretty
relaxed approach to keeping ourselves
and our homes clean the notion that we
are constantly at risk of contamination
or infection barely troubled us taken
back is regrouping and would be pleased
spread a little fear vomiting diarrhea
caused a bit of a stink today we're gone
barded with messages that germs are an
unqualified evil to be purged at all
cost millions of germs will die the
temptation is to move from traditional
cleaners like these to new antibacterial
products like these a new word has
entered the lexicon and he bacterial and
with it thousands of German killing
products from hand gel and kitchenware
to mouse mats and even children's toys
[Music]
I'm heading to the London School of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine to find
out whether these products really are
better at keeping a clean director of
the school's hygiene center dr. Val
Curtis has offered to show me what
happened for the germs on my skin
okay so Jack can you put your hand under
the UV light and let's see what you can
see okay so can you see it glowing
there's a green glow on your hands right
turn your hands over and this is just
touching doors and so on but it's
actually right across my hand I mean I
could have keep my hands clean or
desalter there they don't exactly know
so that's pretty dirty to me I don't
want to do now is wash both your hands
one of them in the latest generation of
antibacterial soaps this one claims to
kill ten times more than any other and
this is just plain white soap would you
like to put them under my lamp here we
can see
I would say is pretty much the thing for
the rocks pregnant so that's exactly how
these two soaps work
they both wash germs off your hands okay
so the plain soap actually has got rid
of the bacteria got rid of 99% of the
bacteria yeah so that's so that isn't
marketed as antibacterial it's just so
plain tape from the day we were married
you and your family have been working
for lunch our conversion from plain soap
to antibacterials began in the unlikely
setting of a luxury soap brand Diamond
Tahiti with Imperial leather cousins had
a market leading brand
but like most soaps he was firmly rooted
to the bathroom the pure cousins
Imperial leather so in 1994 they
launched a product that we would need
all over the house would he be keeping
your hands clean and fresh every 30
seconds all kinds of hidden germs the
tone may have been light but the message
was deadly serious germs were everywhere
and we needed care act antibacterial
soap to combat them so after every
little job always handled with care it's
a message that would make Care Act's
the market leader for the next 20 years
cousins former head of product
development Barry shafe was one of the
men behind the launch of the UK's first
domestic antibacterial parents has been
hugely successful but doesn't just soap
and water do the job to a very large
extent yes simply washing their hands
doesn't most of the job but by bring an
attention to it we're encouraging more
people to wash their hands more of the
time yes on the one hand that's
obviously very very good for business if
you can bring an antibacterial benefit
into that as well then you're doing an
even better job won't you though in the
business of actually trying to create a
kind of climate of fear around the idea
of hygiene no quite simply because we
all know it's just common sense without
that people know that a kitchen is never
perfectly clean and it you have to keep
on top of it yeah look at
yet cousins in its competitors did
exploit our paranoia to push an
ever-growing range of antibacterial
soaps and gels and other products
protect Plus could help predict who
didn't matter that plain soap was just
as effective germ panic was now firmly
planted in the consumers mind which
medve these companies were well placed
to take advantage of the occasional
health scare or pandemic sign flu cannot
smell being contained that's the warning
from the World Health Organization have
it heightened all of the publicity that
those concerns get evoked the need in
the minds of all of us to stay clean and
healthy and that is the only thing that
needs to be in the consumers mind to
make them see care acts as a good idea
cousins responded to the swine flu
outbreak
with this powerful national press
campaign and their sales rose by over
two hundred percent so why are
antibacterial so successfully says valve
Curtis showed me we don't really need
these products she puts it down to a
familiar trick their ability to target
our primal instincts it's not about
science or rationality though we've
given the science argument as other
reason to believe it humans come
equipped with an emotion of disgust
right back in there our earliest history
you see this need for purification for
getting rid of substances that are yucky
and nasty and might make a deal so there
are certain products that we used in
rituals for purification things like
vinegar things like lemon and you find
that those things are actually put into
products nowadays because in our ancient
brain those are things that cue purity
that primal fear of getting ill soon
piqued the interest of the food industry
they showered us with hundreds of new
products he sold us the idea that an
ordinary balanced diet was no longer
enough to stay well and stave off
disease we needed food and drink that
would give us added protection
in Europe tighter regulations have now
placed stronger limits on the health
claims food and drink companies can make
in 2009 this campaign confidently
extolling the virtues of a brand of
pomegranate juice was ordered to be
withdrawn but some companies had already
developed more sophisticated ways to
teach our nerves about health
sophisticated enough to sell us the most
basic commodity of all water folks it
appears older when I sold twenty seven
fifty Cent with the man to bring a new
health product of a masses the rapper
had spotted an opportunity I was going
to supermarket and I saw a gallon of
water but 289 and I will further down an
hour and I send another gallon spring
water for 15 I sent Chris lighty was
working closely together as managing me
and I said I want to sell water in fact
what I fell my cell worries like the who
everyone everybody need water ladies you
know it might have been an easier
concept for him if I said I wanted to
sell liquor
50 cents and his manager homes in on a
colorful new brand called vitaminwater
they hatched the plan designed to
impress and went to see the companies
then marketing chief rohan oza america
galibi he now lives in the hills of Los
Angeles 7 meeting the three of us and
5th walked in with the by the water my
assumption was it was genuine drinking
the product he was very conscious he's
very in shade very fed and he drank
Apollo so once we realized that was the
case he's a very smart businessman as
well he says I want to become a part on
the company and so he structured a deal
where 50 became an owner in the company
and helped build it with us for the
beautiful marriage it was great yeah he
did pretty well out of it I can't say
how much an agreement we have I don't
tell me how much he made he didn't shoot
me I think it's pretty fair if he sent
took a reported 10% stake in the company
and set about promoting vitamin waters
revitalizing properties with this
expansive big budget add sounds like
these integrated vision in the cloud
extraordinary vitaminwater track this is
a product that appears to put health
front and center it's not just that its
water
enhanced with vitamins it's the range of
carefully named flavors from revive to
dispense and it's bottled in this
clinical packaging that seems designed
to affirm the drinks unique selling
point it's a soft drink that actually
does use glue
but in 2009 the Advertising Standards
Authority ruled that victim in water
couldn't be considered healthy because
it's sugar content was nearly as much as
a can of coke do you not feel any kind
of guilt that really you were trying to
push a product with the word health
attached that is not healthy people
didn't think this product was going to
let you you know leap off tall buildings
in a single bound or or you know climb
skyscrapers with your web
I mean people realized oh I'm getting
vitamins the product eighth grade but
don't you think by calling it healthy
your cynically kind of preying on
people's anxieties about health what's
better a classified it's all relative
what vitamin oil is providing and being
very clear about it it's a healthier
approach now if you're going to drink
plain water all day every day take your
vitamins that's fine but the bulk of
people don't the top ten beverages in
America indication onus is the number
one beverage to note coke is fighting
back recently buying a small beverage
company called glass o for 4.1 billion
dollars in 2007 coca-cola took over
victim in waters owners glass o ISO
doubled its sales last year and is
expected to surpass 1 billion dollars in
sales in the next few years we've got an
amazing opportunity to really take a
vitamin water to the next level fifty
Cent celebrated his investment and
marketing chief Rohan OSA went to work
for the new owners toke people do some
crazy things to stay healthy it's like
sleeping a hyperbaric chamber marketing
for vitamin water now pushed even more
explicitly it's health enhancing
properties I like to give real example
by drinking vitamin water xxx the
vitamins and antioxidants help support a
healthy body
so our on their website they went
further still with suggestions that
certain ingredients could reduce the
risk of colds chronic diseases even
cancer some people treat their body like
a temple hoax more explicit sales pitch
had caught the attention of the Center
for Science in the Public Interest an
organization dedicated to protecting
consumers from disk
if labeling and marketing they decided
to sue a vitamin water energy LeBron
James found the energy to tried ruling
another Court he's quickly become the
most dominant defense attorney in a
state of Ohio he created a fictional
court case to inventively advertise
their products virtues with Nikki versus
Oregon prove that we are free from the
tyranny of false accusation now they
found themselves defending a real
lawsuit newspaper a red mark ad I asked
the CSP eyes lead counsel Stephen
Gardner why they turn to litigation in
response to cokes marketing because
we're all scared of dying companies like
Coke but not alone have chosen to prey
on those fears and to make people
believe that this is part of the
solution it isn't so they were making
purely illegal completely unfounded
claims to prevent a variety of diseases
they claimed that it would inhibit
growth of tumors which is double talk
for prevent cancer of the skin lung oral
cavity esophagus stomach liver prostate
and other organs awesome but not true
they were absolute in total nonsense
these claims were completely
unsubstantiated and all they would do at
best was give people false hope at early
legal arguments Koch said that no
reasonable consumer could have been
misled by fritzman waters labeling ahead
of the expected child they insist the
claims are without merit and will be
rejected and the victim in water is a
great-tasting hydrating beverage with
essential vitamins and water and labels
sharing ingredients and calorie content
the specific health claims have been
removed from their website and according
to a spokesperson for coca-cola in the
UK vitamin water has now been
reformulated to be sweetened with a
combination of natural sweetener and
sugar reducing it for 65 calories per
bottle it's written in water the
distillation of fear marketing in a
single bottle of seemingly innocuous
sugary water a product the customer will
reach out to every day and feel they're
protecting themselves and filmer if fear
could be invoked to sell us flavored
water anything seemed possible the menu
made us spend question how they could
use the ultimate anxiety to sell it the
ultimate cure life itself I'm vera live
for or usual as the baby boomer
generation approaches retirement age
they're finding themselves targeted like
never before
I'm at the 50-plus show of the anything
burning in the media shows work so well
because they tap into the priorities and
concerns about the huge section of the
population there's a gardening question
time kind of choosing your first truth
panel the things that really matter or
advice on how to safeguard your finance
and your health
[Music]
what are you all here for I mean even
you come to the community today is when
you entire you know unite doesn't stop
then yes yeah for sure
hello this is why we're here
the organizers know their market the
concerns of visitors here and of many
over fifties are increasingly about
keeping their bodies and minds young and
active in the last decade a new wave of
companies look to cash in on some of
these insecurities among the first was
gaming giant Nintendo with a product
marketed that's helping to keep those
senior moments at bay all the corners of
them high as well buddies David we're at
high school together honey this is
as this ever happened to you exercise
your mind with brain age train your
brain in minutes a day by completing a
few challenging exercises and puzzles
you can help keep your mind shocked
Nintendo's new brain age and brain train
games adapted the ideas of
neuroscientist dr. Reata Kawashima into
a series of mini games simple mental
exercises designed to stimulate the
brain and keep it young buckaroo
David Yankton then the head of Nintendo
UK was the man who brought the game to
Britain we spent a lot of time taking
product out to be sampled by say the
over 50s we went to medical centers so
people in the waiting room we put
product in there to sarpy we actually
worked with saga and got them with their
people to sort of Southwood get some
feedback from them to what people were
their fears about you know growing old
where and it was all about I think
people who do want to lose the youth so
having fun was really important the
brain as they say is a muscle so just as
as I will exercise my mighty muscles the
brain has to be kept fit they enlisted
trusted national treasures to highlight
the game's big hook calculating the
player's brain age and showing how with
practice it could improve you've got a
little pencil that you can use it proves
a winning formula with over a million
copies sold in the UK in the year after
its launch I thought I'd have a brain
score of 25 but there you are the truth
will out over 10 million people
worldwide keep their minds active with
bring training brain training became the
best-selling game in Nintendo's history
tell me about what brain age is how does
that work in your face it wasn't
necessary to say that it's going to make
you younger but it was just a sort of
measure to sort of so you could judge
yourself do lots of practice and maybe
bring it down as you've got quicker and
better so teach is a bit of a mental
gymnastics but it is very much sort of
nudging you towards the idea that this
thing will improve your memory and so on
under that so that's a health benefit
yeah one of the things we never did and
we're very
really very quickly important we make
sure we never made any health claims
with the product it really became from
people outside of the company
black-yellow david's company didn't
really need to make any actual health
claims your brain is in its sixties
[Music]
simply by telling me that my brain is in
its sixties the game plays on the
anxieties we all have about mental
decline as we get older so I'll keep
going back to get my brain age down and
I presume my mind younger are more alert
whilst there's conflicting evidence on
whether brain training really does
sharpen the mind Nintendo success
spawned a multitude of products taking a
similar approach like online training
company you masa P and their appeal to
people after a better brain learn faster
it's not mister I did it to be quicker
just official it's not surprising we
live in an era where many of us will
have to work for more years and in a
more competitive environment than ever
before and the pressure to remain
relevant in the workplace is fueling
spheres not just about our aging minds
but our aging body you make me feel so
young there are thousands of products we
promise to smooth out wrinkles but the
lotions and creams on our high street
are just the tip of the iceberg
end of the door
[Music]
I've come to Las Vegas a city that
defies nature to learn about the success
of an industry that wants to do the same
this is the annual get-together of the
global anti-aging industry
what's the list about cuz I like the
pain free labor to mix being cleared
we're trying to show the before before
and after
and here hundreds of businesses are
pitching some incredibly sophisticated
product the thousands of Delegates and
you've got stocks here what in the
stocks or other stocks are actually a
product a thermal regulate to the body
and allow us blood vessels to expand or
contract as neither they modulate
the body Wow and this is just a glimpse
of an industry but today is worth over
two hundred and fifty billion dollars we
send focused electromagnetic field
through special applicator into the
patient's body to find this functional
areas in the body can I have a go yes
please taunting us alright hungry that's
not that's not in your needle yeah
Achilles plate for um not really okay
yeah okay so what's the diagnosis what
should I do
you're very helping me oh when I look at
you okay
however your dream the choice here is
the will during those exhibitors
offering bespoke pharmaceuticals and
promoting everything from hormone
therapy to stem cell rejuvenation and
they're trading on the biggest fear of
them all the fear of death what I just
see in there is giving me an idea of the
vast scale of this industry there are
people have come from all over the world
to tell their anti-aging product and the
mind-boggling thing because they don't
seem to actually have to prove that any
of it work what's all the more
incredible is that many of the customers
are doctors because this is a medical
conference you deserve a lot of credit
for bringing to the public a new
paradigm of health care that's raise my
blood okay thank you in here they're
taking great care present anti-aging
there's a credible medical speciality
that applies scientific innovation the
medical technology to the prevention
treatment and reversal of age-related
diseases but there's one Kentucky
controversial treatment that has
massively raised the public profile of
their industry well you're about to meet
some folks who think that they may have
found the key to eternity the program
includes growth hormone which can make
people feel younger and stronger human
growth hormone therapy involves the
injection of a naturally occurring
hormone that triggers the growth of
bones and body tissues sixty-eight years
old a longtime bodybuilder and fitness
freak doctor mints and many of his
patients inject themselves with hormones
considered by many to be downright
dangerous
his roster of patients includes movie
stars in the president of a foreign
country some of whom pay as much as
$1,000 a month for the treatment does
this a wonder drug well we wondered
ourselves I'm 74 and I worked out two
hours last night and I've recovered and
I can stay up till midnight it's over 20
years since human growth hormone was
first used as an anti-aging treatment
back then it was the catalyst for these
two men to create an entire discipline
Ronald Platts is chairman of the Academy
for anti-aging medicine Bob Goldman is
its president they make their money not
from selling treatments but from
spreading the word about anti-aging
their company runs events like this
around the world attracting lucrative
sponsorship and thousands of paying
exhibitors observe them close to sixty
million dollars here they're treated
like the a-list celebrities who support
them Barbican IVF constraints for a long
time for decades and always have been a
big admirer of our group but I wanted to
talk to them about making money out of
an industry whose credibility is
questioned by many in the medical
establishment you have a fantastically
successful business but what it's not
based upon is any kind of efficacy or
clinical testing that that does so now
you're crazy comment it's an uninformed
comment everything we do is
science-based the people who claim that
they're not or the people who have
little regard for integrity truth and
academic honesty I mean it's really it's
a disgrace to claim that anti-aging is
unscientific is to claim that the world
is flat America's National Institutes of
Health one of the world's top medical
research centers cautions against many
of the treatments offered by the
anti-aging industry they warn of harmful
side effects and insist there are no
therapies proven to prevent aging or
influence the aging process including
hormone therapy they're playing with
words what they're saying is we've
looked at this and we've determined that
there is no anti-aging benefit but what
is anti-aging if you ask me what
anti-aging is anti-aging is anything
that improves the functionality of the
human species what you say you might as
well say that no one has any credibility
this is another governmental
organization another thing that you know
you're right you're right and the
Department of Defense and the UN
and the the president of united states
told me that there were nuclear weapons
in our back and how could we not believe
that so you're not quack selling an
impossible dream we're people we don't
do anything you see we don't we don't
sell any commercial products so you've
created like a 250 billion dollar
business we haven't made any money out
of it that's not very well we will be
happy with 5% but no we we tell me about
one person we're talking about the
industry right oh yeah
that's not our that's not a beneficiary
us but didn't you sell 80% of your
business and 60 million dollarsí
commercial and of the exposition
business we make money from the business
of the conference business what would
you say to people who say that really
you're pushing a fear and anxiety that
people have about aging and you're kind
of exploiting it we will age yes we were
all aging but it's your choice how you
age it's your choice whether you're old
if 55 or 60 or 65 or 75 or 95 or 105
that is your choice that's what we're
offering but isn't that an impossible I
mean a ridiculous dream because it's not
we're not against aging we're against
the diseases of aging people say well
who wants to live to the 89 a guy who's
88 okay because when it comes your time
all of a sudden wait a second I'm not
ready to go
Bob and Ron have honed a seductive even
lucrative sales pitch and like so many
others before them they've done it by
picking up on age-old anxieties however
sophisticated today's consumers seem
it's a technique that works on enough of
us enough at the time to make a lot of
people very rich over a hundred years
ago the menu made us spend first learn
that purchasing to make it feel better
about ourselves is rooted not in
aspiration but in fear they ensure that
there will always be new anxiety and new
solutions to those anxieties we never
even knew we needed here it's at the
very heart of why we buy next time how
children were turned into consumers
we're praying a generation of kids to
thank the celebi product there's got to
be toys and adults turned into kids with
credit cards markers begin to realize
that they could get adults to behave
more like children they would become
better buyers better consumers what
secret methods the shops used to make
you buy take a ride on the open universe
this shifting carousel and find out what
influences you while you're shopping go
to BBC doc coat UK forward slash many
may dispense and follow the links to the
Open University
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]